Subscribe now

First:

A very nice look at what looks like a very nice book: Sheera Frenkel & Cecilia Kang: An Ugly Truth 
<https://books .google .com/?id=dZ60DwAAQBAJ>:

Claire Potter: Actually, Facebook Does Kill People'. a€~Sheera Frenkel and Cecilia Kanga€™ s a€oeAn 
Ugly Trutha€D reveals why Mark Zuckerberga€™ s denials that Facebook is a Covida€“19 conspiracy 
superspreader are laughablea€!. Frenkel and Kang add a new wrinkle to the story: the magic of 
Zukerberga€™ s partnership with Sheryl Sandberg .a€! Facebook
was only ever abouta€!: collecting your data, selling your data, and keeping users a€ceengageda€D 
so that they cana€! be shown targeted advertising and encouraged to give up more informational. 
Facebook became what Zuckerberg and Sandberg had always intended to be: a giant marketing machine 
posing as a real-life community. Is it any surprise, then, that the
algorithms created to power this giant money-maker have also been a potent channel for marketing 
conspiracy theories, quack remedies, black market data sales, and right-wing disinformation 
campaigns?a€! Zuckerberg was genuinely shocked at the possibility that Facebook had played an 
integral role in throwing the election to Trump. But it was common knowledge
among executives that the platform was being used during the 2016 campaign by foreign and domestic 
actors, and their hands were tied by a corporate culture that failed to differentiate between truth 
and lies, had no capacity to screen out malicious activity, and didna€™ t want to acknowledge that 
disinformation had a real-world impacta€!. Sheryl Sandberg comes off as
a brilliant, ambitious, and ultimately amoral person, Mark Zuckerberg emerges as arrogant and 
closed-minded, cocooned in money, and bent on pushing technology as far as it can go, regardless of 
the consequencesa€I. Researchersa€! between June and July 2021. They found that 25% of people who 
only got news from Facebook in the previous 24 hours say they
wona€™t get vaccinated, putting it below only Newsmax (41%) and slightly above Fox (23%)a€!. Joe 
Biden was right the first time around: Facebook is killing people, and it has been killing people 
long before the Covida€‘T9 pandemic. It is part of facebooka€™ s DNAa€!

LINK:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Paragraphs:

Dan Davies: Another Roaring 20S? We Need to Do Better Than That'. a€~Over the course of the 
pandemic, we have done all the things with government spending that everyone had warned against, 
and the sky hasna€™ t fallen in. The Biden administration seems to have understood this; ita€™ s on 
the verge of passing a $3.5tn (A£2.5tn) spending package on infrastructure, healthcare and social
securitya€!. Now that every leading industrial country has had to run record deficits and finance 
them with quantitative easing, the genie is out of the bottle. The fear of interest rate rises has 
hobbled our ability to think through the problems we facea€!. If we are determined to navigate the 
present with help from the past, perhaps we should return not to the 1920s, but the period known in 
France
as    the trente glorieuses and in Germany as the Wirtschaftswunder (economic miracle)a€“the 
posta€“1945 flourishing that rebuilt the continent. During those years, people were asking a 
question that remains relevant today: if we could spend all that money on a wara€“or in our case a 
pandemica€“why not invest to make society flourish? The last time policy was made on that basis, 
Europe
enjoyed an economic miracle. The opportunity facing us shouldna€™ t be underestimated. If there is 
even a chance of opening up political space required to bring back full employment as a goal, and 
to regard rising wages as a sign of success rather than an ominous sign, then it should be grabbed 
with both handsa€!. For more than a decade now, the developed world has seen the growing wealth
and security of older people set against the stagnation and increasing precarity of the younger 
generation. Politicians of the left have done well to the extent that they have confronted this 
trend, and badly to the extent that they have avoided ita€!. Only then will we ensure prosperity 
for all.

LINK: chttps 
://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/iul/28/roaring-20s-pandemic-postwar-economic-miracle>

Jeet Heer: Is Trumpa€™ s Stranglehold on the GOP Weakening? s\ a€~Trumpa€™ s supporta€! [is] a 
matter of personal fealtya€!. We should be paying attention to the way an emerging cohort of party 
leaders at state level have gone out of their way to make displays of loyalty. As Politico reported 
in July: a€oeln Oklahoma, the newly installed party chair is endorsing a primary challenge to
GOP Sen. James Lankford, the home state incumbent who crossed Trump by voting to uphold results of 
the November election. In Michigan, the state party chair joked about assassinating two Republican 
House members who voted to impeach Trump. Arizonaa€™ s state chair accused Republican Gov. Doug 
Ducey of nothing less than killing people by restricting the use of hydroxychloroquine,
a Trump obsession, in response to the coronavirus pandemic.a€Da€! Trump is carrying on as if hea€™ 
s the head of a government in exile. Thata€™ s bad enough. The fact that enablers like Meadows are 
indulging Trump in this fantasy is even worse. A Trumpified GOP will remain a reality for the 
foreseeable future.

LINK:



The Time of Monsters

Is Trump's Stranglehold on the GOP Weakening?

Donald Trump, as I keep insisting on this blog, is not going away. It was never plausible that 
Trump would retire with a Cincinnatus-like dignity. But hea€™ s really outdone himself in his 
post-defeat activities by working to remain the kingpin of the GOP, challenging the legitimacy of 
his defeat and giving every indication that he intends to run again in a€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 3 likes A- Jeet Heer

Kevin Drum: The Real Source of Americaa€™ s Rising Rage'. a€~So Whata€™ s Changed?a€! We need to 
look for things that (a) are politically salient and (b) have changed dramatically over the past 
two to three decades. The most obvious one is Fox Newsa€!. The recent battle over critical race 
theory is an instructive example of how all roads lead to Fox News. Turning a decades- old critical
framework deployed mostly in grad school into the latest culture wara€! remained bubbling under the 
surface until early this year, whena€”facing flagging ratings and increased competition from the 
even more far-right outlets Newsmax and OANa€”Fox suddenly decided to put it into heavy rotation. 
Starting in March, Fox mentioned CRT 1,300 times in the space of just three monthsa€!. Fox
News   is a grinding, daily cesspool of white grievance, mistrust of deep-state government, and a 
belief that liberals are literally trying to destroy the country out of sheer malicea€!.. It is Fox 
News that has torched the American political system over the past two decades, and it is Fox News 
that we have to continue to fight.

LINK: <https://www.motheriones.com/politics/2021/07/american-anger-polarization-fox-news/>

Noah Smith: The Super-Scary Theory of the 21st Century: a€~The Scary Theory, therefore, holds that 
in addition to using their overbearing institutions to suppress social media, new authoritarian 
Great Powers like China will also be able to use emerging A.I. technology to achieve a level of 
totalitarian social control never before imagined except in dystopian novels. Whether technological
totalitarianism makes,,, We dona€™ t know yet. Which is why the Scary Theory of 
techno-authoritarian great power dominance is still just a speculative, scary idea. But ita€™ s an 
idea that I have trouble getting out of my head. The more China goes from strength to strength 
while increasing its social control, and the more its democratic rivals seem to lapse into division 
and chaos, the more I
worry. There is no law of the Universe saying that freedom and democracy and respect for individual 
rights always triumph in the enda€”or if there is such a law, we dona€™t know it yet. For all we 
know, the arc of history could bend in any direction at all. Anyway, just throwing that out there. 
Sleep tight, sweet dreams!

LINK:


MH

The Super-Scary Theory of the 21st Century
nulla€l

Read more

2 years ago A- 24 likes A- 27 comments A- Noah Smith

Noahpinion

Matthew Yglesias: Why has Bidend€™ s Bipartisanship Worked?: a€~The paradoxical strength of a 
weaker political positionMost political scientists, journalists, progressive activists, and 
Democratic Party staffers were deeply puzzled by Joe Bidena€™ s repeated pledges during the 2020 
campaign to bring a spirit of bipartisanship back to Washington. Speaking personally, I am cynical 
about
politics and never had a problem with Biden saying that stuff, but I did worry that he might 
actually believe it and found it reassuring when he brushed Republicans aside and just wrote a 
partisan American Rescue Plan. And yet now Biden appears to be on the cusp of delivering a 
significant bipartisan infrastructure plana€!. Obama was a lot more opinionated. Obama was quite 
open to
compromise, and in some ways was willing to make bigger ideological concessions than Biden was. But 
he also had pretty specific ideas of what it was he was trying to accomplish. Indeed, just as 
liberals have complained for years that Obama would do too much to pre-compromise his proposals, 
something I hear from Republicans who worked on these processes is an annoyance that Obama
would essentially tell them what he thought they should want out of a deal. And if you accept the 
premise that Republicans care about long-term deficits and the incentive effects of marginal tax 
rates, the grand bargain he was offering them was super-reasonable. It just turns out that they 
dona€™ t, in fact, really care that much about that stuff. Compared to that, the BIF is a total mess
conceptuallya€! a true triumph of backroom dealmakinga€!. Thata€™ s the part where I think you 
should look if you want to credit Bidena€™ s legislative experience or see the value of having a 
veteran lobbyist like Steve Richetti on the team. You dona€™ t get a deal by being the smartest 
person in the room; you get a deal by making dealsa€!. [Republican] reluctance to deal is driven 
more by
sincere differences of opinion and less by a sense of a desperate need to treat everything like a 
fight to the death. The GOP has what they think is a viable road to victory, and that road doesna€™ 
t preclude them from passing a few bipartisan bills.

LINK:


Slow Boring

Why has Biden's bipartisanship worked?

(Doug Mills-Pool/Getty Images) Most political scientists, journalists, progressive activists, and 
Democratic Party staffers were deeply puzzled by Joe Bidena€™ s repeated pledges during the 2020 
campaign to bring a spirit of bipartisanship back to Washington. Speaking personally, I am cynical 
about politics and never had a problem with Bidena€l
Read more

2 years ago A- 92 likes A- 63 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

