Erik Wade: On Twitter: "Have I got a wild medieval story for you. A woman sleeps with someone in 
exchange for presents, and her husband gets mad. So she sets out to prove that her husband would 
ALSO allow a man to
have sex with him in exchange for presents https://t.co/tCaZ8ilw58:

This is a 13th-century German story by a writer named Dietrich of the Glezze/Gletze. And it is a 
LOT. Ita€™ s also a fascinating insight in how complicated medieval ideas of sexuality and gender 
could be. So. Therea€™ s a
married couple, both beautiful and virtuous. One day, while her husband is gone, the woman is 
sitting in her garden. A strange knight passes by, is lovestruck by her beauty, and approaches her. 
Basically, he confesses his love
and begs her for sex. She refuses. He offers her increasingly lavish presentsa€”a goshawk! two 
greyhounds! a horse !a€’’pleading with her. She turns them down, until he offers her his belt, 
which is magic: the wearer will win
any fight. He also throws in all the other presents to sweeten the deal.

Ita€™ s hard to know how to read this scene. Is it meant to be romantic or threatening? The 
powerful stranger intruding into her garden, demanding sex, feels deeply alarming. She doesna€™ t 
seem frightened of him, just
insulted, however. She even tells him to be quiet and go away. When she finally agrees, she sends 
away her servants, and she and the knight have sex. The sex is apparently so good that the trees 
rustle, birds start singing about
it,  and roses bloom from the ground where they are lying down.

Then she tells the knight that she got the better of the deal and sends him away forever.

Unfortunately, a servant spotted her and tells her husband, who is furious and leaves her. She sort 
of shrugs and says she deserves it but he will soon get over it.
This is when the story really gets wild.

She waits a few months, then gets all her presentsa€”hawk, greyhounds, horse, belta€”and some 
money, and sets off to win him back. She stays in an inn, where she sends her servants home before 
she begins Her Plan.

She tells the innkeeper that shea€™ s actually a man in disguise, and that he needs to go out and 
buy her mena€™ s clothes, weapons, and armor. He accepts this and buys her everything. She cuts her 
hair, dons the clothes
(which look GREAT on her), and puts on her magic belt. Then she goes to her husbanda€™ s court and 
announces herself as Sir Henry of Swabia.

At this point, the narrator switches pronouns and names, describing Sir Henry consistently as a 
man.

The husband and Sir Henry do everything together. They go hunting, and Sir Henrya€™ s greyhounds 
are so good at it that the husband begs Sir Henry for them. Henry refuses. Henrya€™ s hawk is such 
a good hunter that
the husband also begs for that. Henry refuses. Then they race their horses home, and Sir Henry 
easily beats the husband. The husband again offers enormous amounts of money for the horse, which 
Henry refuses.

Therea€™ s a tournament, where an amazing Briton beats everyone. The husband warns Sir Henry not to 
fight the Briton. Sir Henry insists on doing so and beats the Briton easily. The husband BEGS Sir 
Henry to teach him
and to give him his amazing animals.

Sir Henry refuses at first, but the husband keeps offering things. Then Sir Henry finally relents 
and says the husband can have everything if he agrees to Henrya€™ s request. The husband says he 
will do anything. Sir Henry
says a€oeMy desire is a small matter: I love men.a€D The husband says ita€™ s sad that such a 
wonderful knight should love men and not women.

Sir Henry tells him that he must fulfill Henrya€™ s wish if he wants all these presents. The 
husband asks what the wish is. Sir Henry says he wants to have sex with the husband. The request is 
fascinating. Henry says the
husband should a€oelie downa€D with him, and that Henry a€oewill do all the wonderful things that 
[he] can imagine and think of.a€D But especially Henry will do what a man does to his wife (aka, 
intercourse).

The husband immediately agrees and says he will a€oesuffer everything and not refuse anything.a€D 
He addsa€”and I think this is really tellinga€”a€oel want to and have to accept it all in return 
for the greyhounds and the
bird of prey.a€D

a€oel want toa€D.

Sir Henry says that they will do it right then and there. He tells the husband to lie down on his 
back. The husband does. Then Sir Henry calls him a loser. Sir Henry announces that hea€™ s the wife 
and CHEWS the husband
out for agreeing to be a a€ceheretica€D with another man. The wife, basically: a€oeYes, what I did 
was bad, but this is SO MUCH WORSE, you loser. Also, I held out for a LOT more presents than 
you.a€D

Then she tells her husband that they are going home and that they will agree to forget this, 
becausea€”as she saysa€”he a€oebore the greatest guilt ,a€D And then they go home and live happily 
ever after!


