And what is on my mind right now is the scale and economic impact of the coronavirus plague:

The Coronavirus Plague:

Deaths and Cases:

Reported case numbers for the coronavirus plague are worth little. Deathsa€”as long as the 
health-care system is not in collapsea€”tell us that there were between 100 and 200 times as many 
new cases three to four weeks before. It is perhaps fantastical to take Australia, Canada, Japan, 
Korea, and the United Kingdoma€”the non-continental Europe nations of the a€oeglobal northa€Da€”as 
our a€ceyardsticka€D nations. But if we do, we must be profoundly
depressed both at the situation, and at how badly we have fallen short of what nations with 
competent governance have managed to accomplish:

New deaths attributed to Covid-19 in United States, United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, South Korea 
and Japan

Seven-day rolling average of new deaths (per 100k)


Marl         Apr         May         Jun         Jul         Aug         Sep         Oct         
Nov         Dec
htt^mg.ft.com/coronavirus-chart/?
areas=usa&areas=gbr&areas=aus&areas=can&areas=kor&areas=jpn&areasRegional=usny&areasRegional=usnj&ar
easRegional=usia&areasRegional=usca&areasRegiona
l=usnd&areasRegional=ussd&cumulative=0&logS

The coronavirus plague is now killing people in the United States significantly faster than it did 
in Marcha€”that is not the case for our yardstick countries

As President-Elect Joe Biden just said, the worst days of the coronavirus plague are not behind us, 
but ahead of us. Ifa€”and this is an ifa€”new infections have been growing at 20% per week over the 
past month, the week after Christmas will see one in every sixty people in America catch the 
coronavirus plague. That would mean 450,000 Americans dead by inauguration day, and 600,000 dead 
total even if we go into an immediate three-week lockdown after
inauguration day to scotch the virus back down to a level where life can then become semi-normal as 
the vaccines are rolled out.

We really ought to have gone into a three-week lockdown in July, or October, or even now, and then 
do what Australia, Japan, and Korea doa€”test-and-trace-and-test-and-isolate, putting up suspected 
patients in quarantine hotels. After a three-week lockdown, caseloads are low enough that this 
Australia strategy has only a trivial cost at the national level.
But we are not going to do that. And I do not envy Joe Bidena€™ s people for the decisions they 
will have to make on January 21. What to do then really depends on how fast the vaccine rollout 
proceeds, and how effective the vaccines are against tomorrowa€™ s virus in the real world.

a€oeBut the Economy !a€D

a€oeBut the economy !a€U do I hear you say? Hopefully few of you have been brainwashed into 
thinking that letting-the-plague-rip was the right strategya€!

Let us be clear: It is, overwhelmingly, fear of the virus that is constraining demand and thus 
production right now, not government restrictions on economic activity. If people were willing to 
risk the virus, they would be spending at a furious pace right now and the economy would be back to 
full employment. They arena€™ t. It isna€™ t. The recovery is stalled, and a second dip is likely 
as fear of the virus grows over the next month. Letting grandmas die of the
virus by the hundreds of thousands is not a road to rapid economic recovery:

FRED    Employment-Population Ratio - 25-54 Yrs.

82.5

77.5


75.0

72.5

70.0

67.5

2018                 2019                 2020

And as for the argumenta€”made to me by John Allison, formerly of CATO, in a debate I had with him 
last weeka€”that it is not very costly to society for the aged to die of coronavirus? As I 
understand the numbers, in America pre-coronavirus an 80-year-old could expect to live to 90, a 
70-year-old could expect to live to 87, a 60-year-old could expect to live to 84, and a 20-year-old 
could expect to live to 78. You could say that the death of an 80-year-old is
only 1/6 as costly to society as the death of a 20-year-old. But at $150,000/year, letting the 
plague rip to kill an extra 500,000 with an average age of 70 gets us a societal cost of $1.3 
trillion. Thata€™ s twice as large as 2020 GDP will be below the 2019 level. Even if one buys that 
the a€cewortha€D of a life scales with life expectancy completely, the mortality and morbidity 
costs of the coronavirus plague outscale the lost-production economic costs.

Forecasting the Economy into 2021:

A good many hope for a rapid recovery once the virus plague is contained. They reason that there 
has been an enormous increase in Americansa€™ savings over the past nine monthsa€”all the extra 
wedge between the blue income line and what extending its pre-March trend would have given us, plus 
all the extra wedge between the red spending line and what extending its pre-March trend would have 
given us. Thata€™ s about $1.5 trillion of extra savings:

FRED   — Real Disposable Personal Income

— Real Personal Consumption Expenditures

18,000


17,000

16,000

15,000

14,000

13,000

12,000

11,000

10,000

2018               2019               2020


And that all of that extra savings is sitting there in household balance sheets, eager to be spent, 
and will be spent at a serious rate once the plague is contained.

To which I say: perhaps. Perhaps a successful vaccination campaign would be followed by a glorious 
Carnival, a long-lasting nationwide Fat Tuesday. But it depends on who has that extra money, and 
how they regard their need for financial reserves given what 2020 has taught us about risks and 
uncertainties. But if we do face a Fat Tuesday, then the Federal Reserve can raise interest rates 
to rebalance the economy. And if we do not face a Fat Tuesday, the
Federal Reserve has no tools to return us to full employment and to magically reknit the societal 
division of labor if the consumer demand to spend enough is not there.

We as a country need to be planning for a world in which the vaccine is not followed by a 
long-lasting nationwide Fat Tuesday, and so be pleasantly surprised if it is and if high 
unemployment then ceases to be a big problem.

Things You Might Have Missed on Twitter:

From Me on Twitter:

The great conjunction, via the iPhone camera. 0.1 A° of separation between Jupiter and Saturn is 
well within the limits of the cameraa€™ s ability to resolve images:

1:55 AM r™ Dec 22,2020

I confess I have never understood why economics courses start their discussions with perfect 
competition. Monopoly is simpler. And then as you add sellers, you gain considerable insight into 
how competition limits monopoly power:


Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!1 @delong

@jasonfurman @snaidunl @paulkrugman @ Betsey Stevenson @ Justin Wolfers #actually, monopoly is the 
simplest. Perfect competition gets all bollixed up in "who sets the price?11, & then you get lost 
in the swamps of tAytonnement. Best way, IMHO, to teach is to start with monopoly. Then add sellers 
one by one & look for Nash equilibrium in the quantity 1/
4:51 AMT™ Dec 18,2020

54Likes4Retweets

This is from a thread which I had the most fun reading last week:

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!' @delong

@economeager I am convinced that Chris Cavanaugh and John Bound understand weak IV asymptotics. 
They would explain them to me. And I would think I understood them for about... 48 hours... and 
then poof...
9:57 PM r™ Dec 16,2020

Even good a€cepoliticala€D reporters lose sight of what really matters. Ita€™ s an occupational 
disease:

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!' @delong

@imillhiser "Minor" cabinet secretary... As far as the real world is concerned, if you are 
interested in making a difference for people, there are no "minor" cabinet secretaries. And I am, I 
must say, appalled to read this...
12:09 AM r™ Dec 16,2020

From Others on Twitter:

My old teacher muses on a horrible fact about America today:

Gerald Friedman @gfriedma

Trumpa€™ s approval 43.4%, highest in December of his presidency. It should be 0% since over 
325,000 Americans have died in the pandemic, jobless numbers are soaring and Russia is waging cyber 
warfare while he does nothing except make baseless claims that he won an election he lost
1:38 PM r™ Dec 22,2020

9Likes3Retweets

And James Medlock finds one of what I regard as my goodies from a decade ago:

James Medlock @jdcmedlock

Robert Nozick totally owned with FACTS and LOGIC by @ delong delong .tvpepad.com/sdj/2011/06/tha€!

I would maintain that only liberals can successfully explain Nozickian political 
philosophy—certainly I have never met a
believer in Nozickianism who can do so. and I expect never to do so.

Why? Well, let me sketch out the logic of Robert Nozick's argument for his version of catallaxy as 
the only just order. It
takes only fourteen steps:


1. Nobody is allowed to make utilitarian or consequentialist arguments. Nobody.

2.1 mean it: utilitarian or consequentialist arguments-appeals to the greatest good of the greatest 
number or such-are
out-of-order, completely. Don't even think of making one.

3. The only criterion for justice is: what's mine is mine, and nobody can rightly take or tax it 
from me.

4. Something becomes mine if I make it.

5. Something becomes mine if I trade for it with you if it is yours and if you are a responsible 
adult.

6. Something is mine if 1 take it from the common stock of nature as long as 1 leave enough for 
latecomers to also take
what they want from the common stock of nature.

7. Birt now even thing is owned: the latecomers can't take what they want.

8. It gets worse: everything that is mine is to some degree derived from previous acts of original 
appropriation—and
those were all illegitimate, since they did not leave enough for the latecomers to take what they 
want from the
common stock of nature.

9. So none of my property is legitimate, and nobody I trade with has legitimate title to anything.

10. Oops.

11.1 know: I will say that the latecomers would be poorer under a system of propertyless anarchy in 
which nobody has
a right to anything than they are under my system-even though others have gotten to appropriate 
from nature and
they haven't.

12. Therefore they don't have a legitimate beef: they are advantaged rather than disadvantaged by 
my version of
catallaxy, and have no standing to complain.

13. Therefore everything mine is mine, and everything yours is yours, and how dare anybody claim 
that taxing anything
of mine is legitimate!

14. Consequentialist utilitarian argument? What consequentialist utilitarian argument?

To be able to successfully explain Nozickian political philosophy is to face the reality that it is 
self-parody, or perhaps
CALVINBALL!

8:58 PM a~™ Dec 18. 2020

30 !Likes43Re tweets

Techno-optimism is a very pleasant place to visit:

Noah Smith dYDt @Noahpinion

A roundup of techno-optimist blog posts from around the new blogosphere! Featuring @tylercowen, 
@calebwatney, @mattyglesias, @ByrneHobart, and more.


noahpinion.substack.comTechno-optimism roundupThe COVID vaccine was a turning point
1:52 AM a'™ Dec 16,2020

141 Likes 13Retweets

I should ask Enrico Moretti whena€”of ifa€’’agglomeration economies and location advantages 
switched from being production-side and became consumoption-side features of the economy. Matt 
thinks it has already happened. Making a place more crowded can make it a less pleasant place to 
be, or a more pleasant. Perhaps in a century we will all be living in million-person kilometer-high 
arcologies in greater San Diego?:

Matthew Yglesias dYD! @mattyglesias

I think it's a mistake to think of skilled workers clustering as driven by "at the office11 effects 
rather than "people like to live there" effects. There's a reason the tech buses go from SF to the 
Valley, and there's a reason the relocation trend is to Miami not Buffalo.
2:57 PM a~™ Dec 16,2020

335Likes IQRetweets

There is an apology made by John Cleesea€™ s character in the movie a€oeA Fish Called Wandaa€D that 
is even more delicious. But this is delicious:

USEFUL

IDIOT

Ami Wty WB Im I
tone WIIhMinlM

wivvi

S.V. DATE

S.V. DAjte @svdate

Newsmax's Chris Ruddy tells me that the statement that's making the rounds will be aired on ALL 
Newsmax TV shows. This began over the weekend and will continue today. Here it is:

Since election day, various guests, attorneys and elected officials have
appeared on Newsmax TV and offered opinions and claims about
Smartmatic and Dominion Systems, both companies that offer voting
software in the U.S.

Newsmax would like to clarifv its news coveraoe and note it has not


reported as true certain claims made about these companies.

There are several facts our viewers and readers should be aware.
Newsmax has found no evidence either Dominion or Smartmatic owns the
other,                                                  or has any business association with each 
other.

We have no evidence Dominion uses Smartmatic’s software or vice versa.

No evidence has been offered that Dominion or Smartmatic used software
or reprogrammed software that manipulated votes in the 2020 election.

Smartmatic has stated its software was only used in the 2020 election in
Los Angeles, and was not used in any battleground state contested by the
Trump campaign and Newsmax has no evidence to the contrary.

Dominion has stated its company has no ownership relationship with the
House Speaker Nancy Pelosi's family, Sen. Dianne Feinstein's family, the
Clinton family, Hugo Chavez, or the government of Venezuela.

Neither Dominion nor Smartmatic has any relationship with George Soros.

Smartmatic is a U.S. company and not owned by the Venezuelan
government, Hugo Chavez or any foreign official or entity.

Smartmatic states it has no operations in Venezuela. While the company
did election projects in Venezuela from 2004 to 2017, it states it never was
founded by Hugo Chavez, nor did it have a corrupt relationship with him or
the Venezuelan government.

7:02 PM r™ Dec 21,2020

6,130Likes2,218Retweets

I do not think that it is the undermining of local-news journalism. I think it is that now the news 
network is part of the more general friends-and-family social network that has done it. But this is 
just a guess on my part:

Matthew Yglesias dYDI @mattyglesias

Tech people's best critique of the media, by far, is that journalists don't like them because we 
are talking our own book and they have undermined our business models. The flipside is that ruining 
the business model for local news is in fact really harmful and bad!

Jonathan Martin @jmartNYT

.@SenatorTester on Facebook replacing local news: "It is a big part of it, right? Ia€™ ve got good 
friends of mine, I might add, reallyjeally good friends of mine, lifelong friends, that quite 
frankly say stuff that I go, 'Holy shit. Really? Thata€™ s what you think? Thata€™ s crazy'"
2:55 PM a~™ Dec 16,2020

99Likes 15Retweets

I would say an attempted military coup is more likely than January 6 congressional shenanigans. But 
I really do not know:


i uo not uuiiK iiitii 11 is me unucimining 01 IUUU-UCWS journalism. 1 1111111s. 11 is mat now me 
news UCIWUIK is pan 01 me 11101c gcnciai mciias-aiia-ianmy social IICLWOIK mai nas uonc 11. out mis 
is just a guess 011 my pan.

Matthew Yglesias dYDI @mattyglesias

Tech people's best critique of the media, by far, is that journalists don't like them because we 
are talking our own book and they have undermined our business models. The flipside is that ruining 
the business model for local news is in fact really harmful and bad!

Jonathan Martin @jmartNYT

.@SenatorTester on Facebook replacing local news: "It is a big part of it, right? Ia€™ ve got good 
friends of mine, I might add, reallyjeally good friends of mine, lifelong friends, that quite 
frankly say stuff that I go, 'Holy shit. Really? Thata€™ s what you think? Thata€™ s crazy"1
2:55 PM a~™ Dec 16,2020

99Likes 15Retweets

I would say an attempted military coup is more likely than January 6 congressional shenanigans. But 
I really do not know:

I predicted that Trump would try to get Pence to put fake electors in the envelope he delivers to 
Congress on January 6th, or use some other parliamentary B.S. to hold up the count. I am now 
leaning toward the prediction that Pence will not do this.

A source who spoke to Trump said the president was complaining about Pence and brought up

a Lincoln Project ad that claims that Pence is 'backing away’ from Trump. This ad has clearly got
inside Trump’s head, the source said.

•  Trump views Pence as not fighting hard enough for him — the same complaint he uses
against virtually everybody who works for him and has been loyal to him.

Pence’s role on Jan. 6 has begun to loom large in Trump’s mind, according to people who’ve
discussed the matter with him.

• Trump would view Pence performing his constitutional duty — and validating the election
result — as the ultimate betrayal.

6:34 PM a~™ Dec 22. 2020

59Likes5Retweets

Last Week, on Grasping Reality Weblog & Elsewhere:

Pairagraph: Brad DeLong & Om Malik: Is America in Decline? 2020-12-22

DeLongTODAY: Fear of Rising Interest Rates No Reason to Shy Away from Fiscal Expansion 
<http://delongtoday.com> 2020-12-18

Noted: Noah Smith: Excited About Batteries I Phipps: View of Hitler as of 1933 I Phipps: View of 
Hitler as of 1935 I Phipps Diary I Randall Munroea€™ s 2020 Election Map I "Bezos Charts !a€D I 
Schama: Why John le CarrA© Is a Writer of Substance

Briefly Noted for: 2020-12-22 2020-12-21 2020-12-18 2020-12-17

Equitable Growth Worthy Reads for 2020-12-18

