The Niskanen Center continues to be the only organization that manages to talk to and try to bridge 
the differences between center-left thinkers who want a successful and technocratic approach to 
growth with equity, and the dwindling
numbers of thinkers on the right who care about something other than grievance politics, if America 
has a hope of being a place where public policy can successfully be made by rough consensus, the 
Niskanen Center's flourishing is
essential.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Cat Rambo: You Sexy Thing: a€~I first learned about hopepunk froma€! Alexandra Rowland. I ended 
up incorporating it in a class I was teaching, All the Punks, which covered cyberpunk, steampunk, 
biopunk, solarpunk,
splatterpunk, and morea€! <https://whatever.scalzi.com/2021/11/16/the-big-idea-cat-rambo-3/>

• Joe Weisenthal: Feda€™ s Powell Fights High Inflation in His 1970d€™ s Paul Volcker Moment'. 
a€~This Is Jerome Powella€™ s Shot at a Volcker Momenta€”in Reverse: It took courage to lift rates 
in 1979 to kill
inflation. The gutsy move for today may be to stand fast until we have more jobsa€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-11-19/fed-s-powell-fights-high-inflation-in-his-1970-s
-paul-volcker-moment>

• Martin Wolf: Dancing on the Edge of Climate Disaster. a€~Despite signs of hope, scepticism is 
fully justified when it comes to the COP26 announcementsaCI 
<https://www.ft.com/content/6e2b366f-el39-4d69-bd4f-
9254333bf316>

•  Girish Gupta: a€~We Want Food!a€™ Looting & Riots Rock Venezuela Daily. a€~a€™ We want food!a€™ 
Looting and riots rock Venezuela dailya€!


Iways Go

'We want food!' Looting and riots rock Venezuela daily

In May 2016, the numbers on my Venezuela Econ website showed the currency now weakened past 1,100 
per dollar on the black marketa€”and the streets were getting more and more hairy. Every few hours, 
wea€™ d hear
reports, from stringers, on social media, of crowds gathering and rioting, sometimes ransacking a 
marketa€!

Read more

a year ago A- Girish Gupta

• Daniel Larison: Starving Millions for d€~Leveragea€™ Is Evil'. a€~Sarah Chayes has written what 
may be one of the most dastardly op-eds I have ever read. She warns against providing aid to 
Afghanistan too quickly
because that would reduce Western a€celeveragea€D over the Talibana€!


Starving Millions for 'Leverage' Is Evil

Sarah Chayes has written what may be one of the most dastardly op-eds I have ever read. She warns 
against providing aid to Afghanistan too quickly because that would reduce Western a€cele verage 
a€D over the Taliban:
Western countries should not move too fast. Just because wea€™ ve failed to use our leverage in the 
past doesna€™ t mean we shouldna€™ t start nowa€l

Read more

a year ago A- 19 likes A- 5 comments A- Daniel Larison

• Tim Kane: Welcome to the a€oeKane Saw Massacred€d

Hey guys, I am converting my regular email update and blogging activity over to this new substack 
newsletter. It will be totally free of charge to you (kind of like that free lunch). Plus, I 
toggled on the functionality that will
send your replies to me personally, soa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- Tim Kane

Parasranhs:


Jason Kottke: The Ten Rules of Golden Age Detective Fiction'. a€~A central feature of many of these 
whodunits was that the reader had access to all the same information as the detective and could, in 
theory, figure things out before they
did. In 1929, Ronald Knox wrote down 10 rules that made this possible: 1. The criminal must be 
someone mentioned in the early part of the story, but must not be anyone whose thoughts the reader 
has been allowed to follow. 2. All
supernatural or preternatural agencies are ruled out as a matter of course. 3. Not more than one 
secret room or passage is allowable. 4. No hitherto undiscovered poisons may be used, nor any 
appliance which will need a long scientific
explanation  at the end. 5. No racial stereotypes. 6. No accident must ever help the detective, nor 
must he ever have an unaccountable intuition which proves to be right. 7. The detective must not 
himself commit the crime. 8. The detective
must   not light on any clues which are not instantly produced for the inspection of the reader. 9. 
The stupid friend of the detective, the Watson, must not conceal any thoughts which pass through 
his mind; his intelligence must be slightly,
but very slightly, below that of the average reader. 10. Twin brothers, and doubles generally, must 
not appear unless we have been duly prepared for thema€!

LINK: chttps ://kottke .org/21/11 /the-ten-rules-of-golden-age-detective-fiction>

John Timmer: Are Scientists Less Prone to Motivated Reasoning?'. a€~Replication failures succeed in 
getting scientists to alter their opinions: A new study lays out a bit of a conundrum in its 
opening paragraphs. It notes that scientific
progress depends on the ability to update what ideas are considered acceptable in light of new 
evidence. But science itself has produced no shortage of evidence that people are terrible at 
updating their beliefs and suffer from issues like
confirmation bias and motivated reasoning. Since scientists are, in fact, people, the problems with 
updating beliefs should severely limit sciencea€™ s ability to progress. And therea€™ s some 
indication that it does. Max Planck, for
example,  wrote that a€oea new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents and 
making them see the light, but rather because its opponents eventually die and a new generation 
grows up.a€D But a new study suggests it
may not be much of a problem after all. Taking advantage of a planned replication study, some 
scientists polled their peers before and after the results of the replication study came out. And 
most scientists seemed to update their beliefs
without much troublea€!

LINK: chttps ://arstechnica .com/science/2021/11/are- 
scientists-less-prone-to-motivated-reasoning/>

Brink Lindsey: State Capacity: What Is It, How We Lost It, And How To Get It Back'. a€~The concept 
of state capacity a€“ a€oethe ability of a state to collect taxes, enforce law and order, and 
provide public goodsa€D a€“ was
developed by political scientists, economic historians, and development economists to illuminate 
the strong institutional contrast that parallels the economic contrast between rich and poor 
countries. Rich countries are all distinguished by
having large, strong, and relatively capable states; poor countries, by contrast, are generally 
characterized by weak and frequently ineffective states, while those polities dysfunctional enough 
to be characterized as a€oefailed statesa€D
are among the poorest and most miserable on Earth. The experience of the COVIDa€“19 pandemic, 
however, has challenged the easy association of rich countries with high state capacity. The United 
States and western Europe failed to
contain, much less suppress, the virus with public health measures, while a number of poorer 
countries in East Asia performed much bettera€!

LINK: 
<https://www.niskanencenter.org/state-capacity-what-is-it-how-we-lost-it-and-how-to-get-it-back/>

Arthur Lewis (1979): Nobel Banquet Speech: a€~Tonighta€™ s laureates include two who were born and 
bred in the poorer parts of the world, that are now playing a larger part in world affairs. This 
Third World, as it is sometimes
called, is experiencing revolutions of many kindsa€l but none more fundamental than the scientific 
revolutionaC!. Science affects all our ways of thinking about the world, both the physical world 
which, if I may make so bold, is easy to
understand because it is regular and follows simple laws, and also the social world, which is more 
baffling and less predictable. Our countries are a couple of centuries late, and have a lot of 
catching up to do. We shall cross the same
ground   in a much shorter time. But it will not be exactly the same grounda€!. We cannot in the 
Third World simply borrow or buy science from those ahead of us. Pure science we can take as it 
comes, but much of applied science we
have  to make for ourselves. Giant strides have been taken over the past thirty years inside the 
Third World, in building, equipping and managing new research institutes of every kind, and there 
is already a substantial pay-offa€!.

Education is the great growth industry of the Third Worlda€!.We cannot give our students all that 
they expect, whether by way of the quality of their schooling, or by way of the jobs that they were 
hoping to get. Student frustration is a
world wide phenomenon, pushing our societies into adjusting faster than they are used to. I salute 
the student body of Sweden, and hope that its frustration will open up for it new and fruitful 
opportunities to serve the whole
community a€!

LINK: <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/1979/lewis/speech/>

Arthur Lewis (1979): Biographical: a€~I was born in St. Lucia on January 23,1915. My parents, who 
were both school teachers, had immigrated there from Antigua about a dozen years before. The 
islands were dissimilar in religion
and culture, so our family had some slight characteristics of immigrant minoritiesa€!. My father 
died when I was seven, leaving a widow and five sons, ranging in age from five to seventeen. My 
mother was the most highly-disciplined
and hardest working person I have ever known, and this, combined with her love and gentleness, 
enabled her to make a success of each of her children. I left school at 14, having completed the 
curriculum, and went to work as a clerk in
the civil service. My next step would be to sit the examination for a St. Lucia government 
scholarship to a British universitya€!. I won the scholarship. At this point I did not know what to 
do with my life. The British government
imposed a colour bar in its colonies, so young blacks went in only for law or medicine where they 
could make a living without government support. I did not want to be a lawyer or a doctor. I wanted 
to be an engineer, but this seemed
pointless since neither the government nor the white firms would employ a black engineera€!

LINK: <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/1979/lewis/biographical/>

Arthur Lewis (1979): Nobel Prize Lecture: The Slowing Down of the Engine of Growth: a€~The problems 
tackled in this paper would not arise at all if MDCs were willing to allow LDCs a greater share of 
MDC marketsa€!. Through the
1960s and 1970s MDCs have been dismantling their barriers to each othera€™ s trade while increasing 
their barriers to LDC tradea€!. Dependence is mutuala€!. It can hardly be an OECD interest to force 
the LDCs into discriminating
against OECDs sources. Neither would these problems arise if the MDCs would return to the attack on 
mass poverty within their own borders which they launched so successfully in the 1950s and 1960s 
and have now abandoneda€!. But
that  is a different storya€!

LINK: <https://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/1979/lewis/lecture/>

Noah Smith: One Year of Noahpinion: a€~What happened to the world in 2021, and what I wrote about 
it: I would count this Substack as a modest success so far. With an email list of 36,000 and 3350 
subscribers, ita€™ s not one of the
most widely read blogs out there, but Ia€™ d say ita€™ s doing OK. Thata€™ s thanks to you, of 
course; I really hope youa€™ ve enjoyed it as much as I have so far, and Ia€™ m grateful to all of 
you for giving me the opportunity to be
an independent writera€!

LINK:


One year of Noahpinion

I would count this Substack as a modest success so far. With an email list of 36,000 and 3350 
subscribers, ita€™ s not one of the most widely read blogs out there, but Ia€™ d say ita€™ s doing 
OK. Thata€™ s thanks to you, of course; I
really hope youa€™ ve enjoyed it as much as I have so far, and Ia€™ m grateful to all of you for 
giving me the opportunity to be an indepea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 16 likes A- 30 comments A- Noah Smith

Matthew Yglesias: The Most Important Election of Our Lifetime'. a€~We understate a€” even in 
retrospect a€” how big of a deal 2016 was. We dona€™t really know yet how impactful or successful 
Joe Bidena€™ s presidency will be,
but one thing we do know is that the 2020 election was not sufficient to un-ring the bell of 
Trumpism. And there are deeper reasons related to the particulars of timing that made 2016 very 
important, because Democrats winning a third
term in a row would have sealed Barack Obamaa€™ s legacy in a way that the real-world outcome 
didna€™ ta€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

The most important election of our lifetime

Every presidential election is described as the most important of our lifetime, and the 2024 race 
will be no exception. People mock this clichA©, but on some level, I think it does capture 
something significant a€” because the United
States pairs zero-sum non-proportional elections with a rising level of polarization in a two-party 
system, there really is a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 75 likes A- 154 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

