FIRST: Tooze Reviews II: More Comments on His Take on My a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D

Well, we at least have gotten a a€oeshould reada€D blurb out of Adam Tooze, with respect to my 
Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>:

EZRA KLEIN: I think that is a good place to end. Ita€™ s always our final question. What are the 
three books that have been on your mind of late that you
would recommend to the audience?

ADAM TOOZE: So Ia€™ ve been reading the Elena Ferrante, Neapolitan Quartet series, which are 
stunning. Another book that I read recently that rocked
my world was Edward Paicea€™ s book, Youthquake: Why African Demography Should Matter to the World. 
And though I read it and reviewed it quite
critically, I think if you want to follow the conversation right now on global economic history, 
you should check out Brad DeLonga€™ s Slouching
Towards Utopia, which came out recently and has been very widely reviewed, and make up your own 
mind.

So that is something.

Nevertheless, I do feel I should correct a couple (more of the) misreadings from his FT review:

Adam Tooze: Fueling Americaa€™ s Global Dream: a€~[WWI] war ended the first wavea€!. Humanity 
slouched towards utopiaa€!. DeLong seesa€!
Friedrich von Hayek and his followersa€! [as] right when they preached that the market would 
deliver dynamism and innovation, buta€! [as]a€! Karl
Polanyi diagnosed, increasingly enfranchised populationsa€! not passive victimsa€! pushed backa€!. 
The result was a dysfunctional muddle, which John
Maynard Keynes tried to sort outa€!. DeLong spans the familiar stations of north Atlantic political 
economya€!.

First, it is not just a single continous round of metaphorical warfare between a€oedynamism and 
innovationa€! [vs.] inequality and capitalist instabilitya€D.

Schumpeterian creative-destruction upsets whatever balance-of-exhaustion settlement or rather 
trench-line of political economy issues the previous generation had reached. It does
this within the time frame of a single generation. And then it goes and does it again. Thus humans, 
repeatedly, need to rewrite the relations-of-production econo-social software
running on top of the technology-driven forces-of-production hardware, for what worked a generation 
ago does not work now.

And then you have to do it again.

And the result is not a a€oemuddle, which John Maynard Keynes tried to sort outa€D. The results, 
plural, were most of the history of the long twentieth century.

Adam Tooze: Fueling Americaa€™ s Global Dream: a€~This is a surprisingly political economic 
history. Of course, individual policymakers, ideologies
and institutions do mattera€!

Second, as for it being a political economy book?
Yes.

Once I decided to choose the Polanyian Grand Narrative, the logic of that choice drove the book 
forward.

As for it being surprising that it is a political-economy von Hayek-vs .-Polanyi in the context of 
repeated generational Schumpeterian creative destruction?

That the book has a Grand Narrative is not surprising at all. That I chose one that focuses on 
embedding and managing the market in society is surprising only if you think of such
issues of governance and system as unimportant, or think that they do not matter, or think that 
history is a matter of structural domination rather than human choice.

I do not think any of those are true: they are important, they matter, and human choicesa€’’often 
individual human choices that set prairies ablaze or snuff fires outa€”do matter.
Now I agree that my choice may well not have been the best choice. But I disagree with any claim 
that it is not a right choice.

Alternative choices would have been to focus on Michael Polanyi and company and the balance between 
mercenary and fiduciary institutions; on Peter Drucker and company and
what John Kenneth Galbraith called the a€oemanagerial technostructurea€D; on Joseph Schumpeter and 
the centrality of entrepreneurship and investment in creative destruction;
on Karl Popper and the idea of an open society. And there were others as well.

Which do you think would have been a better Grand Narrative to choose?

For me, perhaps the Grand Narrative I most regret not setting forth is the orthodox-Engelsian one.

Freddie from Barmen saw technology as the driver, with Feudal Societies giving way to 
Gunpowder-Empire Societies giving way to, in his day, Steampower Societies. After his
day would come Socialist Utopia, with the end of the childhood of the human race.

But that is not what happened.

Instead, Steampower Societies were followed by, in succession:

• Second Industrial Revolution Societies

• Mass Production Societies

• Mass Consumption Societies

• Global Value-Chain Societies.

• And now we are well on our way to Bio-Infotech Societies.

All of these are transformations of what one might call the a€oemode of productiona€D, to coin a 
phrase, of similar magnitude to the shift from the hand-mill or the water-mill to
the steam-mill.

Focusing on these shifts in the underlying mode-of-production, and then tracing the requirements 
that each successive such mode imposed on the societies built on top of ita€”that
would have been a wonderful history to write.

But I went in another direction.
ansa's


