Subscribe now

Give a gift subscription

First:

The Omicron Wave of COVID is here in the United States. But it is beginning to look as if it is not 
going to be a huge deal for youa€”if you are vexed and boosted, and if you are more than two 
degrees of separation from the unvaxxed and the immunocompromised.
If                                                                                                  
                you are unvaxxed, or immunocompromised, or one or two degrees of separation from 
such? Hunker. Down. Now. And hope the Paxlovid factories are starting to produce:

New confirmed cases of Covid-19 in New York, Florida, Texas and California

Seven-day rolling average of new cases (per 100k)

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from the Johns Hopkins CSSE.

Data updated December 21 2021 2.47pm GMT. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

But note, first of all, that back in April 2020 confirmed cases of CO VID were 10% of true cases, 
while now we have effectively all casesa€”or all even middle serious (i.e., more than a usual cold) 
cases. We should not expect many deaths among the vaccinated and boosted from this wave at all.


New deaths attributed to Covid-19 in New York, Florida, Texas and California

Seven-day rolling average of new deaths (per 100k)

Jan 1 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov

2020                                              2021

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from the Johns Hopkins CSSE.

Data updated December 21 2021 2.47pm GMT. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

What? You are asking about the unvaccinated. The answer to that question is still still not clear. 
Maybe the unvaccinated will suffer not the 1% mortality of the original variant, but only 0.25%:

Noah Smith: Christmas Omicron Update'. a€~Omicrona€l will [soon] be a bit moota€l [because] the new 
variant is spreading insanely fasta€l. Omicron is spreading a€oeas fast as measles in a non-immune 
populationa€D. And measles is the most contagious disease hitherto known. The question of whether 
we should a€oelet a€~er ripa€D is a
bit beside the pointa€”by the time our authorities decide what to do, it will already have 
rippeda€l. Vaccine boosters offer substantial protection^I reduces the risk of severe disease by 
about 80%a€!. Omicron waves shoot up and crash even more quickly than basic theory predictsa€l. 
Omicron probably is less severe than previous strainsa€l. As
Andrew Lilley notes in this excellent and careful thread, Omicron is also looking substantially 
less severe in N[ew ]S[outh ]W[ales]a€!. In the medium term there are two other reasons for 
hopea€”both based on the strength of human sciencea€!. A supervaccine that works against ALL 
strains of Covida€”may now be in our handsa€l. Paxlovid,
an antivirala€l is startlingly effectivea€!. As a coda, however, Covida€™ s economic impact will 
still reverberatea€l because China is sticking doggedly to a a€oezero Covida€D policy that almost 
all other countries have abandoned in the face of hyper-contagious new variantsa€l locking down 
whole citiesa€l. Xi Jinpinga€™ s advisors are
begging him to drop the a€oezero Covida€D policy, but the supreme leader remains unmoved. This may 
vindicate my theory that Xi is not as competent an administrator as many believe, but it means 
continued economic headaches for both China and the world at largea€l

LINK:



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:

I used to think that Trump reversing course would be applauded by all of his fanbois as clever, 
clever eleven-dimensional chessa€”a€oedishing the whigsa€D, as it were. But apparently there are 
any who either are plus royaliste que le roi or who are grifters pandering to a plus royaliste que 
le roi audience:


Noah Shachtman: a€™ MAGA diehards are melting down over Trumpa€™ s pro-vaccine push 
<https://t.co/7UQzz3Milz> chttp s: //t.co/NAfmw4Bcxu>a€!


11:12 PM r™ Dec 23,2021

289Likes65Retweets

Very Briefly Noted:

• Wikipedia: Kingdom of the Lombards <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kingdom_of_the Lombards>

• Ian Millhiser: The Supreme Court showdown over Bidena€™ s Covida€ “19 vaccine policies is 
happening now. a€™ Bidena€™ s vaccination policies could save thousands of lives. The Supreme Court 
could toss them out anywaya€! 
<https://www.vox.com/2021/12/22/22848155/supreme-court-vaccine-mandate-osha-cms-covid-joe-biden>

• Dennis C. Rasmussen: Fears of a Setting S^TKhttps ://press .princeton 
.edu/books/hardcover/9780691210230/fears-of-a-setting-sun>

• Matt: a€™ The cons keep making the argument that California is on the brink of collapse when 
ita€™ s actual problem is that the demand to live in California far outstrips the supply of homes 
in the statea€!

Matt @tiredgenerally

the cons keep making the argument that California is on the brink of collapse when ita€™ s actual 
problem is that the demand to live in California far outstrips the supply of homes in the state

Caitlin Flanagan @CaitlinPacific

Ia€™ m not sure who benefits from the collapse of California. It has to be intentional because 
ita€™ s so thoroughgoing and happening so quickly. But I cana€™ t figure out the true engine and 
the reward.
11:07 PM a'™ Dec 23,2021

415Likes46Retweets

• Scary Lawyerguy: a€™ If President Hillary Clinton was on tape asking the GA Secretary of State to 
a€cefinda€D 12,000 votes so she could be declared the winner of his state, the DOJ would have 
already indicted her (and rightly so). Trump actually DID THIS and is under no threat of 
prosecutiona€!

scary lawyerguy @scarylawyerguy

If President Hillary Clinton was *on tape* asking the GA Secretary of State to "find" 12,000 votes 
so she could be declared the winner of his state, the DOJ would have already indicted her (and 
rightly so). Trump actually DID THIS and is under no threat of prosecution
3:12 PM T™ Dec 24,2021

52Likes 11 Retweets

• John Robb: a€™ Doggerland was completely flooded by rising sea levels around 6500a€“6200 BCE. 
About the same time as Doggerland began to submerge (16k BC), New England was under 2,000 feet of 
ice (the Laurentide ICE sheet). It completely melted by 10k BC <https ://t .co/tNqc JbopGt>a€!


John Robb @johnrobb

Doggerland was completely flooded by rising sea levels around 6500a€“6200 BCE. About the same time 
as Do

Continental Europe
Above sea level

16,000 a.c.

8000 8.c.

7000 ac.

e    i, New England was under 2,000 feet of ice (the Laurentide ICE sheet). It completely melted by 
10k BC.

Ice sheet
16,000 ac.

NORWAY


470Likes93Retweets

•  Nilay Patel: a€™ Every d€ winter active TVci€\3experiment ends up like this: sometimes fun 
filler content hidden away in dusty unused corners of apps that dona€™ t work the same across 
platforms <https://t.co/XQ7k6Z5f6s>a€!

nilay patel ©reckless

Every a€oeinteractive TVa€D experiment ends up like this: sometimes fun filler content hidden away 
in dusty unused corners of apps that dona€™t work the same across platforms


the verge .comPS A: Youa€™ 11 miss 25 minutes of The Expansea€™ s final season if you dona€™ t 
pause itThe Expanse Season 6 is now airing on Amazon Prime Video each Friday, but you arena€™ t 
watching the whole season unless youa€™ re watching the hidden X-Ray episodes.
3:07 PM r™ Dec 24,2021

65Likes8Retweets

• Adam Tooze: Books We Read in International & Global History<


Chartbook

Chartbook #60: Books we read in International and Global History HistGR8930

Over the last few months Ia€™ ve had the pleasure of teaching the introductory course on 
a€oeApproaches to International and Global Historya€D for the MA program that Columbia jointly runs 
with the LSE. It wasna€™ t a course I had taught before. But this is one of the fun things about 
teaching - the impulses you dona€™ t expecta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 27 likes A- 3 comments A- Adam Tooze

Paragraphs:

David Dayen: Now Can We Try the Day One Agenda?'. a€~Pramila Jayapal has come around to the right 
idea, after foolishly putting her trust in Biden to work out a deal with Manchin. She said on a 
press call today that the Biden administration must now pivot to executive action to make progress, 
as Manchin has stalled it at the legislative level. a€oeWe cannot make
the same mistake twice,a€D Jayapal said. a€oelt is abundantly clear that we cannot trust what Sen. 
Manchin says.aCD It just so happens that well over two years ago, this magazine wrote a guideline 
to using presidential power called the Day One Agenda. We identified 77 discrete actions the next 
president could take on their own authority simply by executing laws
already passed by Congressa€!. We wrote the Day One Agenda precisely as a counterpoint to the 
despair of legislative paralysis. Therea€™ s not a ton we can do about the paralysis, but a 
president can govern. And we know what he can do. We wrote it down and everythinga€!

LINK: <https://prospect.org/dav-one-agenda/now-can-we-trv-the-dav-one-agenda/>

Jonathan Cohn: Joe Manchina€™ s a€~Scaled-Backa€™ Framework May Be Better than It Sounds: 
a€~Whatever Manchina€™ s motives, whatever the consistency or merits of his views, a bill that 
includes fewer initiatives but is funded permanently might actually be better as both politics and 
policya€”as a number of liberal writers and thinkers have been arguing
for weeks. In fact, ita€™ s possible this is the type of bill that Biden and party leaders would 
have tried passing from the very beginning, if not for the unusual, ultimately fleeting political 
circumstances that prevailed in late 2020 and early 202la€!

LINK: 
<https://www.huffpost.com/entrv/build-back-better-joe-manchin-ioe-biden_n_61c4a435e4b04b42ab699214>

Philippe Aghion & Aymann Mhammedi: The Keys to Inclusive Growth: a€~One of the COVIDa€“19 
pandemica€™ s most important economic lessons is that innovation and inclusion need not be mutually 
exclusive. By pursuing the right policies, Western governments can promote both and thereby help to 
bring about a dynamic and equitable recovery: The
COVIDa€“19 pandemic has highlighted major weaknessesa€! the limits of an economic system that fails 
to protect individualsa€! the insufficient dynamism of the regiona€™ s innovation ecosystema€!. We 
do not regard the US economic modela€™ s lack of protection and inclusiveness as a necessary price 
to pay for greater innovativeness. Nor do we think that
Europea€™   s lack of innovativeness is a natural consequence of greater inclusion and better 
social protection. So, besides calling for greater investment in education, we advocate two 
policies that should both stimulate innovation-based growth and make it more inclusive and/or 
protective: beefed-up competition policy, and a Danish-style a€oeflexicuritya€n system in
the   labor marketa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentary/inclusive-growth-competition-policy-and-flexicurity-bv
-philippe-aghion-and-avmann-mhanimedi-2021-ll>
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

