Human history before 1870 was generally awful. But after 1870 we began to wriggle out from the 
traps that we were then in. So most people back then would, had they been able to foresee our 
immense technological power and sophistication, have expected us to have built our world that we 
live in today into a paradise, a utopia.
We manifestly have not.

What went wrong?
Share

The Sweep of History

Back before 1870 the human population was always too large relative to our low (and slowly 
improving) level of technology, and our limited ability to harvest natural resources. Why? Because 
poverty made infant mortality very high, and patriarchy meant that womena€™ s durable social power 
(with a few exceptions) came pretty much only from being mothers of
surviving sons. Slowly-improving technology meant that there was not much room for this generation 
to be more numerous than the last and for people to still get fed: think of an average pre-1870 
population growth rate of about 2.5% per generation. If you then do the math, you see that, in such 
a world, about one woman in three was left without surviving sons.

Hence the drive to reproduce morea€”even if you already had living sons, to have another as 
insurancea€”was immense. That drive kept population growing whenever any technological headroom to 
support higher productivity emergeda€’’breed strains of rice that grow more rapidly so you can get 
two crops a year, and find in a few centuries that the population of
wetland Asia has doubled. That kept humanity poor. Before 1870 this world was a Malthusian world.

But there was even worse: In such a poor world, only a few could have enough. And the only way the 
few could get enough for themselves and their children was to find a way, through force and fraud, 
to take a substantial share of what the rest were producing and grab it for themselves. That meant 
that those who directed human societya€™ s energies did so not
toward making humanity more productive but, rather, making the force-and-fraud 
exploitation-and-extraction system run better for themselves. That meant that those ideas that were 
promoted and that flourished were not those that made humanity capable of doing more things more 
efficiently and effectively, but rather those that shored up the force-and-fraud
exploitation-and-extraction system. That meant that the rate of technological advance was slow.

My crude guess is that there has been as much proportional technological progressa€’’useful ideas 
discovered, developed, deployed, and then diffused throughout the global economya€’’making humanity 
more productive in the 150-year span since 1870 as there were in the entire nearly 10,000-year span 
since the beginnings of the creation of agriculture around the
year 8000. Moreover, from 8000 to 1870 poverty, patriarchy, and slow technological progress kept 
humanity under the spell of the Devil of Malthus, with nearly all of the potential benefits of 
better technology being eaten up by population growth and resulting resource scarcity. Think of 
something like $900/yeara€”the living standard of the poorest half-billion of our
eight billion todaya€”as the living standards of a typical human back before 1870.

Then, after 1870, everything changed.

Economic historians debate, and will debate as long as there is a human species, exactly why the 
change came in 1870. They debate whether the change could have come earliera€’’perhaps starting in 
Alexandria, Egypt back in the year 170 when Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus ruled in Rome, or in 
the year 1170 when Emperor Gaozong ruled in Hangzhou. They
debate whether we might have missed the bus that arrived in 1870 and still, today, be trapped in a 
Malthusian steampunk, gunpowder-empire, or neo-mediA!val world.

But we did not. A lot of things had to go right and fall into place to create the 
astonishingly-rich-in-historical-perspective world we have today. Three key elementsa€’’modern 
science and the industrial research lab to discover and develop useful technologies, the modern 
corporation to develop and deploy them, and the globalized market economy to deploy and
diffuse them throughout the worlda€”fell into place around 1870.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Hopes for the Post-1870 Era

Ever since, advancing science, turned into technology by industrial research labs, deployed at 
scale by modern corporations, and then diffused throughout the world by that magnificent 
crowdsourcing mechanism that is the global market economy have taken us on a wild ride. The rate of 
global technological progress, a rate that was perhaps 0.05%/year before 1500,
0.15%/year over 1500-1770, and perhaps 0.45%/year over 1770-1870, went into high gear, and has 
averaged 2.1% per year on average since. The deployed-and-diffused technological capabilities of 
humanity have thus roughly doubled every generation since 1870.

Soon after 1870 people got a clue that something had changed. Looking back at 1870-1914, economist 
John Maynard Keynes was to write between the world wars of how it had been:
economic Eldoradoa€! economic Utopiaa€! that Devil [of Malthus] a€! chained up and out of sighta€!. 
What an extraordinary episode !a€!

The forces unleashed in 1870 meant that a€oethe economic problem may be solved, or be at least 
within sight of solution, within a hundred yearsa€! is nota€! the permanent problem of the human 
racea€! [which will be] how to occupy the leisure, which science and compound interest will have 
won for him, to live wisely and agreeably and wella€!a€D

Humanity before 1870 had been stymied because anAimic technology, limited natural resource, 
patriarchy, and poverty had kept us from being able to bake an economic pie sufficiently large to 
even raise the possibility that everybody could have **enough**. But with the coming of the power 
to bake a sufficiently-large economic pie, surely all that would fall away,
no?

John Maynard Keynes had certainly thought so: a€oeWe shall once more value ends above means and 
prefer the good to the useful. We shall honour those who can teach us how to pluck the hour and the 
day virtuously and wella€!a€D
Friedrich Engels also thought so: with a sufficiently-large economic pie, with enough, the power 
system of exploitation-and-extraction:

ceases of itself. The government of men is replaced by the administration of things .a€! Ruling is 
not a€~abolisheda€™ , it atrophiesa€!

They all thought that once you had solved the baking problem, the slicing and tasting 
problemsa€’’sharing and enjoying the pie, using our material resources to make us all healthy, 
secure, safe, and happya€”would be straightforward also. Thus many who lived before 1870 would be 
very surprised to see us in our manifestly not-paradise, and to see how completely
the problems of slicing and tasting the economic pie have flummoxed us.

Leave a comment

What Went Wrong?

So what happened? Why did we fail to grasp a near-utopia, why have we not made the world a 
near-paradise?

Letting the market economy rip to solve the problem of making enough had consequences. Thus the 
first half of the Big Story of twentieth-century economic history is a triumphant one. Friedrich 
von Hayek was a genius. He saw clearly that the market economy, when coupled with industrial 
research labs, modern corporations, and globalization, was the key to
unlocking the cage keeping humanity desperately poor. He thus preached the gospel: a€oeThe market 
giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the market.a€n We should, he thought, be 
satisfied with the fact that there was a large-enough pie, count our blessings, and ignore the 
problems of slicing and tasting it properly.

But people would not, and did not, stand for that. They demanded, instead: a€oeThe market was made 
for man; not man for the market,a€D Karl Polanyi saw this most clearly: that humans thought they 
should have more rights and, indeed, needed more rights than just property rights. The marketa€™ s 
treating those whom society saw as equals unequally, or those
whom it saw as unequals equally, brought social explosion after explosion, blocking the road to 
utopia.

Give a gift subscription

The New Deal Order & Its Collapse

Perhaps humanity came close to an institutional-societal setup to tackle the problems of slicing 
and tasting. After World War II in what historian Gary Gerstle calls the New Deal Order, the Global 
North at least produced the fastest economic and social progress ever seen. It was a shotgun 
marriage of Friedrich von Hayek to Karl Polanyi blessed by John Maynard
Keynes. And it worked.

But this New Deal Order failed its sustainability test in the 1970s. The world made the Neoliberal 
Turn.

There were complaints. There was inflationa€”most notably oil shock-driven rising gasoline prices. 
There were business cycles. There was overbureaucratization. And there were too many programs and 
too many institutions that people saw as seeing giving too much money to peoplea€”from greedy 
Teamster union members to a€oewelfare queensa€Da€”who had
no proper right to it. Society may not know what a€oesocial justicea€D is, but it knows what it is 
not. The New Deal Order ran into the buzzsaw of the neoliberal challenge in the 1980s. The New Deal 
Order succumbed.

Yet the New Deal Order had delivered a lota€”the slow productivity growth and inflation of the 
1970s notwithstanding, the Vietnam War notwithstanding. Yes, mistakes were made. Yes, the New 
Jerusalem was not built. But the effecta€”the discrediting and replacement of the New Deal 
Ordera€”seems disproportionate to the causes.
Back in 1993-1995 I was working for the Clinton administration. Back then we hoped to resurrect 
things. We hoped that 1981-1993 was a mistaken diversion from the best path. We hoped we could 
reverse course and get back to what had manifestly worked so well in the first post-WWII 
generation.

So, led by Bill Clinton, we placed a bet: first, economic policies to reverse the growth-retarding 
mistake of the Reagan and George H.W. Bush administrations; second, hope those would create a 
fast-growth high-tech high-investment high-employment future for America; third, with faster growth 
would come greatly reduced economic anxietiesa€”and so burn the
thread that the uppity undeserving were getting ahead of themselves out of American 
politicsa€”then, fourth, once again pursue a pragmatic politics of what worked equitable growth, 
rather than a destructive politics of finding and punishing enemies.

Donate Subscriptions

The Neoliberal Order

It did not work. It was replaced by a Neoliberal Order that was hegemonic, in Gary Gerstlea€™ s 
terms: it shaped the core ideas of politics and governance not just for those who cheerled for it, 
but even and perhaps especially for those who resisted it. We could not restore the New Deal Order. 
We could not even restore a simulacrum of it in Left-Neoliberal
sheepa€™ s clothing.

The New Deal Order had required rapid growth, so that worries that its social-insurance system 
allowed the undeserving to take advantage of the hard workers and the job creators were drowned out 
by the music of a€oeita€™ s getting better all the time.a€D The New Deal Order required a politics 
of coalitions in which people agreed they had a good thing going, and
the big question was whether they should (as the center-right wanted) prioritize fixing the leaks 
in the roof or (as the center-left wanted) prioritize completing the addition.


Without all of those, it was unsustainable.

And so we working for and with Bill Clinton found ourselves, instead, working to cement the 
Neoliberal Order just as Eisenhower had found himself working to cement the New Deal Order back in 
the 1950s. Whether tilting to the left or to the right, Global North governments indulged in a very 
aggressive pursuit of free trade and globalization, a great weakening of
unions, privatization, deregulation, and an extraordinary reduction of the degree of progressivity 
in the tax system. A belief that market mechanisms were almost always superior to bureaucratic or 
political mechanisms. And, for many, a belief that income inequality needed to be increased in 
order to reinvigorate economic growth, and that that greater inequality was
not an unfortunate necessity but rather a positive gooda€”giving the job-creators and the 
hard-workers what they deserved.

Was this transition from New Deal to Neoliberal Order inevitable? I still think that, on the west 
side of the Atlantic, it might well have worked, had George W. Busha€™ s team not gotten him 
elected by a 5-4 vote, and had all the Republican worthies not followed Newt Gingrich down the road 
that has led them to their current thralldom to Donald Trump and his
fellow grifters. I still think that, on the east side of the Atlantic, it might have worked, had 
Britaina€™ s Liberal Party been willing to support centrist technocrat Gordon Brown rather than 
rightist ideologue David Cameron.

But the Neoliberal Order entrenched itself in the Global North. But it failed to deliver on its own 
promises.

The Neoliberal Order did not restore the rapid growth of prosperity by reinvigorating 
entrepreneurshipa€’’rather, growth slowed further as the cult of short-term financial results 
undermined the ability of businesses and governments to make long-term mutually-reinforcing 
common-prosperity investments.
The Neoliberal Order did not properly distribute prosperity to the deserving and their just deserts 
to the undeservinga€”instead, rent-seeking strengthened among the plutocracy, to which kleptocracy 
added itself.

The Neoliberal Order did not restore moral order and solidity to Global North society a€’’things 
continued to fall apart and the center held less, and less.

The only one of its promises the Neoliberal Order in the Global North fulfilled was to greatly 
increase inequality of income and wealth. It led to plutocracy, tinged with kleptocracy.
And yet the Neoliberal Order remained entrenched. Up until 2008 it was even triumphant. And it 
proved stubbornly and persistently resistant to erosion since.

It hung on after 2003, even after George W. Busha€™ s breaking of the Concert of the World and even 
of the Western Alliance in favor of a a€oeCoalition of the Willing.a€D
It hung on after 2006, even as the hope that information technology would restore golden-age 
economic growth rates ebbed away.

It hung on after 2008, even as the claim that depressions were a thing of the past collapsed.

It hung on after 2010, even as the great-and-the-good did not just put the task of restoring full 
employment on the back burner, but took it off the stove entirely.

Thinkers like Robert Kuttner blame relatively small groups and individuals for the persistence of 
the Neoliberal Order: a€oecultural leftistsa€D, especially high-tech ones, who welcomed 
de-bureaucratization; Ralph Nader, who welcomed deregulation; Bill Clinton, who was opportunistic; 
Barack Obama, who was inexperienced and cautious. Those do not seem
sufficient causes to me. And yet since the 1980s each moment of the Neoliberal OrderaC™ s failure 
to reinvigorate economic growth, restore society to its proper moral center, redistribute wealth to 
the deserving in an appropriate way, or strengthen a world order in which America is the benevolent 
dominant power has been met by a common response: we must not
replace the Neoliberal Order. We must, rather, double down and try harder.


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

A Tentative Diagnosis

Some say that the wheel has finally turneda€”that we now live in the ruins of the fallen Neoliberal 
Order. I do not think that is true. It may no longer be hegemonic in the sense of forcing 
oppositional movements into dialogue and contention with it on its own terms, Neoliberalism is 
still out there. It persists.

My diagnosis is that, at least in the Global North, potential voters are, today: (a) profoundly 
unhappy with a neoliberal world in which the only rights that people have that are worth anything 
are their property-ownership rights and they are thus the playthings of economic forces that value 
and devalue their property; but (b) are anxiously unsatisfied with social
democracy that gives equal shares of access to valuable things to those whom they regard as 
a€oeundeservinga€n; and (c) while that economic anxiety can be assuaged by rapid and broad-based 
growth, it is also (d) stoked by those who like the current highly unequal distribution of wealth 
and thus seek to make politics about the discovery of (external and internal)
enemies rather than about equitable prosperity.

And so here we are. Our current situation: in the rich countries there is enough by any reasonable 
standard, and yet we are all unhappy, all earnestly seeking to discover who the enemies are who 
have somehow stolen our rich birthright and fed us unappetizing lentil stew instead. Thus second 
half of the big story of the twentieth century is that very painful one. And is
slicing and tasting satisfactorily even possible? As Richard Easterlin wrote a generation ago, 
humanitya€™ s is a a€oehollow victorya€D:

In the end, the triumph of economic growth is not a triumph of humanity over material wants; 
rather, it is a triumph of material wants over humanity a€!

If the Neoliberal Order has been broken, it was broken by Donald Trump and his rants against 
Chinese, Mexicans, the imports we buy from them, and the immigrants that Mexico sends us. Nobody 
before Trump had managed to gain much purchase in an attempt to erode the Neoliberal Order. But 
since Trumpa€™ s election in 2016 many politiciansa€”Bolsonaro in
Brazil and Johnson in England ex-London, Orban in Hungary and Modi in India, and many othersa€”have 
been taking notes.

But the potential replacements today for the Neoliberal Order appear massively less attractive than 
it does. Whether on their own or mixed with surviving Neoliberal remnants, ethno-nationalist 
populism, authoritarian state surveillance capitalism, or out-and-our neo-fascism are all 
frightening. And the problems we face are frightening as well: Global warming, ethno­
national terrorism on all scales from the individual AR-15 to the Combined Arms Army, revived 
fascism, techno-kleptocracya€”at all of these new and very serious problems that will mark the 21st 
century.


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

A Tentative Diagnosis

Some say that the wheel has finally turneda€”that we now live in the ruins of the fallen Neoliberal 
Order. I do not think that is true. It may no longer be hegemonic in the sense of forcing 
oppositional movements into dialogue and contention with it on its own terms, Neoliberalism is 
still out there. It persists.

My diagnosis is that, at least in the Global North, potential voters are, today: (a) profoundly 
unhappy with a neoliberal world in which the only rights that people have that are worth anything 
are their property-ownership rights and they are thus the playthings of economic forces that value 
and devalue their property; but (b) are anxiously unsatisfied with social
democracy that gives equal shares of access to valuable things to those whom they regard as 
a€oeundeservinga€n; and (c) while that economic anxiety can be assuaged by rapid and broad-based 
growth, it is also (d) stoked by those who like the current highly unequal distribution of wealth 
and thus seek to make politics about the discovery of (external and internal)
enemies rather than about equitable prosperity.

And so here we are. Our current situation: in the rich countries there is enough by any reasonable 
standard, and yet we are all unhappy, all earnestly seeking to discover who the enemies are who 
have somehow stolen our rich birthright and fed us unappetizing lentil stew instead. Thus second 
half of the big story of the twentieth century is that very painful one. And is
slicing and tasting satisfactorily even possible? As Richard Easterlin wrote a generation ago, 
humanitya€™ s is a a€oehollow victorya€D:

In the end, the triumph of economic growth is not a triumph of humanity over material wants; 
rather, it is a triumph of material wants over humanity a€!

If the Neoliberal Order has been broken, it was broken by Donald Trump and his rants against 
Chinese, Mexicans, the imports we buy from them, and the immigrants that Mexico sends us. Nobody 
before Trump had managed to gain much purchase in an attempt to erode the Neoliberal Order. But 
since Trumpa€™ s election in 2016 many politiciansa€”Bolsonaro in
Brazil and Johnson in England ex-London, Orban in Hungary and Modi in India, and many othersa€”have 
been taking notes.

But the potential replacements today for the Neoliberal Order appear massively less attractive than 
it does. Whether on their own or mixed with surviving Neoliberal remnants, ethno-nationalist 
populism, authoritarian state surveillance capitalism, or out-and-our neo-fascism are all 
frightening. And the problems we face are frightening as well: Global warming, ethno­
national terrorism on all scales from the individual AR-15 to the Combined Arms Army, revived 
fascism, techno-kleptocracya€”at all of these new and very serious problems that will mark the 21st 
century.

We have not resolved the dilemmas of the 20th centurya€”as is shown right now most immediately by 
the failure of governments to manage economies for equitably-distributed non-inflationary 
full-employment prosperity. It should not be beyond us to elect governments that can manage the 
technocratic task of squaring the circle, and getting stable prices, full
employment, rapid productivity growth, and an equitable distribution of income. Yet somehow it is.

Subscribe now

What Comes Next?

The moment does feel to me like the 1920s. Back then, John Maynard Keynes remembered the then-past 
era of 1870-1914 in which the world moved toward what he called aCceeconomic Eldoradoa€n, looked at 
his then-present in which opportunities were not being grasped, and wrote: a€oeWe lack more than 
usual a coherent scheme of progress, a tangible ideal.
All the political parties alike have their origins in past ideas and not in new ideasa€!. No one 
has a gospel. The next move is with the heada€la€D

We need to think harder, much harder, about how to use our immense technological powers to build a 
good society.

Adapted from DeLonga€™ s new book, Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth 
Century, published by Basic Books

Share

