Subscribe now

2021 UPDATE: I must say, this really holds up very, very well indeed:

Share

Is This Really Our Proper Timeline?

This talk has turned out to be rather more of a self-therapeutic exercisea€”or perhaps a call for 
psychological helpa€”than is appropriate for this conference. But you go to the
conference with the talk you have, and not the talk you wish you had. So let me start.

These days I wake up. Bleary-eyed, I stumble down the stairs. And while I am eating my wheaties the 
macroeconomic situation hits me. And I stop, with the spoon halfway
between the bowl and my mouth. I then find myself thinking: a€oeThis cannot be real. This has to be 
some horrible mistake, some dystopian alternate timelinea€”like that Star Trek
episode with the transporter malfunction and evil-Spock-with-a-bearda€!a€D And then I stare 
unproductively at the wall for a while as I try to piece together how exactly we got
here.

What I Was Saying Two Years Ago

Last week I went back and looked at all of my talks from the fall and winter of 2008. Back then I 
was ringing changes on three themes:

1. We are in substantial trouble: the collapse of the housing bubble triggered a mortgage finance 
crisis that snowballed into a general financial crisis and a flight to safety
that would, if unchecked, produce the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression itself.

2. Normal stabilizing monetary policy tools cannot help us any more. The standard policy moves we 
use to stabilize demand and production and prevent or cushion
downturns have already been used to the full and cannot help us any more.

3. Nevertheless, we are going to get out of this with only minor damage to the economy, for we do 
have (a) the technocratic knowledge, (b) the policy tools, and (c) the
political will to escape from the trap.

And I was very confident about all three of those. I would have given 9-1 odds on all of them 
together.

The Impulse That Caused the Downturn

Indeed, we should not have been unable to escape from the trap. For one thing, the initial 
financial shock that set the downturn in motion was remarkably small.

We got irrationally exuberant about the demand for housing and the trajectory of housing prices. We 
built five million houses extra housesa€’’largely in the swamps of Florida and
in the desert between Los Angeles and Albuquerquea€”that simply should not have been built. Their 
cost of construction was to a first approximation covered entirely by mortgage
debt. And on an average one of those five million houses the purchaser took out $100,000 in 
mortgage debt that simply will never be repaid: the buyer cannot afford it and the house
is not worth it. That means that, as of the end of 2007, there were $500 billion of financial 
losses to be allocated: somebody's bonds and derivatives were going to pay off $500
billion less than people had thought.

Regulatory Forebearance & Arbitrage

Now in a global economy with $80 trillion worth of financial wealth, a $500 billion loss due to 
irrational exuberance and malinvestment should not be problem. Double it or
quadruple it and it still should not be a problem. We have modern, sophisticated, highly liquid 
financial markets. We have originate-and-distribute securitization to slice, dice, and
spread risks. The purpose of these institutions and vehicles is to spread financial risk broadly 
across the whole globe so that nobody bears any significant part of and so is ruined by
any idiosyncratic risk like mortgage defaults in the desert between Los Angeles and Albuquerque. 
The losses from the collapse of the dot-com communications-and-computers
bubble were an order of magnitude larger than those from subprime. Yet they did not create anything 
like our huge current problems.

So where was the trap?

The thumbnail explanation is that the trap was set by regulatory a€”we call it a€ceforebearancea€D 
to be polite, but the real words cannot be said at a family conference like
thisa€”and by regulatory arbitrage. Regulatory forebearance allowed investment banks to ramp up 
their leverage to unheard-of levelsa€ ”30 to l?a€”on the grounds that the
financiers'  had their fortunes at risk and knew their business. Regulatory arbitrage arose when 
investment banker said: a€oeHey! Look at these AAA CDO tranches! They pay 10
basis points more than Treasuries! We can hold them as Basel Tier I capital! That's free money !a€D 
And they never turned around and asked their own issue departments the
natural question: a€oeJust what dreck have you and your peers at other banks been persuading 
Moody's to rate as AAA these days, anyway?a€D

Or they asked and did not care about the answer, because their position would get marked to an 
overly exuberant marketa€”or perhaps just marked-to-modela€”at the end of the
year, they would collect their bonus, and then they would be gone.

Flight to Quality & the Financial Accelerator

So when the $500 billion loss hit, it hit the capital of highly-leveraged financial institutions 
and transformed all the liabilities of America's banks from safe, secure, and liquid high-
quality assets to unsafe, insecure, and illiquid low-quality assets. Whenever anything was offered 
on the market it raised the natural questions: a€oeWhy are you trying to sell this?
What is wrong with it? How little is it really worth, anyway?a€D

Thus an enormous worldwide flight to quality. A $500 billion fundamental loss triggers a $20 
trillion decline in global financial asset values with a financial accelerator of 40 as
everybody tries to dump their risky and build up the safe assets in their portfolios. And, as John 
Stuart Mill knew back in 1829, whenever you have a large excess demand in finance
it   will be mirrored by a large deficiency in demand for currently-produced goods and services and 
labor: what John Stuart Mill and his peers called a a€oegeneral gluta€Da€”
unsold commodities in pretty much every branch of distribution and unemployed workers in pretty 
much every branch of production.

Could We Have Escaped the Trap?

Could this meltdown have been avoided?
Of course.

Proper financial regulation-or proper enforcement of existing financial regulationsa€”or even 
proper control of their derivatives books by the senior managements of highly-
leveraged financial institutions would have prevented it. If the originate-and-distribute 
securitization model had actually been followed the $500 billion in losses would have been
spread out over the entire globe and not threatened the integrity of any piece of the financial 
system.

Putting into receivership housing finance in the winter or spring of 2008 would have prevented it. 
If the U.S. government had said at the start of 2008 that housing finance was a
broken mess, and that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac were now arms of the government that were going to 
buy up all mortgages and mortgage-backed securitiesa€”at a discounta€”
and sort things out, there would have been no downturn. The U.S. government would probably have 
made money on the deal: it's cost of capital is low, and the universe of even
subprime mortgages was not that impaired until millions of additional people began losing their 
jobs.

Putting into receivership as many banks as necessary in the spring, summer, and fall of 2008 would 
have prevented it. If the U.S. government had zeroed-out shareholders and
options-holders in the process of rescuing each bank from a run as it happened, it would probably 
have had to have nationalized Bear-Stearns, Lehman, Fannie, Freddie, AIG,
Citigroup,    and a few others. But as long as it guarantees the liabilities of investment and 
commercial banks there is no general impairment of quality and no flight to safety and no
financial accelerator. Admittedly, that would have required letting concerns about moral hazard out 
the window, but letting creditors off the hook is not the worst thing in the world


if shareholders and option holders are completely on the hook. We wouldn't even have had to use 
legal process to nationalize or to completely take ownership. A simple rule by
which government cash injections trigger equity issues at the then-current market price would have 
done the job.

And then with the U.S. Treasury as the majority shareholder of every single large leveraged 
financial institution in the United States, they would have been unable to lobby against
financial reform.

But we did not do that. We did not do any of those things, Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson decided 
that it was time to take away the punchbowl, let creditors see what the
consequences of not doing due diligence was, and allow Lehman Brothers to fail in an uncontrolled 
and unmanaged processa€”and then in 72 hours he reversed himself and made
all                                                                                  of the 
creditors of AIG whole. That looked very bad indeed, as one of the biggest creditors of AIG was 
Henry Paulson's old firm, Goldman Sachs, and if AIG's failure had
followed the pattern of Lehman Brothers the odds are that Goldman Sachs would not be here today.

And so the crisis came.

Consensus Expectations Before the Crisis

Back in the early and mid-2000s, when Federal Reserve officials, other policymakers, and academic 
onlookers were running scenarios for financial crisis management, the
consensus was that even the largest crisis that irrationally exuberant financial markets could 
deliver would deliver would not be enough of a shock to push the unemployment rate to
within kissing distance of 10%, let alone keep it there. The conventional wisdom was that the 
conventional policy tools of Federal Reserve open-market operations could do the job.
The Federal Reserve could, if necessary, flood financial markets with nearly unlimited amounts of 
liquidity. If markets were liquid enough there would be no deficient demand for
currently-produced goods and services. Rather, the excess supply of liquidity would be mirrored by 
an excess demand for currently-produced goods and services and the economic
problem                                                                                 of the day 
would shift from unemployment to inflation.

We can put ourselves inside the mind of Alan Greenspan back in 2005, wondering whether he should 
take steps to try to curb the housing bubble. We can imagine what he thought:

Raising interest rates to try to reduce demand for houses would raise unemployment, and since there 
are no signs of consumer-price inflation anywhere it
would be a real shame to do that. Regulation... The subprime lenders want to lend and the borrowers 
want to borrow. Am I going to declare myself
National Nanny, get in the middle, and tell then that they cannot strike the contracts they want to 
strike because Uncle Fed knows best? They will write to
their Senatorsa€”both the lenders and the borrowers will write to their Senators. And then where I 
will be? Better to keep my powder dry and clean up the
mess afterwards. I can do that. I did that in 1987,1991, 1998, and 2001 after all. Defusing four 
financial crises in less than two decades and keeping any of
them from having a large impact on production and employment is a sign that we really do have the 
tools we needa€!

By the end of 2008 it was clear that that was wrong.

The Federal Reserve had flooded markets with liquidity. It had pushed the price of liquidity down 
to zero: investors could not gain anything in return by trading their liquid reserve
deposits at the local Fed away for longer-term Treasury instruments. Yet the deficiency in demand 
for currently produced goods and services was growing every day. The problem
was that financial markets felt themselves short not of liquidity but of safety-of high-quality 
AAA-rated places to park their wealth where they could be confident it would not melt
away while their backs were turned. Conventional monetary policy had done all it could to boost the 
supply of safe assets. It could not do any more. And we were in the eventuality
that George Akerlof and Peter Diamond had warned me might come to pass back at the end of 2007a€”we 
had reached a point where the downturn was going to be huge unless the
Federal Reserve took extraordinary steps and got extraordinary help from other branches of 
government.

What We Could Have Done at the End of 2008

But there were still plenty of things that could be done to help the Federal Reserve. Thus my 
personal confidence at the end of 2008: my strong belief that we were going to get out
of this with only minor damage to the economy, for we did have (a) the technocratic knowledge, (b) 
the policy tools, and A© the political will to escape from the trap.

What were the available policy tools even though conventional monetary policy open-market 
operations were exhausted?

1. Congress could act by pulling government spending forward from the future into the present and 
pushing taxes from the present back into the future. All increases in
production and employment happen because somebody decides to spend their money fasteraC’’Milton 
Friedman's monetary policies work because when you give
people more cash in their pockets they up their spendinga€”and the federal government's money is as 
good at boosting demand and production and employment as
anybody else's. Moreover, when the federal government spends and does not tax it borrows to finance 
it. That borrowing means that it issues bondsa€”and U.S.
Treasury bonds are, now more than ever, high-quality safe AAA-rated financial assets. By expanding 
the supply of safe assets the government diminishes the excess
demand gap between what the market wants to hold in the way of safety and what it can hold, and the 
reduction in the size of that gap reduces its mirror, the deficient
demand for currently-produced goods and services.

2. The Federal Reserve could act in an extraordinary manner by engaging in "quantitative easing" 
policies. Such policies would not be aimed, as traditional expansionary
open-market operations are, at increasing the amount of liquid assets on the market. They would be 
aimed at taking risk onto the Federal Reserve's and thus the
government's balance sheet, thus decreasing the amount of risky assets the private sector had to 
hold and increasing the quantity of safe assets the private sector could
hold.  Such changes in the supply of risk and safety would almost surely be an order of magnitude 
less effective in restoring balance to financial markets than
conventional open-market operations are in normal times. But quantitative easing is not chopped 
liver.

3. The Federal Reserve could engage in open-mouth operations and state that it is raising its 
targets for the price level and the inflation rate. Such announcements would
lead investors to expect that their holdings of safe high-quality nominal assets would be subject 
to a small inflation tax. That would diminish their demand for such
assets in their portfoliosa€”and as a consequence increase their demand for currentlyproduced goods 
and services instead. Once again, not as powerful as conventional
open-market operations in normal times. But also not chopped liver.

4. The Treasury (and perhaps the Federal Reserve) could promise that the banks would not go 
bankrupt and stand behind that promise. Guaranteeing the debts of
commercial and investment banks decreases the supply of risky and increases the supply of safe 
assetsa€”but with obvious consequences for moral hazard, and for the
incentives to avoid overspeculation and irrational exuberance in the future.

5. The Treasury could engage in targeted nationalizations to keep the inability of firms to get 
credit on usual terms from causing mass layoffs and bankruptcies and
shutdowns that are unnecessary in the long run. The U.S. government did this with Fannie Mae, 
Freddie Mac, AIG, GM, and Chryslera€’’other financial bankruptcies
were forcibly merged into stronger firmsa€”but it could have done more.

6. The Treasury could use its resources to take private risk onto its balance sheet when it thinks 
markets have overshot and risky assets are undervalueda€”thus hopefully
making money as the world's largest hedge fund and adding to the risk-bearing capacity of the 
market.

7. The Treasury can reorganize mortgages by providing liquidity and a little up-front cash in 
exchange for principal writedownsa€”thus making the riskiest part of the
financial asset structure less risky.

BagehotE^s Rule

All seven of these tools are applications of Walter Bagehot's rule: the principal that the way to 
deal with a panic in which nobody is sure if contracts will be honored is for the
government to make sure that contracts are honored by lending freely to anybody who asks. (But, 
Bagehot wrote, the lending should be "at a penalty rate"a€’’financiers should
never profit from the fact of government assistance to stem the panic. That is the second part of 
Bagehot's rule.)

Back at the end of 2008 I was confident that the government would do as many of these seven 
supplements to standard monetary stabilization policy as necessary to keep
unemployment low. 10% unemployment seemed, to me, politically unthinkable. 10% unemployment for any 
substantial period of time seemed, to me, doubly politically
unthinkable.

Expectations

That was the general expectation at the end of 2008. The incoming Obama administration's belief was 
that, with the fiscal stimulus of the Recovery Act and the appropriate support
from the Federal Reserve and the Treasury, the unemployment rate was most likely to kiss 8% in 
mid-2009 and then start down. The most likely scenario and central case, they


uiuugin, was uiai me uiiciupiuyiucni IUIC wuuiu uc uuwn io / 70 uy 111c cuu ui xuiu CUIU men uuwii 
to J.*+7O uy me cun wi iuiz,. y-kiiu scuous piivcuc-scviui ioiceas>ia> pcuuieu m

picture as the incoming Obama administration.

The Outcome

But that is not the outcome that we got.

Current forecasts as of late 2010 see the unemployment rate still kissing 10% late in 2011 before, 
finally starting to decline. Its level at the start of 2012 is currently forecast to be at
least three percentage points higher than what was expected for the start of 2012 back at the end 
of 2008.

What Went Wrong?

Why have things turned out so much worse than expected when the Obama administration took office?

Some of it is that the Bush Treasury hobbled itself. Bush Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson did not 
believe in all of that a€oepenalty ratea€D stuff. He believed that you could not
charge banks a high interest rate for support in the financial crisis because the banks were not 
just illiquid but, at then-current crisis fire-sale market prices, insolvent. In such a
situation the Bagehot rule says that if you cannot charge high interest rates on loans you require 
options to give the government most of the upside: the essential principle is that the
financiers not benefit from the situation that required government support. But Paulson was not 
interested in taking any form of an equity stake in the banks that the Treasury and
the Federal Reserve were helpinga€”that, he claimed, would be socialism. So government policy in 
the crisis got off on the wrong inadequate foot.

And, of course Obama administration initially underestimated the magnitude of the problem: its Plan 
A was too small given how much damage the late-2008 financial crisis did to
the real economy.

However, it was clear by February 2009 that the situation was much worse than the plans made in 
November and December 2008 had reckoned. By February 2009 it was time for a
Plan B. But the Obama administration put forward no Plan B. And then there was no Plan C. And there 
has been no Plan D: policies on a scale to restore the economy to normal
levels of employment and capacity utilization in less than half a decade have simply not been put 
forward by the Obama administration.

The overall impression I get is of policy that was many days late and many dollars short. This is 
especially distressing since the Obama administration appeared to be aware of this
danger: remember Lawrence Summers writing on December 28,2008: "In this crisis, doing too little 
poses a greater threat than doing too much..."

Why?

Let us look, first, at our seven tools. How have they been used?

Congress did, indeed, enact the $800 billion Recovery Act, containing about $600 billion of useful 
stimulus over three years. Thus expansionary fiscal policy was used, albeit on an
inadequate scale. Since then, however, the difficulty of assembling 60 votes in the Senatea€”the 
Republican senators, plus Blanche Lincoln, Ben Nelson, and Joe Liebermana€”
have prevented any further use of this tool.

The Federal Reserve took risk onto its balance sheet in late 2008. As soon as the crisis began to 
ease, however, it stopped. It never took any steps to raise or even declare that it was
going to try to meet its inflation target. It may begin to pursue quantitative easing on November 
3,2010a€”but market expectations are that this stimulus policy will, again, be on an
insufficient scale.

The U.S. Treasury Department did guarantee that it would recapitalize banks if necessary and did 
guarantee their liabilities by announcing that they had passed the a€oestress
tests.a€D And the Treasurya€™ s takeover of most of the auto industry in early 2009 was a step 
toward targeted nationalizations. However, it was not a big enough step to have
serious macro consequences. Moreover, many more nationalizations would have been needed for the 
Treasury to demonstrate that it was serious about achieving the a€oepenalty
ratea€D part of Bagehota€™ s rule.

Otherwise, the Treasury initiatives have been failures. The HAMP program has failed to reorganize 
any appreciable share of the mortgage market. The PPIP program has not
involved a large enough swap of risky for safe assets to have any noticeable macroeconomic impact.

ObamaE^s Biases

The Obama administration tends to blame the Republicans in the Senate (plus Democratic Senators Joe 
Lieberman, Blanche Lincoln, and Ben Nelson) for the too-small size of Plan

A. And they tend to say that given gridlock in the Senate the administration has no levers to use 
to enact a Plan B, or a Plan C, or a Plan D.

The small size of the Recovery Act is indeed the fault of the Republicans in the Senate (plus 
Blanche Lincoln, Ben Nelson, and Joe Lieberman). But the fact that a minority of
senators could and would block legislative action was very predictable, and was predicted even 
before Obama took the lead over John McCain in the national opinion polls. There
are  two modes to the Senate. The first is to have individual senators commit themselves to voting 
for what they regard as good policies for the nation without concern for party
loyalty. Then the procedural obstacles of the Senate may perform a useful task: shouldna€™ t a deal 
of national import be struck in such a way that at least 60 senators think that it
is                                                                              good policy. The 
second mode is to have rigid party loyalty behind a program aimed not at passing legislation but 
rather to embarrass the president of the other party by making
him or her appear a failure. In this case the procedural obstacles of the Senate are dangerous and 
destructive.

President-Elect Barack Obama should have sent Vice President-Elect Joe Biden to talk to the 
Republican senators in November 2008. Would they commit to putting partisan
advantage below the public interest? Or did Biden need to get ready, the moment he took the chair 
and began to preside over the Senate, to cut back the procedural underbrush as
rapidly as possible? Biden never had that conversation. The Obama administration^™ s placing the 
blame on Senate procedures raises the question of why they never lifted a
finger  to try to change those procedures.

The Recovery Act in particular and expansionary fiscal policy in general, however, are only one of 
the seven tools to promote macroeconomic expansion. The other six tools do not
require congressional action. The President appoints the Federal Reserve Chair and the Treasury 
Secretary (albeit with the advice and consent of the Senate).

Barack Obama reappointed Ben Bernanke as Chair of the Federal Reserve. And so Barack Obamaa€™ s own 
choice as Federal Reserve Chair has let the quantitative-easing levers
that the Federal Reserve controls sit idle for two years. Moreoever, it took more than a year for 
Obama to make more than one nomination to the Federal Reserve Board. For
practically all of the time since his inauguration, Dan Tarullo has been the only person Obama has 
added to the Federal Reservea€™ s Open Market Commitee.

Similarly, Tim Geithner is Obamaa€™ s Treasury Secretary. And Tim Geithnera€™ s failure to make 
macroeconomically-relevant successes of the PPIP and the HAMP program
are owned by Obama: the cossacks work for the czar. Now it is very difficult for a new Treasury 
Secretary to gain control of the Treasury building and get it to do much. And it is
next to impossible for a a new Treasury Secretary to gain control of the Treasury building without 
confirmed deputies. But the Senate does not have to confirm deputiesa€”that is
what recess appointments are for.

A President Obama who valued policies to reduce unemployment rather than extending the hand of 
comity one more time to Republican senators would, I think, have gone about
staffing the administration in a very different way.

Some blame for the current situation should, I think, properly fall on Barack Obamaa€™ s economic 
advisors. It is true that he did not ask for a Plan B, or a Plan C. But they should
have unified and provided him with one. Instead, as best as I can tell the economic policy advisors 
split in the second half of 2008. Peter Orszag called for putting the budget deficit
on a downward path to restore business confidence and boost private investment. Lawrence Summers 
called for a large stimulative infrastructure investment program. Jared
Bernstein thought that a payroll tax cut was the best road. Christina Romer favored aid to states 
to head off the then-forthcoming and now in-progress large state fiscal contraction.
Timothy Geithner called for a bunch of little fiscal stimulative programs each of which would be 
dear to the heart of a different senator number 60, but which together would have
wound                                                                                up to 
something macroeconomically significant.

Without a common platform and a common set of priorities, they were defeated in detail. None of 
them, as best as I can tell, was happy with the drift of policy. But their
unhappiness did not lead to action on the part of the administration.

There are issues of the span of control of the president, and there are issues of priorities. The 
job is hard. Bandwidth is limited. Macro recovery cannot take up all of your time.


presidency are to explain what your policies are and to pick personnel, back them, and referee 
fights between them.

There are only 98 possible working hours in a week. A third of those have to go to coalition 
maintenance and ceremonial appearances. Another third have to go to explaining what
you are trying to accomplish. That leaves a maximum of 30 hours a week to do policy.

There are huge numbers of priorities in addition to macroeconomic recovery. There is financial 
reforma€’’which is not quite the same thing. There is climate change. There is health
care reform. There are all the international affairs issues There is everything else. A president 
can spend only three hours a week on macroeconomic recovery, and there is not that
much time in the legislative calendar and there is not that much time on the evening news.

Why Is Macro Recovery Moved to the Back Burner?

Nevertheless, it seemed at the time and seems even more so today extraordinarily strange that 
macroeconomic recovery was moved to the back burner after the passage of the
Recovery Act. Even putting aside the question of the national interest as requiring quick action on 
those issues that genuinely will not wait, even a small concern for political
survival and the ability to implement an agenda in 2011 and 2012 would have called for keeping 
macroeconomic recovery on the front burner throughout 2009 and 2010. The
correlation between economic growth and electoral success not just at the presidential level but at 
the congressional-midterm level is well known. The correlation is strong. The
difference between a rapid recovery and a jobless one is worth 20 seats in the House of 
Representatives in midterm elections.

Every pollster knows about the correlation between economic growth in the two and three quarters 
before an election and electoral success in it. So if there is one thing that the
policy and the political and the message staffs in the White House should be able to all agree 
should not fade to the backburner, it is the macro recovery situation.

Yet it did.

Five Hypotheses

I simply cannot understand why the task of macroeconomic recovery was moved to the back burner in 
the Obama administration so very quickly.

This is the part of the talk where I go from simply needing therapy to actually asking for therapy. 
I am at a loss, All I can do is to throw out hypothesis. What pushed macro
recovery to the bottom of the White Housea€™ s agenda for so much of the past 28 months since the 
passage of the Recovery Act?

I do, however, have five hypotheses. All of these are speculative. I have no confidence that any of 
them are correct.

First, over the past generation the union movement in America has collapsed. This collapse of 
unions means that members of congress, executive-branch appointees, journalists, and
other opinion makers rarely see people representing the interests of or even knowing much about 
what is going on in the bottom 90% of the American income distribution

My second hypothesis is like the first, but it focuses not on unions per se but on the general 
disconnection of Washington from the country. These days, it is said, the only place
where it is hard to walk into a restaurant and immediately get a table is within a mile of Capitol 
Hill. The Washingtonians are prospering: for them and for the financiers of New
York a€oerecovery summeraGD is a reality. Their absence of close connection or even sustained 
contact with what is going on out in the periphery of the country means that they
feel no sense of urgency about the macroeconomy at all.

My third hypothesis is that the failure to lend at a penalty rate broke confidence in the 
governmental™ s ability to do anything constructive at all, and greatly magnified the
obstacles to further action. But it is hard to see how this influences the climate of opinion 
around Obamaa€”and it is the climate of opinion around Obama that has led him to put
macroeconomic recovery issues on the back burner that I want to explain and understand.

A fourth hypothesis is that Obama and his political advisors do not have a great deal of confidence 
in what their own economic advisors recommend because they see that the
economics profession is badly split over a lot of crucial issues about how to generate a recovery. 
And it is certainly true that a great deal of the economics profession in America has
behaved very badly indeed since the start of the financial crisis. They have helped to create a 
climate of ignorance, in which action to make things better requires that one start by
rolling mammoth boulders uphill.

Here at Berkeley we are outraged at the Robert Lucases and Richard Posners claiming that Christina 
Romer must be corrupt for saying that the Recovery Act was likely to boost
employment. Neither Lucas nor Posner has ever been able to elucidate any even half-plausible reason 
for why expansions in government spending would not boost demand. Both
believe that expansionary monetary policy works because more money in people's pockets induces them 
to step up the pace of their spending. Why is a boost to the pace of the
federal governments™ s spending supposed to any worse at this than anyone elsea€™ s? They have no 
answer because there is no answer.

Our reaction to Lucas and Posner is thus contempt and scorn.

We are annoyed at the Greg Mankiws saying that a tax-heavy Recovery Act would have been effective 
but the actual Recovery Act was not. Does he not know that the Recovery
Act was 40 percent tax cuts? Does he not know that the multipliers he says he favors predict that 
the Recovery Act would been twice as effective at boosting employment as the
multipliers the Obama administration used predict?

We are puzzled at the Niall Fergusons saying that there is nothing that ex-construction workers can 
do that is productive because they have no useful skills. We point out to him that
employment held up absolutely fine for 18 months after the peak of the construction boom. As 
construction employment collapsed the workers shed from that industry had no
problems finding other jobs, It is only after collapse of Lehman Brothers and the financial crisis 
that employment crashesa€”that is a sign that what we have is not structural
unemployment but deficient demand unemployment.

And we are horrified when Barack Obama goes off message too, saying that because the private sector 
is cutting back the government needs to cut back tooa€’’therefore, Obama
said, he is calling for a three-year freeze on non-security discretionary spending.

I complained about this last to Peter Orzaga€”who said that it did not matter substantively, that 
the tax side and the mandatory spending side of stimulus dwarfed whatever
happened on non-security discretionary. He is correct. But from the perspective of building and 
maintaining a coalition to support Obama's policies it is disastrous, and inept.

Things could be worse. Obama is not Cameron or Clegg or Osborne. Bernanke is not Trichet. We are, I 
think, in much better policy shape than Europea€’’although in worse shape
than East Asia ex-Japan.

Nietzschean Ressentiment

Let me mention one last hypothesisa€”one that may get my economist union card revoked and get me 
transferred to a department of rhetoric, or perhaps cultural studies.

Friedrich Nietzsche talked about the losers, or about those who thought they were the losers. He 
discussed their tendency in various ways to transvalue their valuesa€”to say that
what was thought to be bad was in fact good precisely because it was thought to be bad.

Three weeks ago I was talking to some activists from the California Tea Party. I was trying to 
explain the Keynesian perspective: Shouldna€™ t we keep public employment from
falling," I said, "because right the government can borrow at such extraordinarily good terms, and 
if we keep our teachers at work then they educate our students and our students
can earn more in the future a€’’and if teachers have incomes they spend money and that employs more 
people in private sector?

And they said no.

They said: we have lost our jobs in the private sector. It is only fair for those who work in the 
government to run some risk of loosing their jobs as well. They are unionized. They
have pensions. It is not fair that they should have jobs too. They need to lose their jobs as well.

Thus unemployment becomes something to be valued. The fact that government austerity will increase 
unemployment becomes a transvalued virtue of the policy

Or take mortgages. Right now a great deal of mortgages are underwater. The people living in the 
house and controlling its maintenance thus do not have a financial stake in the
enterprise. When we used to talk about situations in which decision makers did not have a financial 
stakea€”well, we used to call that "socialism," and we used to think that it was


□au. me capitalist tiling to uo is to write UOWH me value 01 unuerwaier mortgages, mat is me way to 
get oacK to a situation in WHICH me decision makers nave a imaiiciai staKe HI

their decisions. If we do not do that, then there is a gulf between the deciders on the one hand 
and the people who bear the costs on the other. Then we look forward to a future in
which underwater homeowners pull out the copper pipes from the walls of their houses and sell them 
on eBay while West Nile virus breeds in the untreated swimming pools.

Here, once again, the response was: no. We lost our money when the stock market went down. We lost 
our money because the house we bought is worth less; we bought it at the
peak. It is only fair that underwater home owners lose their houses. It would not be fair if they 
get to write down the value of their debts just because they owe more on their houses
than theya€™ re worth.

Once again a transvaluation: we are bankrupt, and so more people need to become bankrupt to keep us 
company.
This Nietzschean hypothesis is the last that I have.

The Outlook

Let me conclude by saying that the future looks bleak.

The last two recessions before this onea€”the early 1990s and early 2000s recessionsa€”both had a 
financial crisis component.

And after those recessions there were no visible signs of the magic of the market returning the 
economy to full employment through the economy's natural processes, at least not
until something else new came along. In the case of the 1990s the new thing that came along was the 
dot-com bubble and the technology explosion. In the case of the 2000s the new
thing that came along was the housing boom and the coming of mortgage securitization.

Thus I can see no reason to believe that there will be substantial private sector forces to push 
the employment-to-population ration up anywhere toward normal over the next several
years. And we have shot ourselves in the head with respect to expansionary government policies. I 
see no possibility for any such on a large scale for the next two years, and
possibly                                                                               for longer.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

October 29,2010

6402 words

<https://www.icloud.com/pages/0fkuQLuR3Sa5hSL8P41Rvhv9Q

<https ://github .com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/2010-10-29-battered-and-beaten .pdf>

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

