
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Dan Nexon: The New Duck of Minerva: Preliminary Details 
<https://www.duckofminerva.com/2Q21/07/the-new-duck-of-minerva-preliminary-details.html>

•  Chad Bown: The Missing Chips'. a€~One of the biggest culprits was a sudden shift in U.S. trade 
policy. In 2018, motivated by national security concerns, the Trump administration launched a trade 
and tech war
with China that jolted the entire globalized semiconductor supply chain. The fiasco contributed to 
the current shortages, hurting American businesses and workers. Now, the Biden administration must 
pick up the
pieces. In its first five months, the Biden administration has laid the groundworka€! 
<https://www.foreignaffairs.eom/articles/2021-07-06/missing-chips>

• Nouriel Roubini: The Looming Stagflationary Debt Crisis: a€~ Years of ultra-loose fiscal and 
monetary policies have put the global economy on track for a slow-motion train wreck in the coming 
years. When the
crash comes, the stagflation of the 1970s will be combined with the spiraling debt crises of the 
posta€“2008 era, leaving major central banks in an impossible positiona€! <https://www.project-

syndicate .org/commentary/stagflation-debt-crisis-2020s-by-nouriel-roubini-2021-06?referral=4d8e23>

•  Michael Warren: _Pence Contradicts Trump on January 6, Calling Plan to Decertify 2020 Election 
a€oeUn-Americana€na€! <https://www.cnn.com/2021/06/24/politics/mike-pence-donald-trump-january-
6/index.html>

• Michael Rooney: a€™Ita€™ s like NozickaC™ s third principle of justice, rectification of past 
improper taking. Hea€™ s aware that it implies massive and open-ended redistribution, but quietly 
buries that
detail in one paragraph while going on for 100s of pages with the usual libertarian 
idealizationsa€! <https://twitter.com/MichaelROOney/status/1409888566327529485>

•  Mike Konczal: The Populist Right Will Fail to Help Workers or Outflank the Left: a€~There really 
a€oeis no unified right-left populist politicsa€D forming out therea€!. The populist right does not 
have a real
agenda to raise wages outside curtailing immigration, which will faila€!. The populist right 
believes that globalization and immigration are the reasons that the working-class has suffered 
under neoliberalisma€!.
Full employment and a tight labor market arena€™ t determined by the number of people in the 
countrya€! but instead by fiscal and monetary policy, demand and technologya€!

<https://mikekonczal.substack.eom/p/the-populist-right-will-fail-to-help>

Paragraphs:

It is not poets but science-fiction writers who are the prophets of our time. As Lois McMaster 
Bujold said somewhere, just as mysteries are fantasies of justice and romances are fantasies of 
marriage, so science-fiction novels
are fantasies of political agency:

Zachary D. Carter: a€~This happened a couple of weeks ago, but I've been dealing with a nasty cold 
and too tired to really dig into it. I've been reading Kim Stanley Robinson since I was 11. Seeing
him cite my book in this interview with Ezra Klein was really something. The night before my first 
day of seventh grade, I just couldn't sleep. Around midnighta€”very late for an almost-seventh-
grader!a€”I picked up a copy of Red Mars and started reading. I finally put it down when my mom 
came in and told me to get dressed for school. I don't really remember very much of what we
learned    the first few weeks of seventh grade, but I do remember Red Mars. It's really gratifying 
to see Robinson expound on this point. In politics, Keynes lost and lost and lost for almost a 
quarter of
a century. Terrible things happened. And then he was able to take advantage of a tremendous 
opportunity to create a better world.! mentioned this on the podcast with Noah Smith and Brad 
DeLong,
but I think it's easy to lose sight of the democratic potential that exists in this moment. We are 
living through a horrific age. The potential for escalating calamity is obvious. But we are 
simultaneously
at a point where the realization of a more just and decent world is more plausible than it has ever 
been in my lifetime.

LINK: <https://twitter.com/zachdcarter/status/1413505780779655178>

I fear he is right.

What kind of person wants to talk about inflation risks right now, rather than getting the economy 
back to full employment as fast as possible, and avoiding risks that recovery stalls out?

Duncan Black: Eschaton: Centrist Dipshits: a€~I used to think we talked about whatever 
conservatives wanted to talk about on any given day. This is true, but in the post-Trump era in 
which their
messaging apparatus is a bit messed up, I realize how much this is true only because centrist 
dipshits want to talk about the same things .a€!

LINK: <https://www.eschatonblog .com/2021/07/centrist-dipshits ,html>

It is too rarely said that Boris Johnson is the doga€”not the dog, the rabid chihuahuaa€”who caught 
the car, tore off the bumper with his teeth, and now has no idea what to do. Boris was supposed to 
lose the Brexit vote, and
in so doing greatly strengthen his position within the conservative party b y this ostentatious 
fighting for the base and for what the Torygraph, the Daily Mail, and the other eyeball-grifters 
had convinced them that their
interests were. It is still the case, as I heard William Haugh say in 2015, that Britain would be 
in a much stronger position in the EU, with a powerful voice in discussions in Brussels, and then 
with a powerful ability to obtain
special carveouts from EU rules from Brussels via the threat of Brexit than it has now, having done 
Brexit, for now it has to accomodate itself to the EU, and it has neither voice in Brussels nor a 
claim on the EUa€™ s
concern:

Martin Wolf: Boris Johnsond€™ s Brexit Win a Pyrrhic Victory: a€~The realities of relative power 
mean the UK and EU area€”and will remaina€”far from equalsa€!. Boris Johnson won the
referendum on UK membership of the EU just over five years ago, went on to win the leadership of 
the Conservative party in July 2019, reached a deal with the EU in October and won a decisive
victory under the UKa€™ s first-past-the post system in the general election of December. He has 
re-made his country. But has he remade it for the better or for the worse?a€! A point that emerged
quickly (and to no informed persona€™ s surprise) is that the Brexiters had misunderstood the 
EUa€!. As Menona€! notes, sardonically: a€oelt was curious that a group of ideological purists
expected their interlocutors to be ideologically flexible and pragmatic.a€D It is clear that 
hitherto Brexit has strengthened the EU, not weakened ita€!. Relations will stay poisonous for the 
indefinite
future. It is inevitable, too, that the UK will lose more from this than the EUa€!.. Brexit seem 
largely a will-oa€™ -the-wisp. It will not increase control, but reduce it where it mattered most to
individuals and even to the public at large. Skilful demagogues transmuted the public unhappiness 
into hostility towards the EU, which was mostly innocent of what people detested, except over
migration. UK statistics are very poor on this: the number of EU citizens seeking a€oesettled 
statusa€D turned out to be 5m by March 2021, vastly more than expected. But, strikingly, inflows of
migrants from the rest of the world have now jumped, as those from the EU declined. In the longer 
run, Brexit is likely to damage the UK, perhaps split it, while strengthening EU solidarity. If so, 
it
will surely be judged a Pyrrhic victorya€!

LINK: 
<https://www.ft.com/content/afl5b3fa-ca28-43eb-8c54-bae72d0d58dd?emailId=60e486c906b93500046a4I05&se
gmentId=7d033II0-c776-45bf-e9f2-7c3a03d2dd26>

That cases jumped 50-fold tells us that a€oebreakthrougha€n infections in mRN A-vaccinated 
populations do shed virus:


Martin Wolf: Boris Johnsona€™ s Brexit Win a Pyrrhic Victory. a€~The realities of relative power 
mean the UK and EU area€”and will remaina€”far from equalsa€!. Boris Johnson won the
referendum on UK membership of the EU just over five years ago, went on to win the leadership of 
the Conservative party in July 2019, reached a deal with the EU in October and won a decisive
victory under the UKa€™ s first-past-the post system in the general election of December. He has 
re-made his country. But has he remade it for the better or for the worse?a€! A point that emerged
quickly (and to no informed persona€™ s surprise) is that the Brexiters had misunderstood the 
EUa€!. As Menona€! notes, sardonically: a€oelt was curious that a group of ideological purists
expected  their interlocutors to be ideologically flexible and pragmatic .a€D It is clear that 
hitherto Brexit has strengthened the EU, not weakened ita€!. Relations will stay poisonous for the 
indefinite
future. It is inevitable, too, that the UK will lose more from this than the EUa€!.. Brexit seem 
largely a will-oa€™ -the-wisp. It will not increase control, but reduce it where it mattered most to
individuals and even to the public at large. Skilful demagogues transmuted the public unhappiness 
into hostility towards the EU, which was mostly innocent of what people detested, except over
migration. UK statistics are very poor on this: the number of EU citizens seeking a€oesettled 
statusa€D turned out to be 5m by March 2021, vastly more than expected. But, strikingly, inflows of
migrants from the rest of the world have now jumped, as those from the EU declined. In the longer 
run, Brexit is likely to damage the UK, perhaps split it, while strengthening EU solidarity. If so, 
it
will surely be judged a Pyrrhic victorya€!

LINK: <https://www .ft.com/content/afl 
5b3fa-ca28-43eb-8c54-bae72d0d58dd?emailId=60e486c906b93500046a4105&segmentId=7d033110-c776-45bf-e9f2
-7c3a03d2dd26>

That cases jumped 50-fold tells us that a€oebreakthrougha€n infections in mRNA-vaccinated 
populations do shed virus:

Josh Marshall: Our Global Real-World Test of Vaccines and the Delta Variant: a€~"Breakthrougha€D 
cases of COVID in Israela€! from the Delta variant. I havena€™t been able to get clear and
definitive information^!. Spread in the country all but went to zero. Then the Delta variant 
arrived. That led cases to go from single digits a day to two or three hundred a daya€”a big 
percentage
spike but still quite low in absolute terms. This has led to a lot of confusiona€!. Ita€™ s worth 
remembering that only just over 50% of the overall population in Israel has been vaccinated. So
therea€™ s still a lot of improvement that could be madea€!

LINK: 
<https://talkingpointsmemo.com/edblog/our-global-real-world-test-of-vaccines-and-the-delta-variant>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

