Subscribe now

SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. BRADFORD DELONG

PREORDER NOW • ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

<https: //bit .ly/3pP3Krk>

A3 20-23: So throughout the long twentieth century, communities and people looked at what the 
market economy was delivering to them and said: a€oeDid we order that?a€D[w] And society demanded 
something else. The idiot Mr. Hyde-side of Friedrich von Hayek called it a€oesocial justice,a€D and 
decreed that people should forget about it: the market economy could never deliver social justice, 
and to try to rejigger society so that social justice could be
delivered would destroy the market economya€™ s ability to deliver what it could 
delivera€’’increasing wealth, distributed to those who owned valuable property rights.[11][x]

Do note that in this context a€oesocial justicea€D was always only a€cejusticea€D relative to what 
particular groups desired: not anything justified by any consensus transcendental principles. Do 
note that it was rarely egalitarian: it is unjust if those unequal to you are treated equally. But 
the only conception of a€oejusticea€D that the market economy could deliver was what the rich might 
think was just, for the property owners were the only people it cared
for.[y] Plus, the market economy, while powerful, is not perfect: it cannot by itself deliver 
enough research and development, for example, or environmental quality, or, indeed, full and stable 
employment.fi2][z]

No: a€oeThe market giveth, the market taketh away; blessed be the name of the marketa€D was not a 
stable principle around which to organize society and political economy.[aa] The only stable 
principle had to be some version of a€oeThe market was made for man, not man for the market.a€D But 
who were the men who counted for whom the market should be made? And what version would be the best 
making? And how to resolve the squabbles over the
answers to those questions?[ab]

Throughout the long twentieth century, many othersa€”Karl Polanyi, John Maynard Keynes, Benito 
Mussolini, and Vladimir Lenin serve as good markers for many of the currents of thought, activism, 
and actiona€’’tried to think up solutions. They dissented from the pseudo-classical (for the order 
of society, economy, and polity as it stood in the years after 1870 was in fact quite new), 
semi-liberal (for it rested upon ascribed and inherited authority as much as
on freedom) order that Hayek and his ilk advocated and worked to create and maintain. They did so 
constructively and destructively, demanding that the market do less, or do something different, and 
that other institutions do more.[ac] Perhaps the closest humanity got was the shotgun marriage of 
Hayek and Polanyi blessed by Keynes in the form of posta€“World War II North Atlantic developmental 
social democracy. But that institutional setup failed its own
sustainability test. And so we are still on the path, not at its end. And we are still, at best, 
slouching toward utopia.[ad]

Share

Printed Endnotes:

[11] Friedrich A. von Hayek, The Mirage of Social Justice: Law, Legislation, and Liberty, vol. 2, 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1976.

[12] Arthur Cecil Pigou, a€oeWelfare and Economic Welfare,a€D in The Economics of Welfare, London: 
Routledge, 1920,3a€“22.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Longer Notes:

[w] That last reference is to Nobel Prize-winning physicist LI. Rabi's quip in response to the 
identification of the muona€”an elementary particle that seemed then to be nothing other than a 
much heavier version of the electron. See CERNCourier: Who Ordered All of That? (January 9,2020) 
<https://cerncourier.eom/a/who-ordered-all-of-that/>

The point is that the industrializing market economy in the context of much more rapid 
technological progress fueled by the phase-shift from the coming of full globalization, the 
industrial research lab, and the modern was certainly producing something. But it was not producing 
what humanity had ordered for the era of progress that visionaries had hoped would be launched by 
the Belle A%opoque that began in 1870. It was not producing anything that could be
called a real utopia, substantially because the market economy was solving the problem of getting 
those who owned valuable property the luxuries they thought they wished, rather than solving the 
problem of making a truly human world for us all.


[x] In a way, von Hayek's point-of-view was as mystical as Marx, Lenin, and Trotsky's. Edmund S. 
Wilson noted that what Trotsky, at least, wrote made absolutely no sense unless you replaced 
"history" and "dialectic of history" with "Providence" and "God". See Edmund Wilson: To the Finland 
Station: A Study in the Writing & Acting of History

Book Wilson Finland

31.3MB a"™ PDF File
Download

Download

Hayek has a very similar attitude toward the catallaxy.

It was not designed by humanity. It cannot be improved by humans. For humans to even question it is 
impious, a violation of taboo, and brings down awful retribution and judgment.

Much wiser than von Hayek, I think, was Michael Polanyi, for whom both fiduciary and mercenary 
institutions have their proper place, and they can be (partially) designed, improved, and kept 
within their proper bounds by humans acting consciously and collectively. See Harry Prosch (1986): 
Michael Polanyi: a Critical Exposition <https://archive.org/details/michaelpolanyicrOOOQpros>

[y] If we were to give Friedrich von Hayek the mic, he would say that the attempts by holders of 
other forms of social power to upend the workings of the market had to be destructive in terms of 
their effect on wealth-creation, and were at best neutral in terms of their effects on 
wealth-distribution. They brought more chaos and uncertainty to an already chaotic world, and so 
risk aversion made them a bad idea even if their revolutions could be quick and
relatively painless. The social fabric of the Habsburg Empire was nothing to be proud of, but there 
was no gain in expected value by replacing it with one imposed by storm troopers, whether Steel 
Helmets or Red Guards or the ethno-nationalism of some particular relatively small grouping of 
valleys.

The moral arc of the universe, von Hayek would have said, does not bend toward justice. Only a fool 
thinks it does. So all we can do is to try to calm everybody down, keep the (social) peace, and let 
obedience to market forces deliver what they can delivera€”and they can deliver marvelous things.
From the standpoint of the 20th-century history of Vienna, Budapest, Prague, Zagreb, Belgrad, or 
Cracow, Hayek's argument looks rather strong. It looks less strong from the standpoint of London, 
Paris, New York, or Los Angeles.

[z] The problems of "externalities "and "market power anytime there is somebody who is not a 
participant in a bargain who is materially affected by its terms and conditions, the argument that 
a bargain is win-win with no downside fails. And anytime there is not somebody just down the street 
able to offer an alternative bargain just as good, holdup problems will ensure that the market 
leaves substantial wealth on the table. A well-functioning market economy
needs very aggressive antitrust and price-posting to support it. A well-functioning market economy 
needs an enormous structure of Pigovian taxes and subsidies to point it in the right direction.

There is, in Chicago-School folklore, a very strange belief that Ronald Coase with his "The Problem 
of Social Cost", disproved Pigou: that there are no externalities, there are only transaction costs 
resulting mostly from the failure to properly set up initial property rights by appropriately 
carving up the beast "at the joints" so that the relevant parties could make the needed 
externality-incorporating arrangements. There are references to a 1959 dinner at the house
of Aaron Director,.where Coase convinced 20 initially very skeptical economists, including Friedman 
and Stigler, that Pigou was simply "wrong".

What was supposed to be Coase's argument-clinching pointa€”that if the farmer has the right to keep 
sparks from the locomotive from.lighting his crops on fire, the railroad gets to decide whether to 
buy out that right or not; while if the railroad has the right to emit sparks, the farmer gets to 
decide whether to buy out that right or not, and so there is not an "externality" but merely a 
"transaction cost" (i.e., in this case a "holdup") problem. Thus it does not matter
who holds the property right as long as somebody holds it. Now that argument is simply wrong. If 
the railroad has the property right, it installs a flamethrower on top of.the locomotive before the 
bargaining begins. It doesn't do that if the farmer has the property right.

Moreov3r, a world in which there are no significant transaction costs... that is not a market 
economy, that is a free society of associated producersa€”a verydifferent thing indeed. The claims 
that "the market will take care of it", and that government failure is always and everywhere a 
bigger danger than market failure rest on the claim that market failures are typically small. Yet 
that claim is ideological in the extreme, not empirical at all.

[aa] The references, of course, are to Job 1:21: "And [he] said 'Naked came I out of my mother's 
womb, and naked shall I return thither: the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the 
name of the Lord.'" And Mark 227: "And he said unto them, 'The sabbath was made for man, and not 
man for the sabbath'. The point is that human societies will not long stand for the inversion of 
values associated with the apotheosis of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness. Society must work or must at least be perceived to work on a human scale. Now 
there is an argument that simply letting the market rip and hoping for the best is the best 
attainable option. But that can be sustained only when the "creation" part of Schumpeter's creative 
destruction is very large, and the "destruction" part unusually small. How to accomplish that is to 
borrow a phrase my teacher Charlie Kindleberger used in a different context, "a
neat    trick... sleight of hand, some trick with mirrors". The problem is that those who worship 
the Mammon of Unrighteousness that is the market cannot understand that hard and clever work is 
required to make that happen. They do not understand that in order to make that happen you actually 
need mechanics so that the two boats can sail, and the one helicopter can fly, in the terms of the 
old joke that ends with God saying to the castaway: a€oel sent two boats
and a helicopter to save you! What more did you want?a€C

[ab] Simply concluding that the creative-destruction of the technological progress-fueled market 
had to be somehow leashed got humanity to precisely nowheresville. Humanity needed a plan. And it 
needed to be a good plan. Much of the failure of humanity to use its technological powers during 
the Long 20th Century 1870-2010 to approach utopia had to do with the absence of a good plan, or 
indeed of any .coherent plan at all, or even of a mechanism to filter
possible plans to reach near-consensus on one probably-good one that then could be turned into 
running code.

John Maynard Keynes saw this lack in the early 1920s, and expressed it well in a review he wrote of 
the work of Leon Trotsky <https://marxists.org/historv/etol/document/comments/keynesO 1 ,htma€!>: 
Keynes:

Granted his assumptions, much of Trotskya€™ s argument is... unanswerable.... But what are his 
assumptions? He assumes that the moral and intellectual problems of the transformation of Society 
have been already solveda€”that a plan exists.  He is so much occupied with means that he forgets 
to tell us what it is all for. If we pressed him, I suppose he would mention Marx. And there we 
will leave him with an echo of his own

wordsa€’’’together with theological literature, perhaps the most useless, and in any case the most 
boring form of verbal creation.' Trotskya€™ s book must confirm us in our conviction of the 
uselessness, the empty-headedness of Force at.the present stage of human affairs.  We lack more 
than usual a coherent scheme of progress, a tangible ideal. All the political parties alike have 
their origins in past ideas and not in new ideas a€“ and

none more conspicuously so than the Marxists. It is not necessary to debate the subtleties of what 
justifies a man in promoting his gospel by force; for no one has a gospel. The next move is with 
the head, and fists must wait.

In the Thirty Glorious Years after World War II, it seemed as though mixed-economy social-democracy 
was the plan, but that failed its political sustainability test in the 1970s. At the end of the 
1990s many (including me) claimed that "soft" left-neoliberalism was the plan, but its failure to 
surpass the bar has been far more glaring than social democracy's failures in its day. And "hard" 
right-neoliberalism has delivered on none of its promises save to create and
entrench a corrupt plutocracy.

So we are still waiting.

As Max Weber <https://soc.upenn.edu/sites/default/files/Weber-Science-as-a-Vocation.pdf> once 
wrote:

For the many who tarry today for new prophets... the situation is the same as... the... song of... 
exile. a€oe Watchman, how much longer will this dark night last?' 'The morning will come, but then 
the night will return. Ask when you want to. And return to ask again.a€UFrom this we want to draw 
the lesson that nothing is gained by yearning and tarrying by themselves, and we shall act 
differently. We shall set to work and meet 'the

demands of the day' in human relations as well as in our vocations...

But in spite of what Weber tries to claim at the end of "Wissenschaft als Beruf", meeting 'the 
demands of the day' without a prophet with a good plan is not easy. Not easy for each of us. Not 
easy for all of us.

Throughout the long twentieth century, many othersa€”Karl Polanyi, John Maynard Keynes, Benito 
Mussolini, and Vladimir Lenin serve as good markers for many of the currents of thought, activism, 
and actiona€’’tried to think up solutions.

How do you keepa€”or perhaps improve upona€”the incentives for efficient production, rapid creative 
destruction, and technological advance that the private-property market economy provides, without 
also buying into its proviso that only property conveys rights that allow one to count in the eyes 
of society's decision-making processes? Keynes thought the problem could be .finessed with an 
extremely light-handed amount of central planning: full-employment
policy, and the euthanization of the rentier class by the low interest rates need to implement 
full-employment policy, would do enough of the job to make the economic problem cease being a 
bigger deal than the problem of the continued survival of Disco.

Karl Polanyi thought that human recognition of society's demands for more rights than property 
rights would be the key:

Acceptance of the reality of society gives man indomitable courage and strength.  As long as he is 
true to the task of creating more abundant freedom for all, he need not fear that either power or 
planning will turn against him and destroy the freedom he is building by their instrumentality.

That peroration may have satisfied Polanyi, but I have no idea what it means.

Mussolini took the strength of ethno-nationalism to teach the lesson, as Polanyi says, that humans 
must "resign [themselves] to relinquishing freedom and glorif[y the] power which is the reality of 
society", just as a single stick that claims to be free is soon broken, while if it loses its 
freedom in a stick-bundle tied with leather thongs it becomes a mighty force in the hand of its 
wielder.
Lenin suffered from the infantile mental disorder of believing that upon the removal of the market 
the oppressive state would also wither away, and all would be very simple and easy, for:

Accounting and control necessary. have been simplified by capitalists to the utmost and reduced to 
the extraordinarily simple operationsa€’’which any literate person can performa€”of supervising and 
recording, knowledge of the four rules of arithmetic, and issuing appropriate receipts.

[ac] As I said above, recognition that people reject the idea that social power .should be 
distributed according to wealth (whether earned, windfall, or inherited) and mediated purely 
through the cash nexus is not an answer to the problem of managing creative destruction, but merely 
a recognition that there is a question. The answer remains opaque and obscure. Finding an answer 
became an extremely pressing need after 1870, as technological progress doubled
humanity's collective powers to manipulate nature and organize themselves not every 1450 years (as 
in the pre-1500 Agrarian Age), not every 500 years (as in the 1500-1770 Imperial-Commercial Age), 
not every 160) years (as in the 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution Age, but every 35 years in the 
post-1870 Modern Economic Growth Age. Without an answer, and a good answer, to how to manage such a 
pace of creative destruction, society would react against
the  logic the market was imposing on it, and in the process smash things to bits.

[ad] That the pseudo-classical semi-liberal order of the 1870-1914 Belle A%opoque fell apart into 
so many different catastrophes after 1914 is readily comprehensible. Governments and A©lites failed 
to manage economic creative-destruction at the fever-heat pace at which it lurched forward after 
1870, as full globalization, the industrial research lab, and the modern corporation all came on 
stream. The failure-to-manage led to many, many societal reactions
against the ongoing rush of claims that all was OKa€”that "the market giveth, the market taketh 
away: blessed be the name of the market". The demands and then the attempts to build a better New 
Ordera€”or rather, multiple attempts to do soa€”turned at least Europe into a hellhole and an 
abattoir until 1945.

And then things were somehow righted. And history began to rhyme, as the pattern of an upward lurch 
to unprecedented economic growth and technological change after 1870 that created the Belle 
A%opoque was followed by another upward lurch to super-unprecedented economic growth after 1945 
that created the Thirty Glorious Years of social democracy: the most golden of Golden Ages, as far 
as visible progress toward a true utopia, a truly human world,
was concerned.

Yet it did not last: by the late 1970s social democracy failed its political-economy sustainability 
test, in a way somewhat reminiscent of post-1914 loss of confidence in pseudo-classical 
semi-liberalism. Yet why the judgment of the Great and Gooda€”and of the voters at the pollsa€”that 
what was needed was A Neoliberal Turn remains obscure to me, even though I lived through it.
With this last, my Slouching reaches the first of its pauses. By this point I have run through my 
Grand Narrative, which I chose not because it was true but because it was the least false one I 
could think of, and I badly needed a Grand Narrative on which to hang the structure of the book.


his head, I have merely mixed him with flavors of Keynes and von Hayek. (Alas! I have not managed 
to also mix in the flavors of Schumpeter, Popper, Drucker, and Karl Polanyi's younger brother 
Michael. That would have required a book with pages numbering in the four digits, which Basic would 
have been very unlikely to

publish. But I dearly feel the absence.)
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

