Subscribe now

CONDITION: I Am Microblogging:

Let me see if SubStack Chat is a useful program for doing soa€!
Share

FOCUS: Was Azere Ever Anything More Utopian A%an Friedrich Engelsa€™s a€oeScientific Socialisma€D?

The... perception that existing social institutions are unreasonable and unjust... is only proof 
that in the modes of production and exchange changes have silently taken place with which the 
social order, adapted to earlier economic conditions, is no longer in keepinga€!. The... capitalist 
mode of production, was incompatible with the feudal... privileges... [of]] individuals, entire 
social ranks and local corporations... [and] hereditary ties of
subordination.... The bourgeoisie broke up the feudal system and built upon its ruins... free 
competition, of personal liberty, of the equality, before the law, of all commodity owners....

a€0 Now modern industry... comes into collision with the... capitalist mode of production.... To 
concentrate... scattered, limited means of production, to enlarge them, to turn them into the 
powerful levers of production of the present day a€” this was precisely the historic role of 
capitalist production....

a€0 The bourgeoisie... transform[ed]... them... into social means of production only workable by a 
collectivity.... The yarn, the cloth, the metal articles that now come out of the factory were the 
joint product of many workers, through whose hands they had successively to pass before they were 
ready. No one person could say of them: "I made that; this is my product."... Now arose division of 
labor upon a definite plan, as organized in the
factory.... Socialized production revolutionized all the old methods of production. But... it found 
ready-made, and made liberal use of... merchants' capital, handicraft, wage-labor. Socialized 
production thus introducing itself as a new form of the production of commodities.... The 
socialized producers and means of production and their products were still treated... as the means 
of production and the products of individuals.... Products...
produced socially were... appropriated by... capitalists.... The contradiction between socialized 
production and capitalistic appropriation manifested itself as the antagonism of proletariat and 
bourgeoisie....

Friedrich Engels: Socialism: Utopian and Scientific: a€~Let us briefly sum up our sketch of 
historical evolution:

I. MediAIval Society a€”Individual productiona€! small scalea€! primitive, ungainly, petty, dwarfed 
in action. Production for immediate consumption^!. Production of commoditiesa€! only in its 
infancy...

n. Capitalist Revolution a€” transformation of industrya€! from individual to social means of 
production a€” a transformation which does not, on the whole, affect the form of exchangea€!. The 
capitalista€! as owner of the means of production^ Io appropriates the products and turns them into 
commodities. Production has become a social act. Exchange and appropriation continue to be 
individual actsa€!. Fundamental
contradiction^! which modern industry brings to light:

(A) Severance of the producer from the means of productiona€! wage-labora€!. Antagonism between the 
proletariat and the bourgeoisie.

(B) Growing predominance^! of the laws governing the production of commodities. Unbridled 
competition. Contradiction between socialized organization in the individual factory and social 
anarchy in the production as a whole.

(C) On the one hand, perfecting of machinery, made by competition compulsory for each individual 
manufacturer^!. Industrial reserve-army. On the other hand, unlimited extension of production^!. 
Unheard-of development of productive forces, excess of supply over demand, over-productiona€! 
excessa€! of laborers, without employment and without means of existencea€!. The capitalist form of 
production prevents the productive
forces from working and the products from circulating, unless they are first turned into 
capitala€’’which their very superabundance preventsa€!. The mode of production rises in rebellion 
against the form of exchange.

(D) Partial recognition of the social character of the productive forces forced upon the 
capitalists themselves. Taking overa€! first by joint-stock companies, later in by trusts, then by 
the State. The bourgeoisiea€! superfluousa€! its social functionsa€! performed by salaried 
employees.

Proletarian Revolution a€” Solution of the contradictions. The proletariat seizes the public 
powera€! transforms the socialized means of productiona€! into public propertya€!. Socialized 
production upon a predetermined plan becomes henceforth possible. The development of production 
makes the existence of different classes of society thenceforth an anachronisma€!. The political 
authority of the State dies out. Mana€! the master of
his own form of social organization^! the lord over NatureaCI freea€!. Toa€! comprehend the 
historical conditions and thus thea€! nature of this act, to impart to thea€! proletarian^! 
knowledge of the conditions and of the meaning of the momentous act it is called upon to 
accomplish, this is the task ofa€! Scientific Socialisma€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ:

Core inflation is still somewhat elevated above the FOMCa€™ s target, but, right now, headline 
inflation is really not:

Alan Blinder: What if Inflation Suddenly Dropped and No One Noticed?: The high year-over-year rate 
masks progress in the past five months. But wea€™ re not out of the woods'. a€~Inflation in the 
second half of the yeara€! is almost back down to the Federal Reservea€™ s 2% targeta€!. The 
annualized inflation rate has been around 2.5%a€!. February 2021 and June 2021, the 12-month CPI 
inflation rate showed a rise from 1.7% to
5.3%a€!. That 5.3%a€! came from a 3.3% annualized rate between June 2020 and January 2021 (seven 
months) followed by an 8.2% annualized rate between January 2021 and June 2021 (five months)a€!. 
Was thea€! drop in inflation in 2022 due to the Feda€™ s interest-rate policy?a€! It defies 
credulity to think that interest-rate hikes that started only in March could have cut inflation 
appreciably by Julya€!. What did change
dramatically was the supply bottlenecksa€! [which] almost certainly wona€™ t returna€!. The 
anti-inflationary effects of the Feda€™ s monetary policy are yet to comea€!. The inflation future 
does indeed look brighter than the inflation past...

ONE IMAGE: One Fewer Pigeon in A%e Elmwood Today:



ONE AUDIO: Gary Marcus & Ezra Klein: GPT Scepticism:

2022a€! advances in artificial intelligence ,a€! DALL-E 2a€! Ciceroa€! ChatGPTa€!. I wanted to give 
voice to skepticism: What is ChatGPT actually doing?a€! Gary Marcus is an emeritus professor of 
psychology and neural science at N.Y.U. who has become one of the leading voices of A.I. 
skepticisma€!. Marcus is deeply worried about the direction current A.I. research is headed, and 
even calls the release of ChatGPT A.La€™ s a€oeJurassic Park
moment.a€D a€oeBecause such systems contain literally no mechanisms for checking the truth of what 
they say,a€D Marcus writes, a€oethey can easily be automated to generate misinformation at 
unprecedented scale .a€Ua€! Marcus also believes that therea€™ s a better way forwarda€!. 
a€oeRebooting A.I.: Building Artificial Intelligence We Can Trusta€Da€!. Mentioned: a€oeOn 
Bullshita€D by Harry Frankfurt; a€oeAIa€™ s Jurassic Park momenta€D
by   Gary Marcus; a€oeDeep Learning Is Hitting a Walla€D by Gary Marcus; The Language Instinct by 
Steven Pinker; How the World Really Works by Vaclav Smil; The Martian by Andy Weira€!

<https://overcast ,fm/+oiPWgx J VM>

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Jay Willis: John Roberts Is Giving Up On His Longest-Running Lie: a€~Among establishment legal 
journalists, the prevailing narrative about John Roberts is that he is an institutionalist above 
all elsea€!. This was never right, but now, it has never been more obviously, howlingly wrong. 
Roberts knows the Courta€™ s approval rating is in the toilet, and why, and the work it would take 
to begin to fix ita€!. That is work he has no interest in
doinga€!

•  Benn: Math is overrated: Our mental model of value needs new priors: a€~Ita€™ s not our ability 
to do fancy math that makes us effective, but our ability to apply basic matha€!

• Greg Robb: Fed's Cook says inflation remains 'far too high' despite some encouraging signsa€!

• Friedrich Engels (1844): Outlines of a Critique of Political Economya€!

• Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels (1844): The Communist Manifestoa€\

• Stephen S. Cohen & J. Bradford DeLong (2016): Concrete Economics: The Hamilton Approach to 
Economic Policya€\

• Charles L. Schultze (1983): Industrial Policy: A Dissenta€\

• Mancur Olson (1982): The Rise & Decline of Nations: Economic Growth, Stagflation, & Social 
Rigiditiesa€\

• Peter Evans (1995): Embedded Autonomy: States & Industrial Transformationa€\

• Laura Tyson & Lenny Mendon A§a (2023): Americaa€™ s New Era of Industrial Policya€\

AJs:

Matthew Klein: Is the U.S. Job Market Disinflationary Now?: a€~Employment is rising as workers 
rejoin the labor force, while pay growth now looks to be slowing thanks to revisionsa€!. Federal 
Reserve officials want to weaken workersa€™ ability to secure wage increasesa€”and have made it 
clear that they will push the U.S. economy into a downturn to do so, if necessary. Their fear is 
that inflation will continue to run too fasta€!. But what if that were
unnecessary? To the extent that wages have risen because workers have moved to better jobs, the 
extra income should not be inflationary because the additional spending power would be commensurate 
with the additional value being generateda€!. Optimistsa€’’including mea€”have been hoping for this 
outcomea€!. [But] even though the public health situation has more or less been fixed and even 
though many commodity prices have returned to their pre­
invasion   levels, job market churn remains elevated while production remains depresseda€!. The 
latest data on labor income, however, suggest that things may be improving, with wages decelerating 
even as employment rises thanks to an expanding labor force. It is rare that one month can make 
such a difference to in this sort of analysis, but the past few months have been extremely unusual 
in terms of the magnitude of the revisions to data that have already been
releaseda€!

Matt Levine: How Not to Play the Game: Magic beans, Bahamian penthouses, old-fashioned fraud and 
other important SBF-inspired insights: a€~On Oct. 25a€! wrote, a€oeita€™ s a good time to be 
talking about crypto. Therea€™ s a pause; therea€™ s some repose ,a€D That was true for, like, an 
afternoon?a€! Consider this a postscript to a€oeThe Crypto Story .a€Ua€! If you are playing a game, 
you might not take it very seriously. You might call up your
trader buddies at your old firm and say, a€oeHey, come over here, ita€™ s so fun, we can just make 
stuff up, and the money is good,a€D but you will not call up the compliance people at your old firm 
and say that. For one thing, that is not an appealing pitch to compliance people. For another 
thing, the compliance people are what made your old firm less fun, always nagging you about 
compliance. Now you dona€™ t need to comply! Now you get to make stuff
up. Same with accountants, it turns out. Ita€™ s very hard for crypto firms to produce audited 
financial statementsa€! If you are running a scam, you will be drawn to crypto. You are running a 
confidence game, and crypto offers the most efficient market for turning confidence into money. 
a€oeThese people just made these tokens up and sold them for money,a€D you will say to yourself. 
a€oeHow do I get in on that?a€Da€! Cryptoa€™ s toy financial system
managed to have itself a toy financial crisisa€! worse, faster and dumber and more complete than 
the global financial crisis of 2008a€!. Banks and savers mostly did not lose money, because banks 
and savers mostly steered clear of crypto, because it was so obviously unregulated and full of 
scamsa€!. A cleverly designed exchange for trading magic beans will never get around the basic 
problem that the magic beans dona€™ t work, and people might stop
believing   in them. If crypto is going to work in the long run, it will need to prove its real 
usefulness outside of financea€!



AJs:

• Laura Tyson & Lenny Mendon A§a (2023): Americaa€™ s New Era of Industrial Policyd€\

Matthew Klein: Is the U.S. Job Market Disinflationary Now?: a€~Employment is rising as workers 
rejoin the labor force, while pay growth now looks to be slowing thanks to revisionsa€!. Federal 
Reserve officials want to weaken workersa€™ ability to secure wage increasesa€”and have made it 
clear that they will push the U.S. economy into a downturn to do so, if necessary. Their fear is 
that inflation will continue to run too fasta€!. But what if that were
unnecessary? To the extent that wages have risen because workers have moved to better jobs, the 
extra income should not be inflationary because the additional spending power would be commensurate 
with the additional value being generateda€!. Optimistsa€’’including mea€”have been hoping for this 
outcomea€!. [But] even though the public health situation has more or less been fixed and even 
though many commodity prices have returned to their pre­
invasion   levels, job market churn remains elevated while production remains depresseda€!. The 
latest data on labor income, however, suggest that things may be improving, with wages decelerating 
even as employment rises thanks to an expanding labor force. It is rare that one month can make 
such a difference to in this sort of analysis, but the past few months have been extremely unusual 
in terms of the magnitude of the revisions to data that have already been
releaseda€!

Matt Levine: How Not to Play the Game: Magic beans, Bahamian penthouses, old-fashioned fraud and 
other important SBF-inspired insights: a€~On Oct. 25a€! wrote, a€oeita€™ s a good time to be 
talking about crypto. Therea€™ s a pause; therea€™ s some repose ,a€D That was true for, like, an 
afternoon?a€! Consider this a postscript to a€oeThe Crypto Story .a€Da€! If you are playing a game, 
you might not take it very seriously. You might call up your
trader buddies at your old firm and say, a€oeHey, come over here, ita€™ s so fun, we can just make 
stuff up, and the money is good,a€D but you will not call up the compliance people at your old firm 
and say that. For one thing, that is not an appealing pitch to compliance people. For another 
thing, the compliance people are what made your old firm less fun, always nagging you about 
compliance. Now you dona€™ t need to comply! Now you get to make stuff
up. Same with accountants, it turns out. Ita€™ s very hard for crypto firms to produce audited 
financial statementsa€! If you are running a scam, you will be drawn to crypto. You are running a 
confidence game, and crypto offers the most efficient market for turning confidence into money. 
a€oeThese people just made these tokens up and sold them for money,a€D you will say to yourself. 
a€oeHow do I get in on that?a€Da€! Cryptoa€™ s toy financial system
managed to have itself a toy financial crisisa€! worse, faster and dumber and more complete than 
the global financial crisis of 2008a€!. Banks and savers mostly did not lose money, because banks 
and savers mostly steered clear of crypto, because it was so obviously unregulated and full of 
scamsa€!. A cleverly designed exchange for trading magic beans will never get around the basic 
problem that the magic beans dona€™ t work, and people might stop
believing   in them. If crypto is going to work in the long run, it will need to prove its real 
usefulness outside of financea€!

