Subscribe now

CONDITION: I Do Not Understand the Current State of the Macroeconomy:

Charles Steindel: a€oeThe Philly Fed manufacturing numbers were pretty much like NY. Things are 
terrible, they are going to stay terrible, but we are boosting employment and want to keep on doing 
soa€!a€D
Share

FIRST: Ita€™s Not Just Going to Be Art; It Is Going to Be Words as Well:

Modern AIa€’’Machine Learninga€”is coming for wordsmiths as well as daubers. Suppose I start with:

Ensorcelled by the Devil of Malthus:

World Economic History, -6000 to 1870

Brad DeLong

2022-10-20 Th

Between 1848 and 1873 John Stuart Mill published the successive additions of his Principles of 
Political Economy, with Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy. In each edition of the 
book he included the following passage:

a€oeHitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day's 
toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery 
and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and others to make fortunes. They have 
increased the comforts of the middle classes. But they have not yet begun to effecta€! great 
changes in human destinya€!

<https://archive .org/details/in.ernet.dli .2015.36903>a€ □

1873 was not that long ago. For somebody like my son, born in 1990, it was the date of birth of his 
great-great grandparents. From 1870 to today is five generations. From -6000 to 1870 is 260 
generations. Moreover, there was about as much proportional technological progress from -6000 to 
1870 as there has been from 1870 to today. Yet between -6000 and 1870 typical human standards of 
living increased by perhaps 40%. By contrast
between 1870 and today humanitya€™ s collective standard of living has grown ten-folda€”and the 
typical standard of living more than 5-fold. For from -6000 to 1870 human population grew from 5 to 
1300 milliona€”260-fold. Since 1870 human population has grown from 1.3 to 7.6 billiona€”six-fold.

That population growth is the answer to the question of why humanitya€™ s productivity and standard 
of living has risen so much since 1870, while it rose so little before. Before 1870, that greater 
population puts more pressure on resources caused nearly all of pre-1870 technological progress to 
be eaten up by the need to compensate for the smaller farm sizes and poorer near-surface ores 
available to the average member of the growing
population. Before 1870, technology lost its race with fertility. After 1870, it won it.

Thus the first questions about the pre-1870 economy present themselves: Why was technological 
progress so slow before 1870. And why was population growth so relatively fast, by the yardstick of 
the contemporaneous rate of technological improvement, over the nearly 8 millennia between -6018 
70? Why, and how? Put a pin in those questions: we will return to them later.

That technology lost its race with fertility over -6000 to 1870 profoundly shaped all of human 
history not only up to 1870, but since. Technologya€™ s loss of its race against fertility meant 
that the pre-1870 world was one of dire poverty: there was absolutely no chance, back then, for 
humanity to be productive enough to bake a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have 
enough. People, however, still desperately wanted
enough for themselves and their families. What to do? Since you could not produce with high enough 
productivity, you chosea€”if you coulda€”the alternative: to take. You established yourself as part 
of the elite, A©lbowed competitors for membership out of the way, dominated, and took: history was 
then a coalition of thugs-with-spears plus their accountants, bureaucrats, and propagandists. They 
lived the (relatively) good life that
we remember as the high civilizations of the past. The strong did what they wished, while the weak 
suffered what they musta€!

And then I ask the AI at <http://lex.page> to continue. It comes up with:

Ancient Rome was such an elite. So too were ancient Greece, China, and India. Further back in time, 
other elitesa€”the priests, nobles, and kings of the first civilizations of Mesopotamia and the 
Nile Valley a€’’lived large on the sweat and toil of the common people. And the common people were 
kept in their placea€”and in povertya€”by the force of the elitesa€™ arms.
But the elites were not always successful in their efforts. All ofa€!

Nathan Baschez says that it seems, right now, useful for sparking ideasa€”i.e., overcoming 
writera€™ s block:

Nathan Baschez dY“§ @nbashaw

Introducin Lex! A word processor with artificial intelligence baked in, so you can write faster. 
dY‘%o lex .page dY‘* (I've been working on this awhile... so glad to finally share it!!)

Nat Eliason @nateliason

I just tried an Al-powered writing app, and I am so so so hilariously out of a job. It literally 
gave me goosebumps. I'm not allowed to share it with you yet but I will when I can dY‘€ Please send 
me new career ideas.
3:48 PM r™ Oct 16,2022

4,666Likes454Re tweets

<https://everv.to/divinations/how-lex-happened>

I would like to see what it does were it to be trained not so much on the general set of words on 
the internet, but on what I have writtena€!

And then I went and asked <http://nightcafe ,studio> to respond to the prompt a€oeBrad DeLonga€D:

Creations Collections Feed Explore



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: Fanflc Department:

Ellie Carina: The Trials of Mairona€!


Leave a comment

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• Noah Smith: National Conservatism has no coherent, workable plan for America: a€~No workable, 
coherent economic plan.... National Conservatismd™ s social and cultural approach is 
anti-nationalist.... National Conservatives are vulnerable to bad influences on foreign policy...

• Richard Powers: Two thoughts from Richard Powers: d'The best arguments in the world won't change 
a person's mind. The only thing that can do that is a good storydid™ d~When you're sure of what 
you're looking at, look harderdid™

•  Martin Sandhu: How (not) to intervene in energy prices: d~Price caps give the wrong 
incentived”to consume even more of something whose scarcity is the root of the problemd!. We 
shouldnd™ t let the debate be distracted into doepros and cons of rationingdU but focus squarely    
         on the kind of rationing that is bestd!

•  Randy Au: In-person-only conferences are sod! bleh: a€~By just about any definition of the word, 
Id™ m considered an extreme introvert. Socializing on the internet, or amongst a tiny group of <5 
people is more than enough to fulfil the majority my psychological needs. Obviously Id™ d hate 
going to in-person conferencesd!

• Yasmine Seale: The Annotated Arabian Nightsd!

•  Hamish McKenzie: Introducing The Active Voice, a new podcast about writing and the internet: d~A 
survival guide for writers in the 2020s...

•  Matt Ford: The Chief Justice Who Isnd™ t: a€~In 2009, C-SPAN conducted a series of interviews 
with the Supreme Court justicesd!. Host Susan Swain asked him what his fellow Americans should 
understand about the Supreme Courta€™ s role in modern society. doeThe most important thing for the 
public to understand is that we are not a political branch of government,dD Roberts told her. 
doeThey dond™ t elect us. If they dond™ t
like what wed™ re doing, itd™ s more or less just too baddUd!

•  Alex Shephard: The Spectacular Failure of Right-Wing Social Media Platforms: d~From Kanye West 
(maybe?) buying Parler (but why) to Donald Trump's flailing (and scammy) Truth Social, the 
"free-speech" revolution is floundering...

Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Nicole Barbaro: Review of THE PARENT TRAP: a€~The Parent Trap: How to Stop Overloading Parent and 
Fix Our Inequality Crisis, by Nate Hilgerd!. Inequality we see in developmental outcomes is the 
result of the inequality of parentsd™ ability to build the necessary skills children need.  Itd™ s 
societyd™ s fault for putting so responsibility on parents to be experts in areas that some adults 
spend decades in educational settings to become experts.

His proposal is that we spend at least as much on children as we do on the elderly d! to, as the 
book title says, stop overloading our parentsd! As a developmental psychologist, I agree most 
strongly with Hilgerd™ s view that children need far more skilled support especially in the first 
five years of development prior to formal education. Many behavior genetic proponents, in my view, 
seem to forget about the immense brain development that occurs in the first
few years of life, years in which too many children develop in underestimating environments that 
inhibit the reaching of their full potential. A view which is still compatible with what we know 
about behavioral genetics of cognitive ability...

Tyler Cowen: Classical liberalism vs. The New Right: d~Curtis Yarvin to J.D. Vance to Adrian 
Vermeule to Sohrab Ahmari to Rod Dreher to Tucker Carlsona€!. Skeptical about free speecha€!. 
Sociological forces operating that are seen as more important than a€cemerea€D free market 
economicsa€!. A self-validating structure to New Right arguments over timea€!. While I try my best 
to understand the New Right, I am far from being persuadeda€!.
Successful societies are based on trust, including trust in leaders, and the New Right doesna€™t 
offer resources for forming that trust or any kind of comparable substituted!

Robert Skidelsky: Gorbacheva€™ s Tragic Legacy: a€~Admired in the West but loathed by his 
countrymen as a harbinger of Russiaa€™ s post-Cold War misfortune, Mikhail Gorbachev fully grasped 
the immense challenges of reforming the ailing Soviet Union. Todaya€™ s Russia largely reflects the 
anti-Western grievances stemming from his failurea€!. Gorbachev understood that the Soviet Union 
could not keep up with the US militarily while satisfying
civilian demands for higher living standards. But while he rejected the Brezhnev eraa€™ s 
stagnation-inducing policies, he had nothing coherent to put in their place. Instead of 
facilitating a functioning market economy, his rushed abandonment of the central-planning system 
enriched the corrupt managerial class in the Soviet republics and led to a resurgence of ethnic 
nationalism. To my mind, Gorbachev is a tragic figure. While he fully grasped the immense
challenges facing Soviet communism, he had no control over the forces he helped unleasha€!

John Gruber: Monica Chin Reviews the New Lenovo ThinkPad XI Yoga: a€~Writing for The Verged!. 
$2,369d! a Core i7-1260P with eight efficiency cores and four performance cores (as well as 16GB of 
RAM and 512GB of storage). Unfortunately, that new processor doesnd™t deliver the kind of 
performance gains I imagine many XI Yoga users will care aboutdi. For things like document markup, 
presentations, word processing, and video calls, I
never got any heat or heard any fan noised%od!. Unfortunately, I am going to have to say the 
dreaded sentence: Iwasnd™ t impressed with the battery lifedidD. Inteld™ s chip offerings are 
clearly to blame, but that very much is a Lenovo problemd!. ThinkPads are supposed to be top-tier 
industry-leading laptopsd!. But now theyd™ ve released a $2,400 notebook that gets crap battery 
life and only stays cool and quiet when you stick to basic
productivity tasks...

Scott Lemieux: The dceclassicaldD stands for doefascistdill: d~A thing that actually exists is a 
conference on doeacademic freedomdD at which the keynote speaker isdiPeter Thiel. The rest of the 
lineup is as youd™d expectd!. Kieran Healy: d~I assume Niall Ferguson's talk will foreground his 
valiant efforts to get people to dig up dirty on an undergraduate student whose politics he didn't 
like, and also his "subtle game of grinding them down

on the committee" they were both ond!. Like, if they offered me enough money, maybe I could go to 
the conference and promise to be good, and then in between the panel and dinner I could sneak out 
and get maybe thirty minutes worth of talking to John Meyer or something. That'd be worth it. 
Anyway, what better exemplifies the best of the Classical Liberal Traditiond”from the keen 
empirical eye of an Adam Smith to the startlingly open mind of a Jeremy
Benthamd”than a Keynote from the guy who regrets women getting the right to vote and crushed a 
gossip site he dislikeddidD. Peter McGratton: dcel look forward to the panel both-sides-ing climate 
change and Covidd!



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 50% off a group subscription
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

