I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

Get 50% off for 1 year

FIRST: Slouching Nominated for Best Business Book of the Year, by The Financial Times


PREORDER!: <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>. One of fifteen on the longlist. This makes me blush. It is very, very 
nice to see:

Andrew Hill: FT Business Book of the Year 2022a€”The Longlist 
<https://www.ft.com/content/f99809a6-5910-4db3-93dd-02cd7795554d>:

J, Bradford DeLonga€™s forthcoming Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth 
Century, which analyses the years from 1870 to 2010. doeBy the standards of all of the rest of 
human history, [this period was] much more marvellous than terribledUd! butd! did not fulfil 
utopian expectationsd!.

Gary Gerstlea€™s The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free 
Market Era traces how the western world embraced dceneoliberalismdndl.

Helen Thompsona€™sa€! Disorder: Hard Times in the 21st Centurya€\ show[s] how energy still drives 
some of the most powerful and disruptive political trendsd!.

Edward Chancellord! The Price of Time: The Real Story of Interest, a polemical attack on the credo 
of low interest rates d!

Direct: The Rise of the Middleman Economy and the Power of Going to the Source, by Kathryn Judged! 
doepowerful middlemen and long supply chainsa€Da€! makes the case for a return to more direct 
exchanged!.

Chris Millera€™s Chip War: The Fight for the Worlda€™ s Most Critical Technology, out in October, 
directly addressesd! the complex and increasingly fragile network that builds and assembles 
semiconductors, the doenew oildDd!.

Talent: How to Identify Energizers, Creatives, and Winners Around the World, by Tyler Cowend! and 
Daniel Gross, is a highly practical guide to identifying and recruiting such peopled!.

William D Cohand! Power Failure: The Rise and Fall of General Electrica€\ tackles the extraordinary 
reputational and financial fall of the conglomerated! doea cautionary tale about hubris, blind 
ambition, and the limits of believing d” and trying to live up continuously to d” a flawed 
corporate mythologydD.

Peter Robisond! Flying Blind: The 737 Max Tragedy and the Fall ofBoeinga€\ the tension between 
profit motives and engineering excellenced!.

The rise of Tencentd! WeChatd! Lulu Yilun Chena€™s Influence Empire: The Story of Tencent and 
Chinaa€™ s Tech Ambitiona€\ media-shy programmer Pony Mad!.

Sebastian Mallabyd! The Power Law: Venture Capital and the Art of Disruption^} a deep dig into the 
roots of the venture capital industryd!.

Kate Binghamd! The Long Shot: The Inside Story of the Race to Vaccinate Britain^} Binghamd™ s 
experience after the government rushed her into place as head of the UKd™ s Vaccine Taskforced!..

Oliver Bullough in Butler to the World: How Britain Became the Servant of Tycoons, Tax Dodgers, 
Kleptocrats and Criminalsa€\.

Dead in the Water: Murder and Fraud in the Worlda€™ s Most Secretive Industry, by Matthew Campbell 
and Kit Chelleld! a fascinating court battle,,, overd! the Brillante Virtuoso, a tanker attacked by 
armed men and set on fire just off Aden in Yemen in 20 lid!.

Gaia Vinced™sd! Nomad Century: How to Survive the Climate Upheaval paints a bleak picture of 
encroaching disaster due to unavoidable climate changed!
LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/f99809a6-5910-4db3-93dd-Q2cd7795554d>

The Price

POWER

The
Power Law

Venture


Eduard
CH'UXX'IJor

The Price of Time

Edward Chancellor

FAILURE

Genera! IJeelnc

WILLIAM D. COHAN

UnSRLMWTMtW

Power Failure

William D. Cohan

The Bise and Fall
of         I hr

Neoliberal Order

IM WHM *• IM few Bwtat f r•

The Rise and Fall of the
Neoliberal Order

Gary Gerstle

TW el tw

and

|h« Power

to
the Source

Direct

Kathryn Judge

Capital and
the Art of
Disruption

Sebastian
Mallaby

The Power Law

Sebastian Mallaby


CHRIS KILLER

CHIP

KATE BINWHAM

OLIVER
BULLOUGH

BUTLER
WORLD


Chip War

Chris Miller

DEAD

in the

Dead in the Water

Matthew Campbell and Kit Chellel

Flying Blind

Peter Robison

Influence Empire

Lulu Chen

Talent

Daniel Gross and Tyler Cowen

SLOUCHING
TOWARDS

MUM «MM MM MM
AN (MNONK HISTORY

OF TW TWEITirr* ttMTlRY

J. BRADFORD DELONG

Slouching Towards
Utopia

J. Bradford DeLong

The Long Shot

Kate Bingham and Tim Hames

Disorder

Helen Thompson

Butler to the World

Oliver Bullough

Nomad Century

Gaia Vince


What do I think of the other books?

I am still digesting Gerstle, Miller, and Cohan. And I have not even looked at any of the ten 
others. So if I were on the jury, and had to award it to a book not my own, I would award it to 
Gerstlea€™ s The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market 
Era. Some of this is that while business- and sector-narratives like Cohan and Miller are great 
fun, they do not strike me as weighty things that shape my thoughta€’’which is no
doubt a flaw in how my mind works. (After all, if my mind did work that way, I would probably be a 
business school professor.)

Cowen & Gross is in the pile, as are Chen, Bullough, Cohan, and Vince.

I think I should spend the rest of the day reading at least the samples of the others that I can 
get ahold of, if only to get a sense of the competition herea€!
Share

One Audio:

Tyler Cowen & William MacAskill: On Effective Altruism, Moral Progress, & Cultural Innovation 
<https://conversationswithtyler.com/episodes/william-macaskill>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Image:

U.S. jobs report shows a gain of 528,000 in July.

Monthly change in jobs

+600,000 jobs

+400,000


July’21            Oct.           Jan. '22           April             July

Data is seasonally adjusted. Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics

Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Tomas Pueyo: A Brief History of Spain <https ://unchartedterritories .tomaspueyo 
.com/p/a-brief-history-of-spain>: 'Why did Spain, and not another country, conquer most of America? 
Why have so many Spanish regions pushed for independence in contemporary Spain, like Catalonia or 
the Basque Country? Why are Spain and Portugal not united?...

•  WTF!?!?: Robin Wigglesworth & Alexandra Scaggs: Prepare for the WeWork-ification of Your Home 
<https://www.ft.com/content/89cbadb5-bc4c-4a2c-853a-ad0436aa00ba>: a€~The Second Coming of Adam 
Neumann: After cashing out from a failed attempt to transform the commercial property market, Adam 
Neumanna€™ s second act will apparently be failing to shake up residential real estatea€l

•  WTF!?!? WTF!?!?: Robin Wigglesworth & Alexandra Scaggs: Prepare for the WeWork-ification of Your 
Home <https://www.ft.com/content/89cbadb5-bc4c-4a2c-853a-ad0436aa00ba>: a€~Andreessen Horowitz is 
reportedly investing $350mn in Neumanna€™ s start-up Flow, after being a€oethrilled by the scope 
and aspirationa€Da€l AndreessenaC™ s post is short on details about how, exactly, Flow is 
a€oerethinking the entire value chaina€D,
or which a€oebenefits of ownersa€D renters will be able to receive.

•  John Ganz: The Case for Going After Trump 
<https://iohnganz.substack.eom/p/the-case-for-going-after-trump>: 'Prevarications and what ifs have 
governed the way the political class and bureaucrats in this country have dealt with Trump from the 
beginning of his political emergence. James Comey bungled everything with all his efforts to appear 
unbiased and unpolitical...

•  Jay L Gischer: Grasping Reality Comment 
<https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/do-i-now-have-a-problem-assigning/comment/8423388>: 'We very 
much have in our own brains a bag of words and a set of numbers which are correlations. We also 
have other things, which we apply in a very general way. For instance, the ability to create a map 
of spatial, kinetic relationships^I

•  Ben Thompson: Instagram, TikTok, & the Three Trends 
<https://stratechery.com/2022/instagram-tiktok-and-the-three-trends/>: 'Twitter required active 
management of your feed, but if you put in the effort, you could get something uniquely interesting 
to you that was incredibly valuable...

•  MacroPolo: Whoa€™ s Paying for the Property Crisis? Not Local Governments: a€~Judging by 
Zhengzhoua€™ s plan, the provincial capital of Henan with the most unfinished housing projects, it 
does not appear that local governments are up to the taska€l


MP Econ Issue 11: Whoa€™ s Paying for the Property Crisis? Not Local Governments

Recent signs have reinforced the fact that Beijing is reluctant to bail out troubled property 
developers, a case I made previously. The July Politburo meeting, for example, declared that the 
responsibility for rescuing unfinished housing projects falls on the shoulder of local governments. 
So we should expect a flurry of local government-designed bailoua€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 2 likes A- MacroPolo Econ
Give a gift subscription

Get a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

