Subscribe now

Two years ago, when the Biden administration-to-be was planning how to try to manage the 
macroeconomy, it sought to avoid three mistakes.

The first mistake was the trap into which the Obama administration had fallen: failing to 
prioritize properly and to set up the game board for the rapid return the economy to full 
employment. The Obama administration had a plan for a first round of recovery measures. It had no 
plan for what it would do if Republicans and blue-dog Democrats proved obstreperous, and
its first round failed to do the entire job. The cost was a lost half-decade of growth, and a 
further widening of income inequalities. The Biden administration was not going to make that 
mistake, but would, rather, prefer to make its own different mistakes.

The second mistake was falling into the trap of giving too large boost to spending. Rapid and 
complete recovery would require the acceptance of some inflation: wages, needed to rise in 
expanding industries to pull workers into them, because the post-plague configuration of the 
economy would be different than the pre-plague configuration ; bottlenecks would emerge
during reopening, and the prices of bottlenecked commodities needed to rise in order to signal the 
economy that here was a problem of finding substitutes and increasing supply that needed to be 
crowd, sourced and sold quickly. How much inflation? Nobody could say. But if the re-opening 
inflation shock was too large, it could easily trigger a Federal Reserve
overreaction, which would put us once again back into the semi-depressed or depressed state of 
secular-stagnatio,n with interest rates at their zero lower, bound and little policy traction to 
promoe recovery.

The third mistake was that too big a boost to spending would be followed by an insufficient 
reaction by the Federal Reserve, in which case the economy would fall into a configuration in which 
inflationary expectations were elevated, which would lead to a stagflation reminiscent of the 
1970s.

The metaphor of steering, like Odysseus, between Scylla and Charybdis seems apposite. The first 
mistake is simply not steering through the strait at all, the second is sailing too close to the 
hydra monster, Scylla, of seclar stagnation. The third is being dragged into the stagflation 
whirlpool of Charybdis.

Even a year ago, however, it still seemed that the task was not that difficult. There had been 
policy and political will to set the oars to work to drive the boat forward at speed. There seemed 
to be a wide middle path between secular stagnation and staglation. You could arguea€”we 
dida€”about whether staglation was the bigger danger to be avoided, or secular
stagnation was. But both risks seemed relatively low, and manageable with a Federal Reserve that 
understood the situation, and was not prone to panic.

Then, this last February, came Vladimir Putin's invasion of the Ukraine. The safe path 
narroweda€’’indeed, the safe path may have disappeared. Then, in June, the Federal Reserve 
abandoned its forward guidance with a 75 basis-point interest-rate hike, pointing to an unreliable 
Michigan survey number as justification. It, at least, no longer believed that it understood
the situation.

Thus today what worries me even more than that there might be no safe path is that whether or not 
there is, the Federal Reserve appears to have given up on trying to find it. I no longer hear 
Federal Reserve officials note that last winter and spring's tightening of monetary and financial 
conditions has not yet had a chance to materially affect the economy. Janet Yellen
once said to me that the FOMC had a strong tendency to overreact to the immediate news flow unless 
it based its thinking around and had something like the Taylor Rule to serve as a navigational Pole 
Star. But the world has changed. The Great Moderation economy in which the Taylor Rule made sense 
is gone. And the Federal Reserve has no replacement to guide
its thinking away from immediate news-driven groupthink.

Financial markets, at least, right now appear to be betting that the Federal Reserve is about to 
make mistake number two: pursuing policies that have too great a chance of returning us to the 
world of secular stagnation, once again at the zero interest rate lower bound on monetary policy, 
with the prospect of then triggering another lost half-decade of economic growth,
and another upward leap in inequality.

Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

