Subscribe now

First:

I must say that if I belonged to the Chinese Communist Party, I would not be at all confident about 
what the future is going to bring.

I would be deeply, deeply worried about the a€oemiddle income trapaCce. I would be very worried 
about the apparently very low real rates of return on Chinaa€™ s investments, and worried about how 
many people think they have valuable property to secure their old agea€”who will find out brutally 
that it is in fact not so. Not all of the losses when values are ultimately marked to what is
sustainable can be hived-off into a a€oebad banka€D, and then put to BlackRock and other foreign 
investors.

It is true that the government guarantees can greatly reduce the required rate of return needed to 
keep people happy holding assets. And it is also true that, as long as inflation does not become 
highly salient, stable governments that engage in only a little financial repression can keep 
enormous amounts of debt going in a merry-go-round.

But there are worries on top of disappointing returns on real assets, outsized promises made to 
savers and investors, plus the middle income trapa€’’since it is vastly easier to shrink your 
low-productivity sectors then to create truly global north-scale high-productivity ones. There also 
are all the political uncertainties. China no longer has, anywhere in its system, a consensus 
mechanism for
choosing its leaders. The memory of and the consequences of the Chinese Communist Party not having 
a way to retire Mao Zedong should loom large. He ought to have been moved into an honorable role as 
respected-but-rear-line sage-guardian. But from 1955-1975 he did not agree. And China writhed in 
torment as a result. That should make everyone in the Chinese Communist Party, and
everyone in China, very very very worried indeed.

Truth be told, even modulus the large gap in average wealth and productivity levels, I would rather 
have Americaa€™ s problems today than ChinaaC™ s:

Economist: The Confidence ofChinaa€™s Communist Party Is Striking: a€™ Since the Ming dynasty, 
Chinese who are oppressed by local officials have sighed, by way of explanation: a€oeThe heavens 
are high, and the emperor far away.a€D An earthier variant runs: aCceWith no tiger in the 
mountains, the monkeys are in charge ,a€D Todaya€™ s Communist Party
bosses have no time for such cynicism. They want the masses to believe that, even in the remotest 
villages, their welfare is the concern of an all-knowing leader, Xi Jinping, served by officials 
striving to follow his stern but wise examplea€!. Since Mr Xi became supreme leader in 2012, party 
membership has been presented as something close to a secular priesthood, in
which a select few selflessly serve the masses. Government ministries in Beijing play their part in 
spreading the faith. Their high-flying staffa€”almost always party membersa€”compete for the 
career-enhancing honour of a stint as grassroots officials in impoverished villages and townsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/china/2021/10/21/the-confidence-of-chinas-communist-party-is-striking>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Audio:

Alice Evans: Ten Thousand Years of Patriarchy: a€~Our world is marked by the Great Gender 
Divergence. In India, Iran and Egypt, most women remain secluded and surveilled, with few friends. 
Chinese women work but are locked out of politics. Latin America has undergone radical 
transformation, with now near gender parity in political representation and mass rallies against 
male violence.
Scandinavia still comes closest to a feminist utopia, but for most of history Europe was far more 
patriarchal than matrilineal South East Asia and Southern Africa. What explains the Great Gender 
Divergence?a€! Two kinds of agricultural societiesa€! Eurasia[n] patrilineal communities 
transmitted land and herds to sonsa€! southern Africa[n] and southeast Asia[n] horticulturalfists] 
tracing
descent    and property down the female line. In the former, female chastity was tightly 
policeda€!. The Middle East and South Asia grew even more endogamous (through cousin marriage and 
caste). Meanwhile Europe emerged from Late Antiquity witha€! nuclear families and participatory 
assemblies. When families were trapped in agriculture, this variation in kinship did not make a huge
differencea€!. The Great Gender Divergence really occurred in the 20th centurya€!. WomenaCI gained 
status, autonomy and much broader friendships. But this progress towards gender equality was 
contingent on strong growth, weak kinship and democratisation. If prevailing wages were too low to 
compensate for the loss of honour, female seclusion persists (as in much of India, Iran and
Egypt).    These effects are compounded by political trajectories. Only in democracies (so 
excluding Russia and China) can women openly challenge patriarchal privileges, foster feminist 
consciousness, and collectively mobilise against male violencea€!

LINK: <https://www.draliceevans .com/post/ten-thousand-years-of-patriarchv> <https://podcasts.apple 
.com/gb/podcast/rocking-our-priors/id1282553335?i=1000538048742>
Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Jo Walton: SF Reading Protocolsa€\ <https://www.tor.com/2010/01/18/sf-reading-protocols/>

• Tim Noah: Tragedy Kept Alan Krueger From Claiming a Nobel Prize, but Hea€™ s Not Forgotten: 
a€~Paying tribute to the late economist who, with David Card, changed Americaa€™ s mind about the 
minimum wagea€! <https://newrepublic.com/article/163994/david-card-alan-krueger-nobel-prize>

• Angelica Oung: a€™ Are we about to see the Cultural Revolution 2.0 in China?a€!. Wen Jiabaoa€! 
criticized the Cultural Revolutiona€! veiled commentarya€! China is going the wrong waya€! using 
whatever political capital he hasa€! to push back against the new Red Guarda€! 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/thread-oung-cultural-revolution-
2.0%3F.pdf>

• Dan Alpert: a€™a€oeTherea€™s No GreatResignationa€dMy colorfully illustrated data THREAD on the 
U.S. labor situation, demonstrating why post-pandemic shortages - like goods supply-chain 
disruptions - will prove temporarya€!

Dan Alpert @ Daniel Alpert

"There's No Great Resignation" My colorfully illustrated data THREAD on the U.S, labor situation, 
demonstrating why post-pandemic shortages - like goods supply-chain disruptions - will prove 
temporary. Below, or in an unrolled version at threadreaderapp.com/thread/1453129a€!

Dan Alpert @ Daniel Alpert

1/10 THREAD: There's No "Great Resignation" There's this idea that a post-pandemic "labor 
shortage," yielding wage inflation, is caused by disinterest in work. A good example of the 
"paralysis of aggregates" I spoke of in this ©Bloomberg podcast this week: https://t.co/CWOXCMlQyo
11:31 AM r™ Oct 27,2021

15Likes6Re tweets

• Sam Ro: There are worse things than inflation: a€™ Former Goldman Sachs CEO Lloyd Blankfein 
explainsa€!


There are worse things than inflation dY“%o

Nobody likes to see the prices for goods and services rise before their eyes. For folks who earn 
lower wages or are in tight financial situations, inflation can be painful, especially if prices 
are rising faster thana€!

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- Sam Ro, CFA

• Jeet Heer: Podcast: David Shora€™ s d€cePopularisma€m a€~Doug Bell on the promise and peril of 
poll-based politickinga€!



"Jhe TIME of MONS TERS

The Time of Monsters

Podcast: David Shora€™ s a€cePopularisma€D

Listen now (42 min) I Ezra Kleina€™ s recent profile of polling guru David Shor has sparked a 
flurry of commentary on the idea of a€cepopularism.a€D Klein sums up popularism (which, in a 
certain, perhaps jaded light, appears simply to be rebranded populism) as a strategy: a€oeDemocrats 
shoa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- Jeet Heer

• Matthew Yglesias: The Inflation Situation Is Pretty Simple: a€~Supply-chain problems are 
overhypeda€”we did a lot of stimulus, and people are buying a lot of stuffa€!



David R. Maclver: How to Make Easy Decisions'. a€~I should warn you that following this advice may 
transform you into a strange and alien creature. I think this is one of my more disconcerting 
traits for others, because fully embracing it causes you to stop doing a lot of social signalling 
that people pretend is necessary. In particular it often is in tension with the advice I proposed 
in Telegraph
your moves, because it will sometimes limit your ability to predict your actions far into the 
futurea€!. An a€oeeasy decisiona€D in the sense that Ia€™ m using here is a decision for which 
there is a strategy for making that is low-effort, reasonable, and not substantially worse than any 
higher effort strategya€!. An easy decision is not one in which there is a low-effort strategy for 
getting the

right answer. You may not be able to get the right answer. The strategy simply cannot do much worse 
than any higher effort strategya€!. To a large degree all easy decisions look like one of these two 
patterns: Either ita€™ s obvious which decision you should make, or it doesna€™ t matter which 
decision you should make and you should pick arbitrarily. Anything that doesna€™ t fit this pattern
necessarily requires more work to make the decision. The trick is learning to recognise when 
youa€™re in one of these situations, and then get permission to make them that waya€!. The most 
common example of an easy decision that people make wrong is a€oeWould you like to do the thing now 
or would you like to procrastinate and let the situation get much worse before you do the thing?
a€D.   This is an example of the a€oeWould you like the better thing or the worse thing?a€D where 
people routinely choose the worse thinga€!

LINK:

Overthinking Everything

How to make easy decisions

Hi everyone, Today I thought Ia€™ d teach you one of my superpowers, which is making easy 
decisions. I think people are bad at making these, and in particular are bad at even noticing that 
they exist, and Ia€™ d like to help you fix that. I should warn you that following this advice may 
transform you into a strange and alien creature. I think this is one of my a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- 3 comments A- David R. Maclver

Kevin Munger: Ita€™ s About Time'. a€~The wag will say a€oebruh this argument is old af, have you 
even read Platoa€™ s Phaedrusl Socrates said that writing sucks because it will produce 
forgetfulness in the minds of those who learn to use it, because they will not practice their 
memory.a€D Socrates was right! And all of the critics who said that new technologies would change 
the nature
of human beings and our relationship to society were right!a€! McLuhan: a€oeln periods of notable 
technological change, men lose most of their dignity and autonomy. Electric speed-up of data 
transmission and retrieval renders the age-old habits and patterns of visually classified knowledge 
(including our educational, political and commercial establishments) quite hollow and inepta€! those
who struggle to maintain the older patterns of perception and procedure in their lives are 
automatically deprived of their autonomy and dignitya€!a€D Social media thus cannot be fixed 
without fundamentally reorganizing society to account for the reality of the interneta€!. The 
fading socio-technical stack of the past five hundred years was far from perfect, but it made 
possible the human
flourishing we have seen over the past centuries. If the printing press and the internet are media 
technologies of the same magnitude of impact, we will need to develop a new socio-technical stack 
made of cultural technologies that we cannot yet imaginea€!. In my opinion, the aspect of the 
Internet Revolution that we need to get a handle on first is how it has affected our ability to 
make sense of
the world, both in terms of individual perceptions and group decision-making. Our society is an 
awkward teenager in the middle of a growth spurt: the relationship between our limbs has rapidly 
changed, and our sensory apparatus doesna€™ t quite know where everything else yeta€!

LINK:


Overthinking Everything

How to make easy decisions

Hi everyone, Today I thought Ia€™ d teach you one of my superpowers, which is making easy 
decisions. I think people are bad at making these, and in particular are bad at even noticing that 
they exist, and Ia€™ d like to help you fix that. I should warn you that following this advice may 
transform you into a strange and alien creature. I think this is one of my a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- 3 comments A- David R. Maclver

Kevin Munger: Ita€™ s About Time'. a€~The wag will say a€oebruh this argument is old af, have you 
even read Platoa€™ s Phaedrus? Socrates said that writing sucks because it will produce 
forgetfulness in the minds of those who learn to use it, because they will not practice their 
memory.a€D Socrates was right! And all of the critics who said that new technologies would change 
the nature
of human beings and our relationship to society were right!a€! McLuhan: a€oeln periods of notable 
technological change, men lose most of their dignity and autonomy. Electric speed-up of data 
transmission and retrieval renders the age-old habits and patterns of visually classified knowledge 
(including our educational, political and commercial establishments) quite hollow and inepta€! those
who struggle to maintain the older patterns of perception and procedure in their lives are 
automatically deprived of their autonomy and dignitya€!a€D Social media thus cannot be fixed 
without fundamentally reorganizing society to account for the reality of the interneta€!. The 
fading socio-technical stack of the past five hundred years was far from perfect, but it made 
possible the human
flourishing we have seen over the past centuries. If the printing press and the internet are media 
technologies of the same magnitude of impact, we will need to develop a new socio-technical stack 
made of cultural technologies that we cannot yet imaginea€!. In my opinion, the aspect of the 
Internet Revolution that we need to get a handle on first is how it has affected our ability to 
make sense of
the  world, both in terms of individual perceptions and group decision-making. Our society is an 
awkward teenager in the middle of a growth spurt: the relationship between our limbs has rapidly 
changed, and our sensory apparatus doesna€™ t quite know where everything else yeta€!

LINK:

Never Met a Science
It's about Time

Many political scientists are coming around to the idea that the United States' present dysfunction 
is insoluble without reforming our electoral institutions. For one comprehensive take, see 
a€oePresidents, Populism and Crisis of Democracy,a€D which I reviewed earlier this yeara€!

Read more

a year ago A- 7 likes A- Kevin Munger
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

