<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentary/delta-variant-underscores-failed-pandemic-response-bv-
j-bradford-delong-2021-08>
Subscribe now

A full year after the first indications that mRNA vaccines against CO VID-19 would be highly 
effective and safe, the world is now reeling from even more dangerous variants of the
virus. What does that say about us, particularly in the wealthy Global North?

BERKELEY a€“ The world is facing two disasters that are making the COVID-19 crisis doubly worse 
than it ought to be. The first is the rise of the Delta variant, which is twice as
contagious and 1.5-2 times deadlier than the original coronavirus. The second disaster is that 
Global North governments have not committed the resources to increase vaccine
production to the scale needed to immunize the global population by the end of this year. Worse, 
the longer we drag our feet, the more likely that the immunity furnished by
vaccines and previous COVID-19 infections will begin to erode.

Given these problems, it is too early to start talking about the a€cepost-pandemica€D world 
economy. Public health should remain the top-line priority. As for the economy, the
focus should be on keeping the basic economic engine running and avoiding a massive increase in 
poverty. With the Delta variant running rampant, we should postpone efforts to
restore economies to full-employment a€cenormalcya€D until after we have achieved some combination 
of vaccine and acquired herd immunity.

After all, since we cannot know what state the global economy will be in six months from now, we 
dona€™ t yet know which policies will be most appropriate for driving a smooth
and sustainable recovery. By the same token, we should reject proposals to a€oecool downa€D the 
world economy in order to avoid some shadowy inflationary spiral or a return of
bond-market vigilantes in the future. The Delta variant should be met not with cooling but warming.

Outside of a few truly informed experts who unfortunately are rarely heard above the noise, our 
ignorance about the pandemica€™ s range of possible trajectories is immense. We
have no clear global picture. All we can do is consider narrower samples.

The United Kingdom serves as one petri dish. The country has suffered from incompetence and 
widespread carelessness. And no, Prime Minister Alexander Boris de Pfeffel
Johnson did not do it all on his own, though he certainly has maintained his modus operandi of 
lying and somehow continuing to a€oefail up.a€D Without the rapid arrival of safe
and effective vaccines, the country almost surely would have lost many more people to COVID-19 than 
the 130,000 (0.2% of the population) that it already has.

The well-performing East Asian countries offer a second petri dish. After long proving effective, 
their world-beating spread-control mechanisms are now cracking under the
pressure of the Delta variant. We can conclude that these measures are necessary but not 
sufficient, with their uses limited to buying time for universal vaccination programs.

A third petri dish is the United States. The lesson here is not that an inept government can 
stumble into herd immunity because it has the power of the Global Northa€™ s biotech
industry behind it. Nor are there lessons to draw about an evolving virus overcoming any and all 
infection-suppression measures. The real lesson from the US is that it is in a league
of  its own. More than 600,000 people have died from CO VID-19, and that figure seems poised to 
rise by another 100,000 in the coming months.

Meanwhile, the message being blared by Fox News and most other right-wing outlets goes something 
like this:

a€~Superman-President Donald Trump quarterbacked the incredibly successful Operation Warp Speed 
project, which performed biotech miracles and created a highly effective
vaccine against a disease that is just like the flu. But now, the vaccines are untested and unsafe. 
We should never have worn masks. The virus is a Chinese bio weapon funded by Dr.
Fauci, who constantly gave Trump bad advice about this gigantic hoax. The medical establishment is 
suppressing information about truly useful medications like ivermectin,
hydroxychloroquine, and hydrogen peroxide .a€™

If this conspiratorial word salad sounds crazy, consider the terrifying fact that around 
one-quarter of the American population apparently believes it (or at least some part of it). One­
fifth of Americans think that the US government is using COVID-19 vaccination to implant microchips 
into their bodies. Tens of millions of Americans have found sufficient reason
to run a 1% risk of death by refusing an extremely effective, extremely safe, widely available 
vaccine.

Consider the implications of this successful act of brainwashing. A country where malevolent, 
cynical media and political operatives can trigger such deep psychological fractures
in a significant share of the population is extremely vulnerable to a wide range of threats. What 
will Americans fall for next? Even if the next mass psychological hacking effort is
motivated merely by a desire to sell more ads, what social destruction might it leave in its trail?

The bottom line today is the same as it was a year ago, when stage-three trials first suggested 
that the mRNA vaccines against COVID-19 were a huge success. The obvious next
step is to cut through the bureaucracy and open the money spigots to mobilize as many resources as 
are needed to get high-quality vaccines into every arm in the world as fast as
possible. We can sort out the financing and regulatory approval issues later.

It has been a full year since the biotech wizards gave us the tools that we need to beat the virus. 
Why are we still in the situation we are?
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


