Subscribe now

First:

For 40 years now, I have been a short-run China bull and a long run China bear.

It has seemed clear to me, at every point in time, China has a working short-run development model, 
and that the legacy of the Maoist version of really-existing socialism had left it with enormous 
but easily correctable economic deficienciesa€’’deficiencies that could be quickly and 
straightforwardly repaired to give China a much more prosperous economy over the next five years. 
But it has
also seemed clear to me that the systemic and governance deficits of China would make successful 
continuation of that development model beyond a 10-year horizon very unlikely indeed. Thus I have, 
at every point in time, thought I saw clearly that the odds were that, within a decade in what was 
then the future, China would join the typical emerging-market economy, and find itself unable to
make significant further progress in convergence toward the global north norm.

It is, of course, very clear and obvious that at each stage in the past I have been wrong.

China has, since 1980, at every point in time, not only had a successful short-run development 
model, but has also managed to avoid the factors that might bring its progress to a halt. It has 
been able to successfully rejigger its development model at each stage to continue economic 
progress. I think Barry Naughtona€™ s periodization of post-Mao China is the most useful way of 
thinking about
the stages of this process:

1. Agricultural de-communization

2. Labor-intensive manufactures in the Chinese countryside via TVEs

3. Chinaa€™ s cityscapes via retail decontrol

4. The drastic and painful 1996 to 2002 shrinkage of SOE work force by more than 40 percenta€” the 
flip side was that alternate businesses and ownership forms had reached sufficient scale to absorb 
the workers, land, and structures

5. Greatest of all: 200 million migrants flooded into the urban economy

6. The decision in 1998 to privatize urban housing

7. Finally, the decision to enter the WTOa€”the China-export shock


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

PODCAST: Hexapodia XI: China: Its Industrial Policy, & Its Striving for Deweaponized Autarchy

Listen now (43 min) I Key Insights: Brad DeLong: a€oel have one key insight: everyone should 
subscribe to Foreign Affairs and read Dan Wanga€™ s forthcoming piecea€!a€D Noah Smith: a€oeThere 
are no good models in history for what China is doinga€!a€D Dan Wang: a€oeThere are lots of 
questions about industrial policy that it is very difficult to answera€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 2 likes A- Brad DeLong

But I find myself, right now, still holding to my own opinion: that of a long-run China bear. And 
right now I think the odds are very high that the long-run has arrived: that China is about to hit 
its version of the middle-income growth slowdown. Question: MI, once again, wrong and fooling 
myself? Or, as Bull winkle J. Moose says, a€oethis time for sure?a€D

Robert Armstrong & Ethan Wu: Will China Have to Loosen Policy?'. a€~The Chinese authorities seem to 
be trying to do with Evergrande what they did successfully (to date) with the over-extended insurer 
Anbang: some sort of orderly, break-upy, liquidationy thingy which will not require a general 
bailout of the sector, or fiscal and monetary juicing of the economy.
This will involve state-owned entities taking Evergrandea€™ s assets and liabilities at prices that 
will not require big losses to be recognised. The governments™ s goal is a€oeto reach a balance 
between short-term stability and long-term reformsSn, as Chaoping Zhu, of JPMorgan Asset 
Management, put it in the Financial Times today. Which is, if you think about it,
what wea€™re all trying for in life, isna€™ t it? But this balance requires discipline, and there 
are a few signs that China might engage in a general easing of financial conditions, of the sort 
that encourages rather than discourages risk-taking, but which eases the short-term pain a€” and 
supports marketsa€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/0ad2be76-81aa-4735-a871-c3c6ac3elfee>

Share



Paragraphs:

An ex-communist looks at his cult-enthralled ex-comrades, and triesa€”unsuccessfullya€”to talk them 
into sense, and humanity:

Leszek Kolakowski (1973): My Correct Views on Everything: Reply to E.P. Thompson'. a€~Your 
a€oesense of politics of those yearsa€D is obviously subtler and more differentiated than minea€!. 
You saya€! a part (a part, I do not omit that) of responsibility for Stalinism lies upon the 
Western powers. You saya€! a€oeto a historian, fifty years is too short a time in
which to judge a new social system.a€Da€! You say, a€oetimes when communism has shown a most human 
face, between 1917 and the early 1920s and again from the battle of Stalingrad to 1946a€Da€l. Your 
second comment is revealing, indeed. What is fifty years a€oeto a historiana€n? The same day as I 
am writing this, I happen to have read a book by Anatol
Marchenko, relating his experiences in Soviet prisons and concentration camps in the early 1960s 
(not 1930s)a€!. He got only six years of hard labour in a concentration camp. One of his stories is 
about three Lithuanian prisoners who tried to escape from the convoy in a forest. Two of them were 
quickly caught, then shot many times in the legs, then ordered to get up
which   they could not do, then kicked and trampled by guards, then bitten and torn up by police 
dogs (such an amusement, survival of capitalism) and only then stabbed to death with bayonets. All 
this with witty remarks by the officer, of the kind a€oeNow, free Lithuania, crawl, youa€™ 11 get 
your independence straight off!a€D The third prisoner was shot and, reputed
to  be dead, was thrown under corpses in the cart; discovered later to be alive he was not killed 
(de-stalinization!) but left for several days in a dark cell with his festering wound and he 
survived after his arm was cut offa€!. What is fifty years to a historian? Fifty years covering the 
life of an obscure Russian worker Marchenko or of a still more obscure Lithuanian student
who has not even written a book? Let us not hurry with judging a a€oenew social systema€Da€i.

LINK: chttps://socialistregister.com/index.php/srv/article/view/5323/2224>

I do note that the formation of the CIA, & c., did not, in the end, do much good. Consider the 
Eisenhower administration^™ s failure to believe in the late-1950s Sino-Soviet split, after all:

Robert Farley: How Pearl Harbor Changed America Forever. a€~The attack on Pearl Harbor was 
psychologically shattering for a generation of American policymakers. The success of the attack 
resulted from careful Japanese planning and a series of American intelligence failuresa€!. The US 
immediately appreciated the need for a centralized, professionalized
intelligence service, but had little experience in operating one. In part on the basis of advice 
from the British, the United States established the Office of Strategic Services in June 1942. This 
organization would become the forerunner of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), formally 
inaugurated in 1947. The OSS would primarily act as an operational intelligence
organization, leaving intelligence collection and analysis mostly to the services. In the wake of 
the war, the United States government was determined to anticipate and prevent another surprise. 
Much else had changed. The Army and Navy remained at levels of mobilization unimaginable in the 
years before the war. In 1947 the National Security Act broke the Air Force
away  from the US Army, created the Department of Defense, and founded the CIA. Many of the 
intelligence reforms would focus on the process of aggregating and integrating intelligence 
collection^!

LINK: <https ://www. 19fortyfive.com/2021/12/how-pearl-harbor-changed-america-forever/>

Across a singularity-like divide:

E. E. Smith: First Lensman: Chapter 10 : a€~a€oel am Virgil Samms, a Tellurian,a€D he sent out 
slowly, carefully, after he made contact with the outer fringes of the creaturea€™ s mind. a€oels 
it possible for you, sir or madam, to give me a moment of your time?a€Da€! a€oea€~Madama€™ might be 
approximately correct,a€D the nativea€™ s thought went
smoothly on. a€oeMy name, in your symbology, is Twelfth Pilinipsi; by education, training, and 
occupation I am a Chief Dexitroboper. I perceive that you are indeed a native of that hellish 
Planet Three, upon which it was assumed for so long that no life could possibly exista€!. a€DAll I 
can understand of your occupation is the name you have given it. What does a
Chief Dexitroboper do?a€D a€oeShea€”or hea€”or, perhaps, it a€! is a supervisor of the work of 
dexitroboping.a€D The thought, while perfectly clear, was completely meaningless to Samms, and the 
Palainian knew it. She tried again. aCceDexitroboping has to do witha€! nourishment? Noa€“with 
nutrients.a€n a€oeAh. Farminga€“agriculture,a€n Samms thought;
but this time it was the Palainian who could not grasp the concept. a€oeHunting? Fishing?a€D No 
better. a€oeShow me, then, please.a€D She tried; but demonstration, too, was useless; for to Samms 
the Palainiana€™ s movements were pointless indeed. The peculiarly flowing subtly changing thing 
darted back and forth, rose and fell, appeared and disappeared;
undergoing the while cyclic changes in shape and form and size, in aspect and texture. It was now 
spiny, now tentacular, now scaly, now covered with peculiarly repellent feather-like fronds, each 
oozing a crimson slime. But it apparently did not do anything whatever. The net result of all its 
activity was, apparently, zero. a€oeThere, it is done.a€D Pilinipsia€™ s thought
again came clear. a€oeYou observed and understood? You did not. That is strangea€”bafflinga€Da€!

LINK: <https://scifistories .com/s/76:1009/chapter- 10-first-lensman>

Smart thoughts on land-use planning:

Addison Del Mastro: Going Nowhere Fast'. a€~An intersection, and a Rorschach testa€!. What is going 
on here?a€l A land-use pattern that virtually requires car trips for nearly everythinga€!. What 
wea€™re seeing at this is really the opposite of overcrowding. Ita€™ s a little like one of those 
noisemaker toys with a couple of marbles inside a sphere. If you shake it,
the marbles are everywhere and it feels like ita€™ s full of them. But there are still just two. 
Theya€™ re going nowhere fasta€!. Total people and total car trips are not directly related, and 
ita€™ s largely poor land use that makes them appear to bea€!

LINK:

ORTHISOUTI



I will revise and rerecord ita€! sometime. But, hopefully, not until I have a better grasp of the 
issues, and a more-justified more-true belief and understaning of the situation.


I will revise and rerecord ita€! sometime. But, hopefully, not until I have a better grasp of the 
issues, and a more-justified more-true belief and understaning of the situation.

