Subscribe now

<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2020/03/a-grave-setback-for-left-neoliberalism.html>

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!1 @delong

The electorate of all those who care enough to be motivated to vote for Chief Neoliberal Shill has 
spoken: I am defeated. Congratulations to @scottlincicome on a well-fought campaign. I wish him
luck. He will need it. 1/

182Likes 14Re tweets
Share

The electorate of all those who care enough to be motivated to vote for Chief Neoliberal Shill has 
spoken: I am defeated. Congratulations to @scottlincicome on a well-fought campaign. I wish him
luck. He will need it.


This marks the end of an era. Since its inception, the office of Chief Neoliberal Shill has been 
occupied by someone from the left wing of the neoliberal movement. The wearers of the Iron Crown
have put forward a claim to a kinder, gentler neoliberalism; one that is really nothing but a more 
effective form of social democracy; a neoliberalism with a human face. The argument has been that
the resort to market mechanisms maximizes human freedom and choice and also maximizes the 
collective entrepreneurial energy of the human race by using Pigou-compatible incentives to crowd
source the solutions to all human problems.

Thinkers on the left have long called for "think globally, act locally": the Pigou-compatible 
market powerfully incentivizes that and accomplishes it in a way that no other societal system can. 
And
as for the fact that markets not only allocate scarce resources among alternative uses but also 
create rich and poora€”and make the societal voices of the rich much, much, much louder than those 
of
the poor? Neoliberalism with a human face has called for large scale redistribution and 
pre-distribution to prevent inequalities of income from becoming poisonous. That has been our 
Polestar and
our Lodestone ever since the days when John Maynard Keynes called for the "euthanasia of the 
rentier" as a side effect of pursuing a monetary policy consistent with constant full employment.

Suffice to say that large scale pre-distribution and redistribution and the euthanasia of the 
rentier has never been in the Cato Institute's wheelhouse.
Rather, the vibe I have always gotten from it is that of Andrew Carnegie back when he was a robber 
baron:

When visiting the Sioux, I was led to the wigwam of the chief. It was just like the others in 
external appearance, and even within the difference was trifling between it and
those of the poorest of his braves. The contrast between the palace of the millionaire and the 
cottage of the laborer with us to-day measures the change which has come with
civilization.

This change, however, is not to be deplored, but welcomed as highly beneficial. It is well, nay, 
essential for the progress of the race, that the houses of some should be
homes for all that is highest and best in literature and the arts, and for all the refinements of 
civilization, rather than that none should be so. Much better this great
irregularity than universal squalor. "Without wealth there can be no MAlcenas. The 'good old times' 
were not good old times. Neither master nor servant was as well
situated then as to-day. A relapse to old conditions would be disastrous to botha€”not the least so 
to him who serves—and would Sweep away civilization with it. But
whether the change be for good or ill, it is upon us, beyond our power to alter, and therefore to 
be accepted and made the best of. It is a waste of time to criticise the
inevitable....

To-day the world obtains commodities of excellent quality at prices which even the generation 
preceding this would have deemed incredible. In the commercial world
similar causes have produced similar results, and the race is benefited thereby. The poor enjoy 
what the rich could not before afford. What were the luxuries have become
the necessaries of life. The laborer has now more comforts than the landlord had a few generations 
ago. The farmer has more luxuries than the landlord had, and is more
richly clad and better housed. The landlord has books and pictures rarer, and appointments more 
artistic, than the King could then obtain.

The price we pay for this salutary change is, no doubt, great. We assemble thousands of operatives 
in the factory, in the mine, and in the counting-house, of whom the
employer can know little or nothing, and to whom the employer is little better than a myth. All 
intercourse between them is at an end. Rigid Castes are formed, and, as
usual,  mutual ignorance breeds mutual distrust. Each Caste is without sympathy for the other, and 
ready to credit anything disparaging in regard to it. Under the law of
competition, the employer of thousands is forced into the strictest economies, among which the 
rates paid to labor figure prominently, and often there is friction between the
employer and the employed, between capital and labor, between rich and poor. Human society loses 
homogeneity.

The price which society pays for the law of competition, like the price it pays for cheap comforts 
and luxuries, is also great; but the advantage of this law are also greater
still, for it is to this law that we owe our wonderful material development, which brings improved 
conditions in its train. But, whether the law be benign or not, we must say
of it, as we say of the change in the conditions of men to which we have referred: It is here; we 
cannot evade it; no substitutes for it have been found; and while the law may
be sometimes hard for the individual, it is best for the race, because it insures the survival of 
the fittest in every department.

We accept and welcome therefore, as conditions to which we must accommodate ourselves, great 
inequality of environment, the concentration of business, industrial and
commercial, in the hands of a few, and the law of competition between these, as being not only 
beneficial, but essential for the future progress of the race. Having accepted
these, it follows that there must be great scope for the exercise of special ability in the 
merchant and in the manufacturer who has to conduct affairs upon a great scale. That
this talent for organization and management is rare among men is proved by the fact that it 
invariably secures for its possessor enormous rewards, no matter where or under
what laws or conditions..."

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

