Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)I would put this more strongly. The price level now is 10% below where consensus forecasts that 
it would be a decade ago. In that context, a quartera€”or a year, or two
yearsa€”of 5%/year inflation is simply not an issue:

Francesco Da€™Acunto & Michael Weber: A Temporary Increase in Inflation Is Not a Long-Run Threat to 
U.S. Economic Growth & Prosperity.
a€~Recent 5 percent inflation rate appears much less concerning once we account for what economists 
call the base rate effecta€”the price level 12 months
ago,   in the midst of a pandemic recession in which demand was artificially low due to lockdown 
measuresa€!. As this base rate effect vanishes over the
next few monthsa€”due to the sharp drop in the price level early in the recession partially 
reversing in the second half of 2020a€”then, all else being
equal, policymakers should expect more moderate Consumer Price Index inflation readings going 
forwarda€!. Accumulation of higher savings, paired with

new spending opportunities and the reopening of the U.S. economy, made the scope for demand 
pressure very concrete. Indeed, new car and home sales are
at their highest levels since before the Great Recession of 2007a€“2009a€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/a-temporary-increase-in-inflation-is-not-a-long-run-threat-to-u-s-econo
mic-growth-and-prosperity/>

2) As John Maynard Keynes wrote, long ago, the boom not the slump is the time for austerity. And 
a€ceslumpa€D includes the first, second, and third stages of the recovery as
well. From <http://voxeu .org>:

Davide Furceri, Prakash Loungani, Jonathan Ostry, & Pietro Pizzuto: Fiscal Austerity Intensifies 
the Increase in Inequality After Pandemics'. a€~This
column predicts the likely distributional effects of Covida€“19 by analysing evidence from five 
previous outbreaks (SARS, H1N1, MERS, Ebola, and
Zika).  It finds that severe austerity measures were associated with inequality increases three 
times greater than expansive fiscal policy following a
pandemic. Premature austerity is self-defeating from both a macro and an equity standpoints I

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/fiscal-austerity-intensifies-the-increase-in-inequality-after-pandemics
/>

3) I think this piece was extremely well put together:

Kate Bahn: Testimony Before the Joint Economic Committee on Monopsony, Workers, & Corporate Power: 
a€~When employers have outsized power in
employment relationships, they are able to set wages for their workers, rather than wages being 
determined by competitive market forces. Given this
monopsony power, employers undercut workers. This means paying them less than the value they 
contribute to production. One recent survey of all the
economic research on monopsony finds that, on average across studies, employers have the power to 
keep wages over one-third less than they would be in
a perfectly competitive market. Put another way, in a theoretical competitive market, if an 
employer cut wages then all workers would quit. But in reality,
these estimates are the equivalent of a firm cutting wages by 5 percent yet only losing 10 percent 
to 20 percent of their workers, thus growing their profits
without significantly impacting their businessa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/kate-bahn-testimonv-before-the-ioint-economic-committee-on-monopsonv-wo
rkers-and-corporate-power/>

4) The concentration of profits into a relatively small number of firms over the past two 
generations is something that I do not well understand about the American economy I live
in:

Heather Boushey: a€The Guardrails Have Come Off the US Economy a€™: a€~Overa€! most of my lifea€! 
growing economic inequalitya€!. How do
we make productivity and wages grow together?a€! Wea€™ ve allowed some to reap the gains of growth 
and wea€™ ve allowed the economy to shift in a
direction that isna€™ t good for people and families. We can see that in how wea€™ ve been 
enforcing our notion of what is a fair market, how wea€™ ve
been taxing and who wea€™ ve been taxing and who is paying their fair share to the tax system, and 
what wea€™ re doing to the planet in climate change,
which is ultimately destabilisinga€!. For me it is, a€oeare we making sure that markets work, that 
theya€™ re open, that theya€™ re competitive, that
capitalism can bring us all the good things without just a very small number of businesses taking 
the gains and then that not leading to the kind of
investment   that we see in a much more competitive economy?a€D So I think competition policy is 
one. Making sure that we are thinking about a fair and
just   tax system is anothera€!. Other things you have to think abouta€”do American workers have 
the right to organise? Also, this isna€™ t in my lane, but
do they have the right to vote?a€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/33a86191 -3a75-452b-b3ce-d3d35ae90e06>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)The people claiming that it was very likely there would be a big employment boost from cutting 
off plague-time unemployment insurance always seemed to me to bea€! not
competenta€! or not thinking coherently. And, as of right now, it is looking as though they were, 
as expected completely wrong. But will there be any rethinking on their part as the
empirical evidence comes in? I strongly suspect not. As is more and more the case these days, 
policy effectiveness and societal well-being optimality is not the point. The cruelty is
the point:

Arindrajit Dube: Early Impacts of the Expiration of Pandemic Unemployment Insurance Programs: a€~So 
far, 25 states have ended their participation in
all or most of the pandemic unemployment insurance (UI) programsa€!. Alla€! have ended the 
$300/week benefit boost (Pandemic Unemployment
Compensation, or PUC)a€l. 21a€! have also ended their participation in the Pandemic Emergency 
Unemployment Compensation (PEUC)a€! Pandemic
Unemployment Assistance (PUA)a€!. Around 3/4 of workersa€!. Thisa€! [would be] especially true in 
the 25 states cutting off UI, since unemployment
rates     are lower there than in states keeping the pandemic UI for now. So what has been the 
impact so far on the labor market?a€! I group states by their
dates                                                                      of expiration: 4 states 
ended the programs on June 12, then 8 more states ended them on June 19, and finally 10 additional 
states ended participation
on June 26a€!. In the 12 states where pandemic UI expired on June 12 (grey) or 19 (green), the 
share of population receiving UI fell sharply between early
June and early Julya€! a roughly 60 percent reduction in the UI rolls in these statesa€!. Between 
early June and early July, the EPOP rates in the states
seeing large drops in UI receipt (i.e., 12th and 19th June cohorts in grey and green) saw no uptick 
in employments!. Certainly there was no immediate
boost to employment during the 2a€“3 weeks following the expiration of the pandemic UI benefitsa€!. 
Of course, this evidence is still early, and more data
is needed to paint a fuller pictures!

LINK: <https://arindube 
.com/2021/07/18/early-impacts-of-the-expiration-of-pandemic-unemployment-insurance-programs/>

2) More on how to think about the coming SARS-COVID-19-DELTA plague in a half-vaxxed country:

Natalie E. Dean: a€™ Vaccines reducea€\ risk^\ but they arenS™t per/ecZ. Then what fraction of 
transmission in the population is from the
vaccinated? How might this change with new variants?S! A mental model with worked examplesa€!. Are 
vaccine breakthroughs less likely to transmit?
Due    to lower viral load, shorter illness, location of replication (nose, lungs). This is VE 
against infectiousness (aka VE_I). A recent preprint estimated 50%
(w/ high uncertainty)a€!. How often vaccinated individuals go on to transmit also depends upon: - 
The level of exposure in the community - The fraction
of people vaccinated - The reproduction number R(t)a€!. If we assume exposure is similar for 
unvaccinated and vaccinated individualsa€! in this simplified
model, the key is the % of the population vaccinated, plus the combination of the vaccinea€™ s 
effect to reduce infection and reduce infectiousness
(sometimes called VE against transmission)a€!. Consider a vaccine that reduces infection by 80% and 
reduces infectiousness by 50%. If 50% of the
population    is vaccinated, about 9% of transmission is attributable to vaccinated individualsa€!


LINK: <https ://twitter.com/nataliexdean/status/1418577831097901056>

3) I confess this really surprises me, too. a€oeObeying the law is for little peoplea€D is not 
something that seems to be to be a likely vote-winner for any set of politicians. And as
the Democratic Party shifts to the left with its increasing concern with equitable growth, where 
might the Republican donors go should Republican candidates cross them on things
like pay-your-taxes?:

Paul Krugman: Should Only the Little People Pay Taxes?'. a€~Even I was caught by surprise when 
Republicans negotiating over a possible infrastructure
bill ruled out paying for it in part by giving the Internal Revenue Service more resources to go 
after tax evasiona€!. Ia€™m not surprised to learn that a
significant number of senators are sympathetic to the interests of wealthy tax cheats, that they 
are objectively pro-tax evasion. I am, however, surprised that
they  are willing to be so open about their sympathies. There is, after all, a big difference 
between arguing for low taxes on the rich and arguing, in effect,
that rich people who dona€™t pay what they legally owe should be allowed to get away with ita€!

LINK: chttps ://www.nytimes .com/2021/07/22Zopinion/tax-evasion-irs .html>

4) The ease with which the right-wing base can be grifted continues to amaze me:

Tom Porter: TrumpaC™ s PAC Spent No Money on Proving Election-Fraud Claims: Report'. a€~Trump 
founded the Save America leadership PAC last
year as he pushed his a€oebig liea€D that the election had been stolen from him as a result of an 
elaborate plot by Democratsa€!. None of the money had
been channeled into concrete attempts to challenge last yeara€™ s election resulta€!. Trumpa€! he 
hasna€™ t used the money from his PAC war chest to
support the reviewsa€!. The deadline for the PAC to make public its financial statements in 
compliance with federal laws is July 31. A Trump spokesperson
did not immediately respond to Insidera€™ s request for commenta€!

LINK: 
<https://www.businessinsider.com/trumps-pac-spent-no-money-proving-election-fraud-claims-report-2021
-7>

5) It is much less clear to me than it is to Paul that the a€cemediana€D core measures are to be 
preferreda€”it depends on how rising used-car and hotel prices feed into
expectations. What is clear to me is that I DO NOT CARE. We are burning rubber as we rejoin the 
highway at speed. Some inflation now is necessary, and a sign that we are doing
desirable things:

Paul Krugman: Strengthening Your Core: a€™ The theory of core inflation has been a huge success 
story: people who understood it avoided the inflation
panics of 2008 and early 2011 (remember Paul Ryan accusing Bernanke of a€oedebasing the 
dollara€D?). Which measure of core inflation should you
use?   It didna€™ t really matter: they all told the same storya€”until now. But in the 
post-pandemic, conventional core is running very hot, while other
measures, especially median inflation, not. It seems clear to me that the less-used measures are 
telling a more accurate story: used car prices and hotel rates
dona€™ t belong in core inflation. Markets seem to get that; economic reporting less soa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.eom/paulkrugman/status/1416786559752409093>

6) The right solution, in my opinion, is to make a Supreme Court appointment a twenty-year one-shot 
job, and appoint a new Supreme Court justice every year:

Ben Wittes: Prepared Statement: a€~I do not doubt that Republican conduct over the past half decade 
has set a new milestone of aggressiveness, and I am
not trying to draw any sort of equivalence between Republican behavior during the Trump 
administration and prior outrages against the norms of the
confirmation process. They are not equivalent. That is the nature of an escalatory cycle; each 
escalation takes the combatants to a new place. My point,
rather,    is that the behavior was altogether predictable given the cycles of retribution that had 
taken place over the previous three decades. I believe that
court-packing, enlargement, or some other manipulative scheme will likely serve as the next phase 
of this ongoing escalationa€”unless, that is, as I
describe    below, our political actors take it as an opportunity for deescalation. The essential 
reason for the long-term escalatory cycle is that both sides
perceive themselves as playing defense against a high-stakes attack on their fundamental values. 
Both sides perceive the judicial nominations of the other
side   as deeply threatening and as part of a long-term attempt by the opposing party to exercise 
political control through unelected means. Moreover, both
sides believe, with some justice, that the other side plays dirty and will manipulate the rules to 
its own advantage. Hence, each side has a significant
incentive to violate the current norms when it has the chance and the powera€’’believing, probably 
rightly, that the other side would do the same as soon as
it  had the chance. Ita€™ s a classic prisonera€™ s dilemma, and it operates according to its own 
logic. The perception on the part of each party that it is
acting defensively blinds both sides to their own contributions to the decay of the governing 
normsa€!

LINK: <https ://www.whitehouse .gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/Wittes-Testimony.pdf>

7) A very nice history lesson from the extremely sharp Annette Gordon-Reed, Harvard Law School 
University Professor. No successful Haitian Revolution, no Louisiana Purchase
sale to Jefferson, and then in all likelihood both France and Britain willing to spend resources to 
contest control of the Mississippi Valley with the United Statesa€”especially as
onea€™ s presence in the area will induce the other to see it as a key cold- or hot-war 
battlefield:

Annette Gordon-Reed: We Owe Haiti a Debt We Cana€™ t Repay: a€~In 1791 the enslaved people of 
Haitia€! engineered the first and only successful
slave revolt in modern historya€!. Francea€™ s richest colonya€! worldwide demand for sugar and the 
slavery-based economy that fulfilled it. Led by
Toussaint La€™ Ouverture, Africans on the island violently threw off their enslaversa€!. Americans 
watched these proceedings closely. As refugees from
Saint-Domingue arrived in the United States, bringing news of the successful revolt, white 
Southerners were alarmeda€!. Napoleon brought a new
challenge      to Saint-Domingue when he decided in 1802 to reassert control over French colonies 
in the Americas. He sent a fleet to the island to accomplish
the  task. The residents fought back and, with the help of Aedes Aegypti, the mosquito that carries 
yellow fever, repelled the invadersa€!. Napoleona€! the
territory of Louisiana as a supply stationa€!. Once the Haitians had shattered his dream, Napoleon 
saw no reason to hold on to the territory. He was eager
to  sell it, and President Jefferson was equally eager to buya€!.If not for the French defeat at 
the hands of the Haitians, the sale may not have come off,
leaving the United States possibly forever divided by a huge swath of French-controlled land or 
forced into armed conflict with the French over it. Of
course, what the United States really bought from France was the right to contend with the various 
Indigenous people who had their own claims to the
landa€l. The Haitians, who suffered enormously for their victory in the early years of the 19th 
century and who were treated so poorly by Americans and
Europeans for decades after that, gave the people and the government of the United States a 
generally unrecognized benefit. Writing in a€oeHistory of the
United States During the Administrations of Thomas Jefferson,a€D Henry Adams said it plainly: the 
a€oeprejudice of race alone blinded the American
people to the debt they owed to the desperate courage of five hundred thousand Hay tian Negroes who 
would not be enslaveda€Da€!

LINK: <https ://www.nytimes .com/2021/07/21/opinion/haiti-us-history.html>

8) The extremely sharp Leah Boustan, Princeton economic history professor, is a very kind and 
warm-hearted person. So what has prompted her to highlight this from 2019?

Leah Boustan: a€™I dona€™ t say this lightly because I try to be kind and open to everyone on 
Twitter but fa€” you: David Brooks: a€oeWaiters are
87% friendlier as they hand me the bill and Ia€™ m about to decide the tip amount than they are at 
any other point in the meala€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/leah_boustan/status/1154738232808091648>
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

’Th Ar A a   frAA Arnnil lief TliArA3^™c a r»ciid_ciih«Arir»tir»n list with tut th A mnmAnt nnlv Q  
                Avtrac tnn


