Subscribe now

Adam Smith: An Inquiry into the Nature & Causes of the Wealth of Nations: a€~Poverty, though it no 
doubt discourages, does not always prevent, marriage. It seems even to be
favourable to generation. A half-starved Highland woman frequently bears more than twenty children, 
while a pampered fine lady is often incapable of bearing any, and is generally
exhausted by two or three. Barrenness, so frequent among women of fashion, is very rare among those 
of inferior station. Luxury, in the fair sex, while it inflames, perhaps, the
passion                                                                                for 
enjoyment, seems always to weaken, and frequently to destroy altogether, the powers of generation.

But poverty, though it does not prevent the generation, is extremely unfavourable to the rearing of 
children. The tender plant is produced; but in so cold a soil, and so severe a
climate, soon withers and dies. It is not uncommon, I have been frequently told, in the Highlands 
of Scotland, for a mother who has born twenty children not to have two alive.
Several officers of great experience have assured me, that, so far from recruiting their regiment, 
they have never been able to supply it with drums and fifes, from all the
soldiersa€™ children that were born in it.

A greater number of fine children, however, is seldom seen anywhere than about a barrack of 
soldiers. Very few of them, it seems, arrive at the age of thirteen or fourteen. In some
places, one half the children die before they are four years of age, in many places before they are 
seven, and in almost all places before they are nine or ten. This great mortality,
however will everywhere be found chiefly among the children of the common people, who cannot afford 
to tend them with the same care as those of better station. Though their
marriages are generally more fruitful than those of people of fashion, a smaller proportion of 
their children arrive at maturity. In foundling hospitals, and among the children brought
up                                                                                  by parish 
charities, the mortality is still greater than among those of the common people.

Every species of animals naturally multiplies in proportion to the means of their subsistence, and 
no species can ever multiply beyond it. But in civilized society, it is only among
the inferior ranks of people that the scantiness of subsistence can set limits to the further 
multiplication of the human species; and it can do so in no other way than by destroying a
great part of the children which their fruitful marriages produce.

The liberal reward of labour, by enabling them to provide better for their children, and 
consequently to bring up a greater number, naturally tends to widen and extend those limits.
It deserves to be remarked, too, that it necessarily does this as nearly as possible in the 
proportion which the demand for labour requires. If this demand is continually increasing, the
reward of labour must necessarily encourage in such a manner the marriage and multiplication of 
labourers, as may enable them to supply that continually increasing demand by a
continually increasing population. If the reward should at any time be less than what was requisite 
for this purpose, the deficiency of hands would soon raise it; and if it should at
any   time be more, their excessive multiplication would soon lower it to this necessary rate. The 
market would be so much understocked with labour in the one case, and so much
overstocked in the other, as would soon force back its price to that proper rate which the 
circumstances of the society required.

It is in this manner that the demand for men, like that for any other commodity, necessarily 
regulates the production of men, quickens it when it goes on too slowly, and stops it
when it advances too fast. It is this demand which regulates and determines the state of 
propagation in all the different countries of the world; in North America, in Europe, and in
China; which renders it rapidly progressive in the first, slow and gradual in the second, and 
altogether stationary in the last.

The wear and tear of a slave, it has been said, is at the expense of his master; but that of a free 
servant is at his own expense. The wear and tear of the latter, however, is, in reality, as
much at the expense of his master as that of the former. The wages paid to journeymen and servants 
of every kind must be such as may enable them, one with another to continue
the race of journeymen and servants, according as the increasing, diminishing, or stationary demand 
of the society, may happen to require. But though the wear and tear of a free
servant be equally at the expense of his master, it generally costs him much less than that of a 
slave. The fund destined for replacing or repairing, if I may say so, the wear and tear
of the slave, is commonly managed by a negligent master or careless overseer. That destined for 
performing the same office with regard to the freeman is managed by the freeman
himself.

The disorders which generally prevail in the economy of the rich, naturally introduce themselves 
into the management of the former; the strict frugality and parsimonious attention
of the poor as naturally establish themselves in that of the latter. Under such different 
management, the same purpose must require very different degrees of expense to execute it. It
appears, accordingly, from the experience of all ages and nations, I believe, that the work done by 
freemen comes cheaper in the end than that performed by slaves. It is found to do
so even at Boston, New-York, and Philadelphia, where the wages of common labour are so very high.

The liberal reward of labour, therefore, as it is the effect of increasing wealth, so it is the 
cause of increasing population. To complain of it, is to lament over the necessary cause and
effect of the greatest public prosperity.

It deserves to be remarked, perhaps, that it is in the progressive state, while the society is 
advancing to the further acquisition, rather than when it has acquired its full complement

of riches, that the condition of the labouring poor, of the great body of the people, seems to be 
the happiest and the most comfortable. It is hard in the stationary, and miserable in the
declining state. The progressive state is, in reality, the cheerful and the hearty state to all the 
different orders of the society; the stationary is dull; the declining melancholy.

The liberal reward of labour, as it encourages the propagation, so it increases the industry of the 
common people. The wages of labour are the encouragement of industry, which,
like every other human quality, improves in proportion to the encouragement it receives. A 
plentiful subsistence increases the bodily strength of the labourer, and the comfortable
hope of bettering his condition, and of ending his days, perhaps, in ease and plenty, animates him 
to exert that strength to the utmost. Where wages are high, accordingly, we shall
always find the workmen more active, diligent, and expeditious, than where they are low; in 
England, for example, than in Scotland; in the neighbourhood of great towns, than in
remote country places. Some workmen, indeed, when they can earn in four days what will maintain 
them through the week, will be idle the other three. This, however, is by no
means the case with the greater part. Workmen, on the contrary, when they are liberally paid by the 
piece, are very apt to overwork themselves, and to ruin their health and
constitution in a few years. A carpenter in London, and in some other places, is not supposed to 
last in his utmost vigour above eight years. Something of the same kind happens in
many other trades, in which the workmen are paid by the piece; as they generally are in 
manufactures, and even in country labour, wherever wages are higher than ordinary.

Almost every class of artificers is subject to some peculiar infirmity occasioned by excessive 
application to their peculiar species of work. Ramuzzini, an eminent Italian physician,
has written a particular book concerning such diseases. We do not reckon our soldiers the most 
industrious set of people among us; yet when soldiers have been employed in some
particular sorts of work, and liberally paid by the piece, their officers have frequently been 
obliged to stipulate with the undertaker, that they should not be allowed to earn above a
certain sum every day, according to the rate at which they were paid. Till this stipulation was 
made, mutual emulation, and the desire of greater gain, frequently prompted them to
overwork themselves, and to hurt their health by excessive labour. Excessive application, during 
four days of the week, is frequently the real cause of the idleness of the other three,
so  much and so loudly complained of. Great labour, either of mind or body, continued for several 
days together is, in most men, naturally followed by a great desire of relaxation,
which, if not restrained by force, or by some strong necessity, is almost irresistible. It is the 
call of nature, which requires to be relieved by some indulgence, sometimes of ease only,
but sometimes too of dissipation and diversion. If it is not complied with, the consequences are 
often dangerous and sometimes fatal, and such as almost always, sooner or later,
bring on the peculiar infirmity of the trade.

If masters would always listen to the dictates of reason and humanity, they have frequently 
occasion rather to moderate, than to animate the application of many of their workmen. It
will be found, I believe, in every sort of trade, that the man who works so moderately, as to be 
able to work constantly, not only preserves his health the longest, but, in the course of
the year, executes the greatest quantity of work.

In cheap years it is pretended, workmen are generally more idle, and in dear times more industrious 
than ordinary. A plentiful subsistence, therefore, it has been concluded, relaxes,
and a scanty one quickens their industry. That a little more plenty than ordinary may render some 
workmen idle, cannot be well doubted; but that it should have this effect upon the
greater part, or that men in general should work better when they are ill[Pg 35] fed, than when 
they are well fed, when they are disheartened than when they are in good spirits,
when they are frequently sick than when they are generally in good health, seems not very probable. 
Years of dearth, it is to be observed, are generally among the common people
years of sickness and mortality, which cannot fail to diminish the produce of their industry.

In years of plenty, servants frequently leave their masters, and trust their subsistence to what 
they can make by their own industry. But the same cheapness of provisions, by
increasing the fund which is destined for the maintenance of servants, encourages masters, farmers 
especially, to employ a greater number. Farmers, upon such occasions, expect
more profit from their corn by maintaining a few more labouring servants, than by selling it at a 
low price in the market. The demand for servants increases, while the number of
those who offer to supply that demand diminishes. The price of labour, therefore, frequently rises 
in cheap years.

In years of scarcity, the difficulty and uncertainty of subsistence make all such people eager to 
return to service. But the high price of provisions, by diminishing the funds destined
for the maintenance of servants, disposes masters rather to diminish than to increase the number of 
those they have. In dear years, too, poor independent workmen frequently
consume the little stock with which they had used to supply themselves with the materials of their 
work, and are obliged to become journeymen for subsistence. More people want
employment than easily get it; many are willing to take it upon lower terms than ordinary; and the 
wages of both servants and journeymen frequently sink in dear years.

Masters of all sorts, therefore, frequently make better bargains with their servants in dear than 
in cheap years, and find them more humble and dependent in the former than in the
latter. They naturally, therefore, commend the former as more favourable to industry. Landlords and 
farmers, besides, two of the largest classes of masters, have another reason for
being pleased with dear years. The rents of the one, and the profits of the other, depend very much 
upon the price of provisions. Nothing can be more absurd, however, than to


iiiiagiiiv mat iiivii in ^vnviai diivuiu VYVIA IVOO wiivii nivj vvuin ivi Liivinovivvd, man wnvn 
mvj vvuiiv ivi vmvi puvpiv.

A poor independent workman will generally be more industrious than even a journeyman who works by 
the piece. The one enjoys the whole produce of his own industry, the other
shares it with his master. The one, in his separate independent state, is less liable to the 
temptations of bad company, which, in large manufactories, so frequently ruin the morals of
the other. The superiority of the independent workman over those servants who are hired by the 
month or by the year, and whose wages and maintenance are the same, whether they
do much or do little, is likely to be still greater. Cheap years tend to increase the proportion of 
independent workmen to journeymen and servants of all kinds, and dear years to
diminish it.

A French author of great knowledge and ingenuity, Mr Messance, receiver of the tallies in the 
election of St Etienne, endeavours to shew that the poor do more work in cheap than
in dear years, by comparing the quantity and value of the goods made upon those different occasions 
in three different manufactures; one of coarse woollens, carried on at Elbeuf;
one of linen, and another of silk, both which extend through the whole generality of Rouen. It 
appears from his account, which is copied from the registers of the public offices, that
the quantity and value of the goods made in all those three manufactories has generally been 
greater in cheap than in dear years, and that it has always been greatest in the cheapest,
and least in the dearest years. All the three seem to be stationary manufactures, or which, though 
their produce may vary somewhat from year to year, are, upon the whole, neither
going backwards nor forwards.

The manufacture of linen in Scotland, and that of coarse woollens in the West Riding of Yorkshire, 
are growing manufactures, of which the produce is generally, though with some
variations, increasing both in quantity and value. Upon examining, however, the accounts which have 
been published of their annual produce, I have not been able to observe that its
variations have had any sensible connection with the dearness or cheapness of the seasons. In 1740, 
a year of great scarcity, both manufactures, indeed, appear to have declined very
considerably. But in 1756, another year of great scarcity, the Scotch manufactures made more than 
ordinary advances. The Yorkshire manufacture, indeed, declined, and its produce
did   not rise to what it had been in 1755, till 1766, after the repeal of the American stamp act. 
In that and the following year, it greatly exceeded what it had ever been before, and it
has continued to advance ever since.

The produce of all great manufactures for distant sale must necessarily depend, not so much upon 
the dearness or cheapness of the seasons in the countries where they are carried
on, as upon the circumstances which affect the demand in the countries where they are consumed; 
upon peace or war, upon the prosperity or declension of other rival manufactures,
and upon the good or bad humour of their principal customers. A great part of the extraordinary 
work, besides, which is probably done in cheap years, never enters the public
registers of manufactures. The men-servants, who leave their masters, become independent labourers. 
The women return to their parents, and commonly spin, in order to make
clothes                                                                                   for 
themselves and their families. Even the independent workmen do not always work for public sale, but 
are employed by some of their neighbours in manufactures for
family use. The produce of their labour, therefore, frequently makes no figure in those public 
registers, of which the records are sometimes published with so much parade, and from
which our merchants and manufacturers would often vainly pretend to announce the prosperity or 
declension of the greatest empires.

Though the variations in the price of labour not only do not always correspond with those in the 
price of provisions, but are frequently quite opposite, we must not, upon this
account, imagine that the price of provisions has no influence upon that of labour. The money price 
of labour is necessarily regulated by two circumstances; the demand for labour,
and  the price of the necessaries and conveniencies of life. The demand for labour, according as it 
happens to be increasing, stationary, or declining, or to require an increasing,
stationary, or declining population, determines the quantities of the necessaries and conveniencies 
of life which must be given to the labourer; and the money price of labour is
determined                                                                                by what 
is requisite for purchasing this quantity. Though the money price of labour, therefore, is 
sometimes high where the price of provisions is low, it would be still
higher, the demand continuing the same, if the price of provisions was high.

It is because the demand for labour increases in years of sudden and extraordinary plenty, and 
diminishes in those of sudden and extraordinary scarcity, that the money price of
labour sometimes rises in the one, and sinks in the other.

In a year of sudden and extraordinary plenty, there are funds in the hands of many of the employers 
of industry, sufficient to maintain and employ a greater number of industrious
people than had been employed the year before; and this extraordinary number cannot always be had. 
Those masters, therefore, who want more workmen, bid against one another,
in order to get them, which sometimes raises both the real and the money price of their labour.

The contrary of this happens in a year of sudden and extraordinary scarcity. The funds destined for 
employing industry are less than they had been the year before. A considerable
number of people are thrown out of employment, who bid one against another, in order to get it, 
which sometimes lowers both the real and the money price of labour. In 1740, a
year                                                                               of extraordinary 
scarcity, many people were willing to work for bare subsistence. In the succeeding years of plenty, 
it was more difficult to get labourers and servants.

The scarcity of a dear year, by diminishing the demand for labour, tends to lower its price, as the 
high price of provisions tends to raise it. The plenty of a cheap year, on the
contrary, by increasing the demand, tends to raise the price of labour, as the cheapness of 
provisions tends to lower it. In the ordinary variations of the prices of provisions, those
two opposite causes seem to counterbalance one another, which is probably, in part, the reason why 
the wages of labour are everywhere so much more steady and permanent than
the price of provisions.

The increase in the wages of labour necessarily increases the price of many commodities, by 
increasing that part of it which resolves itself into wages, and so far tends to diminish
their consumption, both at home and abroad. The same cause, however, which raises the wages of 
labour, the increase of stock, tends to increase its productive powers, and to make
a smaller quantity of labour produce a greater quantity of work. The owner of the stock which 
employs a great number of labourers necessarily endeavours, for his own advantage,
to make such a proper division and distribution of employment, that they may be enabled to produce 
the greatest quantity of work possible. For the same reason, he endeavours to
supply them with the best machinery which either he or they can think of.

What takes place among the labourers in a particular workhouse, takes place, for the same reason, 
among those of a great society. The greater their number, the more they naturally
divide themselves into different classes and subdivisions of employments. More heads are occupied 
in inventing the most proper machinery for executing the work of each, and it is,
therefore, more likely to be invented. There are many commodities, therefore, which, in consequence 
of these improvements, come to be produced by so much less labour than
before,  that the increase of its price is more than compensated by the diminution of its quantity 
.a€!

LINK: <https ://www.gutenberg .org/files/38194/38194-h/38194-h.htm#Page 318>
Share

Leave a comment

