Subscribe now

Rana Faroohar: The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Ordera€”an instant classic: a€~Gary Gerstlea€™ s 
economic history is essential reading for learning how we arrived at a
reckoning with capitalism: Ita€™ s rare that one can use the term a€ceinstant classica€D in a book 
review, but Gary Gerstlea€™ s latest economic history, The Rise and Fall of the
Neoliberal Order, warrants the praise.

he Rise and Kall

America and the World in the Free Market Era

It puts neoliberalism, defined as a a€oecreed that prizes free trade and the free movement of 
capital, goods and people ,a€D as well as deregulation and cosmopolitanism, in a 100-
year historical context, which is crucial for understanding the politics of the moment, not just in 
the US but globally. The book also knits together a century of very complicated
economic, political, and social trends, which are often siloed but are in fact quite interrelated, 
creating a new and important narrative about where America has been, and where it
may   be going.

One of the most useful things Gerstle does for readers is to blow up the usual definitions of 
conservative and liberal, at least in terms of how US economic history is framed. Former
Republican presidents Ronald Reagan and both Bushes were a€ceconservativea€D, while their Democrat 
peers Bill Clinton and Barack Obama were a€oeliberalsa€n. And yet all
of   them could be described as neoliberals, in the sense that many of their economic policies were 
at core about unleashing (or at least not restraining) capitalism, with the underlying
belief that markets would, indeed, know best.

While decades of unchecked markets ultimately contributed to everything from the financial crisis, 
to the rise of both Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders (reflecting again the way in
which neoliberalism and its discontents have blurred political categories), they were in the 
beginning a necessary and in many ways useful reaction to what came before. You
cana€™ t really understand the Reagan revolution, with its dismantling of unions, deregulation, and 
tax-slashing, without understanding FDRa€™ s a€oeNew Deal,a€D and how it
so dramatically expanded the power of the public sector. And so, the first section of the book 
tackles the 1930s to the 1970s, in which the pendulum of economic power swung
towards state planning, welfare, the curbing of corporate monopolies, and stability over 
speculation.

The fact that a book on neoliberalism starts with Herbert Hoover, the president whose failure paved 
the way for Roosevelta€™ s success, rather than Friedrich Hayek, will throw
some readers (like me). Other important works on the topic, such as Quinn Slobodiana€™ s Globalists 
(2018), which Gerstle quite rightly name checks, begin with the European
roots of neoliberalism in post-first world war Vienna, where economists such as Hayek and Ludwig 
von Mises struggled to find a way to knit a war-torn continent back together.

What they came up with as a philosophy was neoliberalism, the idea being that if capital, goods, 
and people could more freely move across borders, conflict would be less likely.
Their ideas informed the creation of institutions such as the International Monetary Fund and the 
World Bank, which have since stopped working as well as they once did, in part
because the world was never quite as flat as New York Times columnist Tom Friedman would have had 
us believe. Capital, as always, moved faster than goods or people.

Gerstle does a particularly wonderful job of connecting the political and economic dots in that 
post 2000s era in the US, a complicated and fascinating time in which the sort of
a€oetechno-utopianisma€n exemplified by Friedmana€™ s book The World Is Flat (2005) collided with 
two ill-advised wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, as well as a Democratic
party in thrall to both Wall Street and Silicon Valley, the election of the first black president, 
an economic crash, and a political narrative a€” we must save banks but not
homeowners a€” that never quite added up to average voters.

While ita€™ s impossible to include every scintillating detail of the time in 300 pages (I craved 
even more on the existential splits between the neoliberal economic policy camp
exemplified by Alan Greenspan, Bob Rubin and Larry Summers, and others like former Clinton and 
Obama administration advisers including Robert Reich and Joe Stiglitz, who
worried about where it was all leading), Gerstle gets the broad brush strokes right. Low interest 
rates, financialisation, and Busha€™ s a€oeownership societya€D collided with
increasing California wealth, identity politics, and creative accounting of stock options to brew 
up our very own version of 1929, which was quickly followed by the ugly race and
class-dividing politics we have now.

Gerstle has a real genius for capturing political irony a€” how 1960s hippies turned into Bay Area 
libertarians, how increased access to credit hurt minorities most, how Democrat
Jimmy Carter was a deregulator, how individual a€cefreedoma€D to pursue prosperity might morph into 
terrible inequality and insecurity. But one such point he seems to have
missed is the way in which Reagan, whom he sees as the a€oeideological architecta€D of the past 
half century of neoliberalism, supported industrial policy, something Gerstle
either misses or doesna€™ t explore, and used state power in the form of things such as voluntary 
export agreements and anti-dumping duties to bolster American trade interests.

Of course, protectionism and neoliberalism can marry with particularly unfortunate results such as 
Trump, who slashed taxes even as he started a trade war with China. As Gerstle
points out towards the end of the book, the former president may have been a€oepushing on an open 
door,a€D in the sense that globalisation as wea€™ ve known it since the 1980s
started shifting after 2008, when both a€oeproducers and consumersa€C in various countries began 
a€oeto question the pursuit of a borderless worlda€D.

As The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order shows us, some of this reckoning is racist and 
xenophobic. Some of it is a necessary swinging of the economic pendulum back to a
happy medium. As we wait to see where it lands, Gerstlea€™ s history of where wea€™ ve been is 
essential reading for a post-neoliberal era.

The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Rise-Fall-Neoliberal-Order-America/dp/0197519644> by
Gary Gerstle, OUP A£21/$27.95,272 pages Rana Foroohar is the FTa€™ s global business columnist Join 
our online book group on Facebook at FT Books CafA©.

Subscribe now


Leave a comment

