Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

Subscribe now

4) Erica Handloff: Equitable Growth Responds to Passage of American Rescue Plan'. a€~Biden 
yesterday signed the American Rescue Plan, which provides $1.9 trillion in critical
public health investments to fight COVIDa€“19, support struggling families, and grant aid to 
states, localities, tribes, and territories. The Washington Center for Equitable Growth
commends Congress and the president for passing a federal rescue package that meets the scale of 
the problem and for taking steps to put our nation on a path to recovery that is
strong,  stable, and broadly shared. In particular, the plan provides a third round of critical 
relief checks in response to the coronavirus recession and extends enhanced
Unemployment Insurance, ensuring workers who have lost their jobs or had their hours cut will 
continue receiving the supplemental $300 per week through September 6. Research
supported                                                                                   by 
Equitable Growth shows that robust UI benefits and direct stimulus, scaled to meet economic needs, 
can help mitigate hardship for individuals and families while also
boosting the wider economy, preventing a more severe downturn. Also notable is the lawa€™ s 
commitment to invest so that our nation emerges from the coronavirus recession
stronger, more resilient, and more equitable. Key investments include: Nearly $100 billion to 
combat the public health crisisa€l $350 billion in funding for state and local
governmentsa€! More than $100 billion to expand and improve the Child Tax Credit and Earned Income 
Tax Credita€! $130 billion to help schools reopen safely and $45 billion

for child care reliefa€! $12 billion for nutritional assistance^! But while the investments made in 
the American Rescue Plan are at an appropriate scale given current conditions, a
growing body of research highlights the ongoing structural reforms that are necessary to address 
the underlying racial, climate, and economic crises laid all the more bare by the
coronavirus pandemica€! LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/press/equitable-growth-responds-to-passage-of-american-rescue-plan/>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Zeynep Tufekci: Aerosols: a€~Incredible New Zealand study on a mystery transmission in a 
quarantine hotel. For a while, a garbage can was suspecteda€”one of the very, very
few known suspected cases of fomite transmission. Turns outa€! ita€™ s aerosols. What a Kuhnian 
year this has beena€!. This year will clearly force an updating of our
understanding of role of aerosol transmission for respiratory pathogens. PLUS ita€™ s almost 
text-book Kuhnian in how ita€™ s happening: resistance, a€ceepicyclinga€O and
then   paradigm shift. Yes, feels like cold-comfort now as we are and have been late, but wea€™ re 
here. The new CDC director has already cited importance of aerosols as one of
things that most surprised hera€’’along with a good chunk of peoplea€!. Nothing wrong with a 
(sensible) amount of hand-washing but the issue is that our mitigations need a
hierarchy                                                                                  of 
energy and resources. Deep cleaning is still a big thing, parks/beaches are still shut down. 
Clearly a€’’very clearlya€”our stack was wrong-ordereda€!. Ita€™ s places
like Japan and South Korea and Hong Kong etc., whose scientists knew from day one that airborne 
transmission was a key routea€’’disregarding global official guidance
essentiallya€”that managed to beat back outbreaks to get back to near normalcya€!. Many had been 
through SARS and they have top-notch infectious disease specialists and
epidemiologist. Reading their documents from February/March of 2020 is mind-blowing. They went 
their own way. Ita€™ s all there. Ia€™ m still not sure why the global orgs
were so wrong on this. Did these countries have special institutional knowledge (e.g. from previous 
outbreaks) that just wasna€™t considered by the rest of the world? What
happened?a€! Sometimes people say a€oewait, doesna€™t everybody know airborne transmission is 
important?a€D If you follow the right experts on Twitter, I guess?

Meanwhile, a library in one of the highest-educated US counties is a€cequarantininga€D returned 
books for seven daysa€!
LINK: <

zeynep tufekci @zeynep

This is what Ia€™ ve heard from all over the US and most if the world, nonstop, for a year no 
wa€’’exceptions are countries that went their own way from very early on, on airborne
transmission risks, like Japan, Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea, etc.

chrisjohn @ chrisjohn,12345

@zeynep I have jury duty in Boston in May. Jury prep video emphasizes hand washing and special 
cleanings. I worked in that building and know that there is no outside air brought
in thru its HVAC. Fortunately I have N95s and have been vaxxed.

2:36 AM T™ Mar 22,2021

337Likes67Retweets

4) Economist: Small, Cheap Spy Satellites Mean Therea€™ s No Hiding Place: a€~Fleets of them will 
eavesdrop on every part of Eartha€™ s surface: In the middle of last year,
Ecuadorians watched with concern as 340 foreign boats, most of them Chinese, fished just outside 
the Exclusive Economic Zone (eez) around their countrya€™ s westernmost
province,   the Galapagos Islands. The law of the sea requires such vessels to carry gps-based 
automatic identification systems (ais) that broadcast where they are, and to keep those
systems switched on. Some boats, however, failed to comply. There were more than 550 instances of 
vessels not transmitting their locations for over a day. This regular radio
silence stoked fears that the boats concerned were sneaking into Ecuadora€™ s waters to plunder its 
fish. Both local officials and Chinaa€™ s ambassador to Ecuador denied this,
and  said all the boats were sticking to the rules. In October, however, HawkEye 360, a satellite 
operator based in Virginia, announced it had detected vessels inside Ecuadora€™ s
eez on 14 occasions when the boats in question were not transmitting ais (see map). HawkEyea€™ s 
satellites could pinpoint these renegades by listening for faint signals
emanating from their navigation radars and radio communications. HawkEyea€™ s satellites are 
so-called smallsats, about the size of a large microwave oven. They are therefore
cheap   to build and launch. HawkEye deployed its first cluster, of three of them, in 2018. They 
are now in an orbit that takes them over both of Eartha€™ s poles. This means that, as
the planet revolves beneath them, every point on its surface can be monitored at regular 
intervalsa€! LINK: <https://www.economist.com/science-and-

technology/2021/03/18/small-cheap-spv-satellites-mean-theres-no-hiding-place>

6) Heather Cox Richardson: March 19, 2021: a€~Asked about what happened at the Capitol on January 
6, 87% percent of Americans say it is either a€oevery importanta€D
(69%)                                                                                or 
a€oesomewhat importanta€D (18%) for law enforcement officials to find and prosecute the 
insurrectionists. Where those numbers fall apart is among Republicans who
believe that former president Trump won the 2020 electiona€l. 66% of people who believe that Trump 
won the election say that the riot at the Capitol is getting too much attention.
Eighty-two percent of them said Trumpa€™ s conduct leading up to the insurrection was not wrong and 
that the House should not have voted to impeach him. The danger of the
Big Liea€”the false idea that Trump actually won the 2020 electiona€”was always that it would 
convince Trump supporters to fight for him not because they thought they would be
fighting to overturn the U.S. government, but because they thought they would be defending ita€L 
The lawyer for Schaffer, the Indiana man, is trying to get leniency for his client
by arguing that the man was encouraged by Trump. a€oePeople have the right to believe the highest 
elected officiala€!. My client is not responsible for what happened on January
6a€Ua€! LINK: <https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.com/p/march-19-2021>

7) Sergei Guriev & Elias Papaioannou: The Enduring Populist Threat: a€~The a€cethema€D versus 
a€ceusa€D populist narrative does not capture merely a conflict between
haves and have-notsa€!. With so many populists still firmly in power, the notion that the trend 
will simply dissipate following Trumpa€™ s defeat seems like wishful thinking. In
fact, even in the US, Trumpa€™ s brand of right-wing populism has not been definitively 
repudiateda€!.. Economists often used a€oepopulisma€n as shorthand for a particular
brand of inefficient macroeconomic policya€!. Latin American-style left-wing populisma€! has 
largely been superseded by a right-wing variant with little fondness for


ivvjiOLiiuuLivv uvuiiviiiiv             Aviivpiivuiu iiciLiMiiaiioiii aim ivii^iuuo wiidvi 
vaiidiiiax-.i IVAVIILILJ aim iimiaiitj, HVJL viaddax>i. r upuiidio ouuoviiuv LU a ax>WLIIIII 
WIILVIvvi

ideologya€D that divides society into two a€oehomogenous and antagonistica€D groups: the pure 
people and the corrupt elitea€! a template into which one can force a worldview
or discourse. And it brooks no nuancea€!. The same groups that have lost their jobs in industries 
like manufacturing have been among the most likely to vote for populist leaders
and causes, not only in the US, but also in the UK and Western Europe. Nor is it a coincidence that 
support for populists surged after the 2008 global economic crisisa€l. Post-crisis
austerity only intensified votersa€™ resentmenta€!. The coronavirus pandemica€! could well fan the 
populist flamea€!. The a€cethema€D versus a€ceusa€D populist narrative
does   not capture merely a conflict between haves and have-nots. If it did, a cartoon plutocrat 
like Trump would not have been able to campaign as the voice of the peoplea€!.

Populism reflects the rejection ofa€! freedom of expression, environmental protection, gender 
equality, racial and cultural diversity, and tolerancea€!. Economic insecurity likely
compoundsa€! feelings of uncertainty and isolationa€!. The link between cultural and economic 
insecuritya€! may explain why immigration is so central to the modern populist
platforma€!. As for Trump, early evidence suggests that his policies did not have a profound 
economic impact. But, like many populists, he did mount attacks on institutions,
undermining confidence^! significantly undermined civility and trust, with its associated impact on 
productivity and well-beinga€!. Finally, there are the excess deaths caused by
Trumpa€™ s utter mishandling of the pandemic a€“ a failure so great that some accuse him of 
a€oepandemicidea€na€! LINK: <https://www.project-syndicate.org/onpoint/the-
enduring-populist-threat-by-sergei-guriev-and-elias-papaioannou-2021-03>

8) Matt Yglesias: Weekend Update, March 20: a€~Along the way Jude Doyle named me as one of several 
a€oepeople who actively hate trans people and women, argue ceaselessly
against our civil rights, and in many cases, have a public history of directly, viciously abusing 
trans people and/or cis women in their industry.a€D I objected on Twitter that I do

not in fact hate trans people or women, nor do I argue against their civil rights even 
sporadically, much less ceaselessly. Many people agreed with me, which was nice to see since
ita€™ s clearly true. Unfortunately, several other people argued that it was fine to write in a 
public forum that I a€oeargue ceaselesslya€D against civil rights for women and trans
people on the grounds that they find some other thing I did objectionable, or that some other parts 
of Doylea€™ s article are true. I reject this. People should write true things rather
than false thingsa€! LINK: <https://www.slowboring.eom/p/weekend-update-march-20>

