Subscribe now

CONDITION: Somewhat Annoyed at A34e a€oeGenerative AIa€D Hype:

When the very sharp Derek Thompson writes:

Derek Thomson: AI Is Coming for the Thought Leaders: a€~This year, wea€™ ve seen a flurry of AI 
products that seem to do precisely what the Oxford researchers considered nearly impossible: mimic 
creativitya€!. GPT-3a€!. DALL-E 2a€!. Midjourneya€!. Ia€™ ve been experimenting with various 
generative AI apps and programsa€!. For years, Ia€™ ve imagined a kind of disembodied brain that 
could give me plain­
language answers to research-based questions. Not linksa€\ or listsa€!. A toola€! already in 
development^! Consensusa€!. Type a research question in the search bara€! and the app combs through 
millions of papers and spits out the one-sentence conclusion from the most highly cited sourcesa€!. 
Consensus is part of a constellation of generative AI start-ups that promise to automateaC! 
reading, writing, summarizing,
drawing, painting, image editing, audio editing, music writing, video-game designing, blueprinting, 
and morea€!. Using AI to learn how experts work, so that the AI could perform the same work with 
greater speed. I came away from our conversation fixated on the idea that AI can master certain 
cognitive tasks by surveilling workers to mimic their taste, style, and outputa€!. So thata€™s what 
Id€™ ve been doing with my
career, I thought. Mindlessly constructing a training facility for someone elsea€TMs machinea€\. 
When the Vox reporter Kelsey Piper asked GPT-3 to pretend to be an AI bent on taking over humanity, 
she found that a€oeit played the villainous role with aplomba€Da€!

I say: Wait a minute! Thata€™ s not right! Noah Smith and Roon are right!a€D:

Noah Smith & Roon: Generative AI: autocomplete for everything: a€~No one knows, of course, but we 
suspect that AI is far more likely to complement and empower human workers than to impoverish them 
or displace them onto the welfare rollsa€!. Instead of replacing people entirelya€! technologies 
simply replaced some of the tasks they dida€!. As Noah likes to say, a€oeDystopia is when robots 
take half your jobs.
Utopia is when robots take half your job.a€Da€!

The current wave of generative AI does things very differently from humansa€!. Because of these 
differences, we think that the work that generative AI does will basically be a€oeautocomplete for 
everythinga€O. The most profoundly impactful generative AI application to come out thus far is a 
tool aptly called GitHub Copilota€!. Copilot is able to suggest the next few lines of code for a 
programmer based upon what he or
she has already writtena€!. Before a software engineer had to remember, search for, or infer all 
low level functionalities^!. They can now describe in plain language what they would like a snippet 
of their program to do, and if ita€™ s within the capacity of the language model, synthesize it 
from nothing!a€! Noah imagines that at some point, his workflow will look like this: First, hea€™ 
11 think about what he wants to say,
and type out a list of bullet points. His AI word processor will then turn each of these bullet 
points into a sentence or paragraph, written in a facsimile of Noaha€™ s traditional writing style. 
Noah will then go back and edita€!. Many artists will likely have a similar workflowa€!. The 
a€cesandwicha€D workflowa€!. A human has a creative impulse, and gives the AI a prompt. The AI then 
generates a menu of options. The
human then chooses an option, edits it, and adds any touches they like.a€!Just as some modern 
sculptors use machine tools, and some modern artists use 3d rendering software, we think that some 
of the creators of the future will learn to see generative AI as just another toola€’’something 
that enhances creativity by freeing up human beings to think about different aspects of the 
creation...

For a long, long time into the futurea€’’perhaps forevera€’’computers will be much better at 
generating options than at filtering and assessing them. Creativeity is not just generating 
alternatives, but figuring out which of them is the besta€”is what the author wanted, but did not 
initially know it.
Share

FOCUS: A Very Nice Review & Critique of Slouching Towards Utopia:

A very nice review and critique of Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> from the highly 
estimable Matt Klein:



REVIEW by Matt Klein of "Slouching Towards Utopia

a€g Matt Klein: "Slouching Towards Utopia" and "The Long 20th Century": a€~Brad Delong's new 
history makes an important point well, and gave me a lot of food for thought. But I have some 
quibbles: Certaia€!
Read more

2 months ago A- Brad DeLong
Some highlights:

Matt Klein: "Slouching Towards Utopia" and "The Long 20th Century": a€~I really liked this line 
(366): "There is no a priori reason to think that the economic organization best suited to 
inventing the industrial future should be the same as the one best suited to catching up to a known 
targetaCI"

rad DeLong's Grasping Reality


And:

And:

And:

Matt Klein: "Slouching Towards Utopia" and "The Long 20th Century": Brad Delong's new history makes 
an important point well, and gave me a lot of food for thoughta€!. [It] is an argument for 
recognizing how the world since 1870... above all is characterized by unprecedentedly rapid 
change... radically different than the world before 1870....

Matt Klein: "Slouching Towards Utopia" and "The Long 20th Century": The central paradox, for 
Delong, is that the growth in humanitya€™ s productive potential since 1870 should have been 
sufficient to create something like a a€ceutopiaa€D for everyone by now, at least by the standards 
of anyone alive in 1870a€!

Matt Klein: "Slouching Towards Utopia" and "The Long 20th Century": Yet despite the dramatic 
progress our species has experienced, we remain far from that ideal.... Our desires have grown to 
match our capabilities.... The gains... have not been distributed particularly evenly...

Here let me interrupt the flow of praise: My thumbnail description^’’which Bob Reich suggested to 
mea€”is that, while we have made extraordinary progress at figuring out how to bake a sufficiently 
large economic pie so that, potentially, everyone can have enough, the problems of slicing and 
tasting that economic pie have completely flummoxed us. Thus while we are rich and powerful beyond 
the wildest dreams of avarice of previous centuries,
that is all. We can neither equitably distribute our wealth nor properly utilize it to live wisely 
and well, so that people feel safe and secure, and live lives in which they are healthy and happy. 
To say a€oehave not been distributed particularly evenlya€D and a€oeour desires have growna€D 
catches only half of it. Distribution has not been inept, but has been positively poisonous. And 
utilization has fallen vastly short not just because of our rising
expectations: people 200 years ago would also have hoped along with us for a world in which they 
were not stalked by flying killer robots, and in which sinister people in steel and glass towers 
did not attempt to hypnotize them via dopamine loops to glue their eyes to screens in terror so 
they could be sold fake diabetes cures and crypto grifts.


Overall, I am of course very flattered by Matta€™ s high praise.

One of the greatest things about publishing this book is figuring out how many good-hearted friends 
willing to give attention and thought the book has turned out to havea€”and that I have turned out 
to have, for the book is me in a very real sense.
However, as I asked of Matt, then there is the a€ceBUT!a€D:

Matt Klein: "Slouching Towards Utopia11 and "The Long 20th Century": a€~But I have some quibbles:

[1] There is surprisingly little discussion of either industrial research labs or corporations. 
With remarkably few exceptions, we get almost no insight into how the post-1870 growth engine 
actually workeda€!

[2] Delonga€! identifiesa€! Joseph Schumpeter, Karl Popper, Peter Drucker, Michael Polanyi, Karl 
Polanyi, and Friedrich Hayek. (They stand in contrast to violent fantasists such as Hitler, Lenin, 
Mao, and Mussolini.)... Constrained by space, Delong decided to focus only on Hayek and Karl 
Polanyia€!. That fits well with Delonga€™ s focus on the conflicts over how to distribute the gains 
of the post-1870 windfall, but I
think it ended up detracting from some of his other arguments...

[3] The paucity of material about Canada, Europe, and Japan, especially after WWII, is 
unfortunate.... In general, I wish there were a lot more about Japan...

[4] I would have expected the chapter on WWII to highlight the Alliesa€™ material advantages and 
describe how the war was won thanks to superior industrial organization and scientific prowess... 
the Manhattan Project, Bletchley Park.  I also would have expected the ideas that Adam Tooze laid 
out so masterfully in The Wages of Destruction and The Deluge would have played a larger role in 
Delonga€™ s narrative of the

1920s-1940s. Germany was technologically underdeveloped and resource-poor...

[5] I wish the section on the Marshall Plan had mentioned the importance of the U.S. using currency 
aid to force the rest of western Europea€’’particularly Francea€”to accept the reality that West 
Germany needed to reindustrialize and become economically integrated with its neighborsa€!

[6] Speaking of which: there is almost no discussion of financial history and financial innovation 
in Slouching, except at the very end in the context of 2008a€!

[7] There was no mention of the provisional government in Russia that followed the February 
revolution...

[8] My other major criticism (I have a few narrower ones that I will mention lower down) is that I 
am not convinced that the a€oelong 20th centurya€D actually endeda€L [Perhaps] the agonizingly slow 
growth in the years after the global financial crisis represents a fundamental break in the trend 
towards ever-rising prosperity. But that is a claim one could have made just as well in the 
1930sa€”and it would have
turned out to have been wronga€!. While I am willing to believe that the a€oelong 20th centurya€D 
may have ended when Delong says it dida€”on the grounds that global growth has been much weaker 
than in the pasta€”I have little reason to believe that this sad state of affairs must persist..

[9] Climate change is a serious problem that had not received the attention it deserves until 
recently, but there is little reason to think that it is a serious impediment to the growth 
trajectory humanity has experienced since 1870....

[10] The section on the 1920s and the Great Depression gave too much credence to the 
Friedman-Schwartz view that the problem was tight monetary policy from the Federal Reserve, in my 
view. I would have preferred more of a discussion of the Eccles/Keynes/Kindleberger view that the 
problem was excessive debt, the imbalanced income distribution, and the decisions by the Bank of 
France and the Fed to sterilize gold
inflows...

[11] Delong has a throwaway comment that the slowdown in productivity growth (as opposed to total 
growth) since 1970 could be explained in part by the fact that a€oeenergy diverted away from 
producing more and into producing cleaner would quickly show up in lower wage increases and 
profitsa€D (431). Ia€™m not sure I buy this but I would have appreciated more of an explanation 
either way...

[12] Finally, I would have liked more on this (453): a€oelt is normal for a plutocratic elite, once 
formed, to use its political power to shape the economy to its own advantages. And it is normal for 
this to put a drag on economic growth. Rapid growth like that which occurred between 1945 and 1973, 
after all, requires creative destruction; and, because it is the plutocratsa€™ wealth that is being 
destroyed, they are unlikely to
encourage it.a€D A different version of the book would have used this to frame a long discussion of 
antitrust and public choice theory. More generally, I would love to know the extent to which the 
post-1870 boom was due to the suppression of this a€oenormala€n behavior. If so, what caused that? 
And how can we restore the dynamism and competition that Schumpeter recognized was so essential for 
progress?a€!

To [1] and [2} I plead guilty, and throw myself on the mercy of the court. In my minda€™ s eye, the 
book I would write written in letters of fire that directly inscribed their truth on the brain of 
the reader and so was a treasure for all time started from the claim that 1870 was the true hinge 
of history, and then went in three directions:

1. Backward from 1870 earlier in time to trace how it came about the 1870 was the hinge Dash and 
how, previously, there was no alternative hinge.

2. Forward from 1870 later in time to trace how the research lab-, corporation-, and global market 
economy-enabled discovery, development, deployment, and diffusion of technologies, 80 repeated, 
unprecedented, revolutionary, Schumpeterian creative-destruction pace worked itself it leading 
sector by leading sector and trailing sector by trailing sector.

3. Forward from 1870 later in time to trace the political-economy consequences for human society of 
this unprecedented advance toward technology revolution-driven material cornucopia.

Will MacAskilla€™ s What We Owe the Future book from Basic is 352 pages. Jacob Solla€™ s Free 
Market: The History of Ideas book from Basic is 336 pages. My book is 624 pages. I will not say 
that the memory of hearing my publisher scream in tears still rings in my ears. But I will say that 
asking Basic to sell a book this long in its usual excellent way is asking it to do a heavy lift, 
and taking it will out of its comfort zone.

In addition to the 624 pages published, there are another 400 odd pages on the cutting room floor, 
and there are notes, quotations, bullet points, and outlines for a further 500 pages. Maybe I could 
have delivered on my original plan if I had published the book in three volumes from a university 
press, but I really wanted Basica€™ s excellent marketing machine on my side. Probably I could not 
have delivered the larger opus: the difficulty of the
project goes with the square of the length.

So I am really sorry that I could not deliver, and that as a result of my failure Matt justly makes 
his criticisms [1] and [2].

(Parenthetically, I suspect Will MacAskill faced the same problem with his What We Owe the 
Futurea€’’too much to say, and it not being clear how to say it. His book reads to me like five 
60-page book prospectuses, each of which could have been 300 pages, stapled together. Not, I hasten 
to say, that it is not a very very good book: it is.)

I think Matta€™ s criticisms [3] through [7] are also valid. There should be more about Canada, 
Europe, and Japan, for while the U.S. was a€oethe furnace where the future was being forgeda€D my 
probably excessive focus on it as in some sense the leading point-guard of humanitya€™ s slouch 
towards utopia harmed the book. A greater share of my points could and should have been made by 
drawing examples from elsewhere in the global north
rather than falling-back on the U.S. examples with which I am most comfortable. Yes, Adam Toozea€™ 
s The Deluge and Wages of Destruction are magnificent accomplishments, so magnificent that I 
greatly envy the author, and I think it was the anxiety-of-influence (plus their existence) that 
kept a great deal of my 1920-1945 chapters from being simply regurgitated precises of Toozea€™ s 
artguments. (But, while Germany was resource-poor, I do
think he overstates the extent to which it was technologically underdeveloped for its day} More on 
how the U.S. imposed the mixed economy on western Europe after WWII and more on global finance as 
the nervous system of the globalized market economy would have improved the book. And, yes, 
Kerensky, Wladimir Woytinsky, and their gallant company of the democratic forces in Russia deserved 
a spotlight.

When it comes to Matta€™ s criticisms [8] through [10], however, I do want to push back: I really 
think that the Grand Narrative of the Long 20th Century is success at baking and failure at slicing 
and tasting a sufficiently large econoic pie, and that while we do not know what the Grand 
Narrative of the era that started sometime after 2000 will be, it will be something different. I do 
see fossil-fuel emissions-generated global warming as a huge
challenge not so much because of technocratic and geoengineering concerns but because of political 
economy concernsa€”and I note, in support of that belief, that Matt Klein cannot bring himself to 
say a€oeglobal warminga€d, let along a€oefossil-fuel emissions-generated global warmingaCD. As for 
the causes of the Great Depression, I see the Bank of France and the Federal Reserve as 
mediator-causes in the Friedman-Schwartz story, and debt
as   an accelerant of an ongoing process rather than as a spark.

And Matta€™ s [11] and [12] are not so much critiques, as calls for separate extra essays. Maybe I 
will write them.:-)
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Elon Musk Goes Full Conspiracy Theory on Us:

Josh Marshall has the receipt:

One particularly notable hint about the future came in a fractious
interaction on Wednesday when Musk rolled out his own antic

DolchstoElegende manque. In an exchange about advertiser


departures and alleged media bias, Musk claimed that he had cut a
deal with civil rights groups to create a “moderation council” but that
they had broken the deal.

Q 232             tl 399                  5,612           ,t,

Elon Musk 0

@elonmusk

Replying to @PatrickW @kylenabecker and ©Twitter

A large coalition of political/social activist groups
agreed not to try to kill Twitter by starving us of
advertising revenue if I agreed to this condition.

kn\/           fkn rlnnl


Perhaps needless to say, this did not happen. The reference is to a
chaotic meeting Musk held with a group of leaders of prominent civil
rights groups, including the NAACP and the ADL, on November 2nd.
Musk had actually announced the “moderation council” days earlier.

So even on its own terms the timeline doesn’t match up. We’re hardly
four weeks into the Elon era on Twitter and he’s already cueing up a
storyline in which he tried to placate the Blacks and the Jews and the

gays but they betrayed him and set out to “kill Twitter.”


Perhaps needless to say, this did not happen. The reference is to a
chaotic meeting Musk held with a group of leaders of prominent civil
rights groups, including the NAACP and the ADL, on November 2nd.
Musk had actually announced the “moderation council” days earlier.

So even on its own terms the timeline doesn’t match up. We’re hardly
four weeks into the Elon era on Twitter and he’s already cueing up a
storyline in which he tried to placate the Blacks and the Jews and the
gays   but they betrayed him and set out to “kill Twitter.”

Not pretty.

I do not see Muska€™ s tenure as Twitter paranoid chaos monkey going well at all.
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

