
Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Well, Paul Krugman now has a SubStack too. Resistance is futile. We have been assimilated: Paul 
Krugman: Stagflation Revisited LINK: https://paulkrugman.substack.com/p/stagflation-revisited

• What I am using to keep track myself of the macroeconomic course of the coronavirus plague 
depression. Useful for keeping the entire thing in perspective: FRED: DeLonga€™ s COVID
Dashboard LINK: https://research.stlouisfed.org/dashboard/56322

•  Jeff Horwitz: Facebook Knew Calls for Violence Plagued a€~Groups,a€™ Now Plans Overhaul'. a€~The 
giant struggled to balance Mark ZuckerbergaC™ s free-expression mantra against findings that rabid
partisanship had overrun a feature central to its futurea€! LINK: https ://www.wsj 
.com/articles/facebook-kne 
w-calls-for-violence-plagued-groups-now-plans-overhaul-11612131374?mod=djemalertNEWS

•  Noah Smith: Innovation: It Takes a Village: a€~Agarwal, Ganguli, Gaule and Smitha€! how powerful 
that communal production process isa€!. Conditional on teenage math test performancea€! people are 
six
times as productive when they immigrate to the U.Sa€!. Six times!! For scientific publications, 
immigrants to America are four times as productive as stayers, and twice as productive as 
immigrants to the U.K.
and other rich countries. That means, first of all, that there is something very special about the 
U.Sa€! LINK: https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/innovation-it-takes-a-village

• Well worth watching, and it is probably a sign that I am a shallow person that I did not switch 
this out with the video of SubStack honcho Chris Best: Gareth Bran wen: Rashida Tlaiba€™ s 
Emotional Speech
about the Jan 6th Attack LINK: 
https://boingboing.net/2021/02/06/rashida-tlaibs-emotional-speech-about-the-ian-6th-attack.html

•  Something I did not know that I wanted, but am now very, very happy to have: Historical 
Dictionary of Science Fiction LINK: https ://sfdictionary .com/

•  I confess I still do not know what to really think about SubStack. It is a weblog. It is a 
weblog constrained in format. And it is a weblog that is not bashful but rather very aggressive 
about tipjars and paid-
subscription-only content. And it is a weblog that doesna€™ t wait passively for you to surf to it 
or give you a little RSS ping, but instead opens the basement window, climbs into the house, and 
perches itself at
your   dining room table eating potato chips via its arrival in your grand todo list that is your 
email inbox. Is this social engineering to try to counter the Twitterization of the world? I have 
to think more about this.

• Meanwhile, some SubStacks: Noah Smith 
https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/larry-summers-misplaced-stimulus I Matt Yglesias 
https://www.slowboring.eom/p/biden-popularitv I Joshua
Gans https://ioshuagans.substack.eom/p/new-book-the-pandemic-information I Hamish McKenzie 
https://blog.substack.eom/p/welcome-facebook-and-twitter-seriouslv I John

Ganz https://johnganz.substack.eom/p/from-republic-to-reaction I Emily Atkin 
https://heated.world/p/bring-in-the-climate-clowns I Scott Alexander 
https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/ontologv-of-
psychiatric-conditions-34e

Share

Seven Paragraphs

Wendy Edelberg & Louise Sheiner: A Macroeconomic Analysis of a Senate Republican COVID Relief 
Package: a€~Ten Senate Republicans recently proposed a $618-billion COVID relief package. In this 
piece, we provide
an analysis of that package and update our analysis of the Biden Administration^™ s $1.9 trillion 
fiscal package, using the current-law GDP projections that the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) 
released on Monday. We
estimate that the Republican plan would raise the level of real (inflation adjusted) gross domestic 
product (GDP) by 1.6 percent in the fourth quarter of 2021 and 0.8 percent in the fourth quarter of 
2022, above the baseline
level  that CBO projects under current law (which assumes no additional fiscal support). This would 
leave GDP about 0.8 percent below its pre-pandemic trajectory at the end of both and 2021 and 2022, 
but a touch above
CBOa€™ s estimate of potential GDPa€”the maximum sustainable level of outputa€! LINK: 
https://www.hamiltonproject.Org/blog/a macroeconomic_analysis_of_a_senate republican_covid relief 
package

Wikipedia: Trimalchio: a€~His full name is a€oeGaius Pompeius Trimalchio Maecenatianusa€D; the 
references to Pompey and Maecenas in his name serve to enhance his ostentatious character. His 
wifea€™ s name is
Fortunata, a former slave and chorus girl. Trimalchio is known for throwing lavish dinner parties, 
where his numerous servants bring course after course of exotic delicacies, such as live birds sewn 
up inside a pig, live birds
inside fake eggs which the guests have to a€oecollecta€n themselves, and a dish to represent every 
sign of the zodiac. The Satyricon has a lengthy description of Trimalchioa€™ s proposed tomb 
(71a€“72), which is
ostentatious and lavish. This tomb is to be designed by a well-known tomb-builder called Habinnas, 
who is among the revellers present at Trimalchioa€™ s feast. He seeks to impress his guestsa€”the 
Roman nouveau riche,
mostly freedmena€”with the ubiquitous excesses seen throughout his dwelling. By the end of the 
banquet, Trimalchioa€™ s drunken showiness leads to the entire household acting out his funeral, 
all for his own amusement
and egotisma€! LINK: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trimalchio

Simon Kuper: How to Save the World from Long Covid: a€~Where we might be a year from now, two main 
scenariosa€!. Good: Covida€“19 keeps circulating but loses its sting. Most people in rich 
countries, and the most
vulnerable in developing countries, get vaccinated in 2021. The vaccines prevent disease caused by 
all strains. Covida€“19 weakens: once it finds potential victims protected either by vaccination or 
past infection, it becomes
at  worst a nasty colda€!. But there a€™ s another scenario, less likely yeta€! momentousa€!. 
Vaccine-resistant mutations cause years of mass death, repeated lockdowns, economic disaster and 
political dysfunction. What
determines which one comes true? Precedent favours the benign outcomea€!. Even as mutations emerge, 
previous vaccines and infections should confer enough immunity to protect us at least from severe 
diseasea€!. Yet the
malign scenario remains plausiblea€!. New variants have appeared fasta€!. Imagine a pandemic that 
lasts years, killing millions. Whole sectorsa€! could collapse. So might democracies, as isolated 
people mainline
conspiracy theories in their bedroomsa€!. A few countriesa€”New Zealand, Australia, Taiwan, Vietnam 
a€” would become oases besieged by would-be immigrants. To avoid global long Covid, states need to 
hurry. The
quicker humanity achieves herd immunity, the less time the virus has to mutate beyond controla€! 
LINK: https://www.ft.com/content/92eb314b-bc5!-4356-b873-ed58ad26d25c

Wikipedia: List of Saga Characters: a€~Lying Cat: First appearance: Chapter 1: Lying Cat is a 
large, female talking feline companion to The Will who aids him in his work. Green in color with 
yellow stripes, she has the
ability to detect when a verbal statement is a lie, which she indicates by saying, a€ceLyinga€D. 
Her power is limited to the state of the mind of the person speaking: She can detect deliberate 
deceptiona€!. Lying Cats always
play by the rules, an allusion to the fact that a Lying Cat must also admit ethical truths as well 
as factual onesa€!. A line of T-shirts featuring Lying Cat have been produced, and have become 
visible in popular media. In
a€oePac-Man Fevera€D, the April 24,2013 episode of the American TV series Supernatural, the 
character Charlie Bradbury (played by Felicia Day) is seen wearing a Lying Cat T-shirt. Day, who 
has referred to Saga as the
a€oebest comic EVERa€D, indicated that show writer Robbie Thompson picked out the shirt. Skybound 
Entertainment has also produced an 8a€oe tall resin statue of the character, and a posable, 19-inch 
tall plushy doll of it
that says, a€EILying" when its collar is presseda€! LINK: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of 
Saga_characters

Heather Cox Richardson: February 5, 202la€” Letters from an American: a€~This ideaa€”that the U.S. 
must reform its own society in order to extend the principles of democracy overseasa€”was precisely 
the argument
Theodore Roosevelt and other reformers made in the late 1890s when they launched the Progressive 
Era. When Roosevelt became president in 1901, he used this rationale to take the government out of 
the hands of business


mostly freedmena€”with the ubiquitous excesses seen throughout his dwelling. By the end of the 
banquet, Trimalchioa€™ s drunken showiness leads to the entire household acting out his funeral, 
all for his own amusement

and egotisma€! LINK: https ://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trimalchio

Simon Kuper: How to Save the World from Long Covid\ a€~Where we might be a year from now, two main 
scenariosa€!. Good: Covida€“19 keeps circulating but loses its sting. Most people in rich 
countries, and the most
vulnerable in developing countries, get vaccinated in 2021. The vaccines prevent disease caused by 
all strains. Covida€“19 weakens: once it finds potential victims protected either by vaccination or 
past infection, it becomes
at  worst a nasty colda€!. But there a€™ s another scenario, less likely yeta€! momentousa€!. 
Vaccine-resistant mutations cause years of mass death, repeated lockdowns, economic disaster and 
political dysfunction. What
determines which one comes true? Precedent favours the benign outcomea€!. Even as mutations emerge, 
previous vaccines and infections should confer enough immunity to protect us at least from severe 
diseasea€!. Yet the
malign scenario remains plausiblea€!. New variants have appeared fasta€!. Imagine a pandemic that 
lasts years, killing millions. Whole sectorsa€! could collapse. So might democracies, as isolated 
people mainline
conspiracy theories in their bedroomsa€!. A few countriesa€”New Zealand, Australia, Taiwan, Vietnam 
a€” would become oases besieged by would-be immigrants. To avoid global long Covid, states need to 
hurry. The
quicker humanity achieves herd immunity, the less time the virus has to mutate beyond controla€! 
LINK: https://www.ft.com/content/92eb314b-bc5 !-4356-b873-ed58ad26d25c

Wikipedia: List of Saga Characters'. a€~Lying Cat: First appearance: Chapter 1: Lying Cat is a 
large, female talking feline companion to The Will who aids him in his work. Green in color with 
yellow stripes, she has the
ability to detect when a verbal statement is a lie, which she indicates by saying, a€oeLyinga€D. 
Her power is limited to the state of the mind of the person speaking: She can detect deliberate 
deceptiona€!. Lying Cats always
play by the rules, an allusion to the fact that a Lying Cat must also admit ethical truths as well 
as factual onesa€!. A line of T-shirts featuring Lying Cat have been produced, and have become 
visible in popular media. In
a€oePac-Man Fevera€D, the April 24,2013 episode of the American TV series Supernatural, the 
character Charlie Bradbury (played by Felicia Day) is seen wearing a Lying Cat T-shirt. Day, who 
has referred to Saga as the
a€oebest comic EVERa€D, indicated that show writer Robbie Thompson picked out the shirt. Skybound 
Entertainment has also produced an 8a€oe tall resin statue of the character, and a posable, 19-inch 
tall plushy doll of it
that says, a€EILying" when its collar is presseda€! LINK: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List of 
Saga characters

Heather Cox Richardson: February 5, 202la€” Letters from an American: a€~This ideaa€”that the U.S. 
must reform its own society in order to extend the principles of democracy overseasa€”was precisely 
the argument
Theodore Roosevelt and other reformers made in the late 1890s when they launched the Progressive 
Era. When Roosevelt became president in 1901, he used this rationale to take the government out of 
the hands of business
interests and use it to protect ordinary Americans. Roosevelt argued that the government must clean 
up the cities, educate children, protect workers and consumers, support farmers, and make business 
pay its fair share. Biden
shared his own list on Thursday: ending the so-called Muslim ban, reversing the ban on transgender 
troops, defending the free press, respecting science, addressing systemic racism and white 
supremacy, and rebuilding the
economy. a€oeAll this matters to foreign policy ,a€D he said, a€oebecause when wea€! rally the 
nations of the world to defend democracy globally, to push backa€! authoritarianisma€™ s advance, 
wea€™ll be a much more
credible partner because of these efforts to shore up our own foundationsa€Da€! LINK: 
https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.com/p/february-5-2021

Scott Lemieux: Anatomy of a Sedition: a€~As Isaac Chotiner observes, the game here seems to be for 
McConnell to pretend to be a complete moron and for the [New York Times] reporters [Jim Rutenberg, 
Jo Becker, Eric
Lipton, Maggie Haberman, Jonathan Martin, Matthew Rosenberg and Michael S. Schmidt] to pretend to 
believe him, because he thinks the babe-in-the-woods-routine will play better than his cynical 
nihilism. Still, they end
up twisting the knife in him pretty well by the enda€!. a€oeMcConnell moved to bring the curtain 
down. He called the presidentaC™ s chief of staff, Mr. Meadows, to say that he would be 
acknowledging Mr. Biden as
president-electa€!. McConnell had been holding off in part because of the earlier assurances from 
Mr. Meadows and Mr. Kushnera€!. Yet even now, the president was refusing to concedea€L Perhaps most 
important in Mr.
McConnella€™   s evolving calculus, internal polls were showing that the Republicansa€™ strongest 
argument in the Georgia runoffs was that a Republican-led Senate would be a necessary check on a 
newa€”and
inevitablea€’’Democratic administrationa€!a€D Amazing coincidence that Mitch would suddenly realize 
that Jared Kushner would not, in fact, have a Moderating Influence on his father-in-law at the 
exact time that polls
suggested       that Trumpa€™ s ongoing election theft efforts were making winning the Georgia 
runoffs less rather than more likely! We also shouldna€™ t forget the other elite and elitish 
Republicans who were in on it from the
beginning .a€! Newt Gingricha€!. Kevin McCarthy a€! LINK: 
https://www.lawyersgunsmonevblog.com/2021/02/anatomy-of-a-sedition

Charlie Sykes: In Praise of Secret Ballots: a€~House Republicans voted overwhelmingly (145a€“61) to 
keep Liz Cheney in her leadership position; latera€! overwhelmingly to support the bigoted 
conspiracy theorist,
Marjorie Taylor Greene. The difference, of course, is that one vote was secret; the other onea€! in 
the eyes of God, Trump, and the GOP base. The result is incoherent and unsustainable, but ita€™ s 
also a stark reminder of
the   gap between what Republicans say in private versus what they do in public. The good news is 
that there is still a residue of conscience and rationality in the GOP. The bad news is that their 
courage depends on anonymity,
which means that it is not courage at all. (And it raises the question: what would the vote to 
impeach have been if it had been a secret ballot?)a€! [The Cheney vote] was a surprising and, in 
many ways, staggering defeat for
Trump World and the Sedition Caucus. Trump himself had reportedly been making calls, and the 
drumbeat to dump Cheney had been picked up by Fox News hosts, and members of the disgraced 
ex-presidenta€™ s family. In
the end, they were able to muster less than a third of the GOP caucusa€!. During the closed door 
meeting, Cheney herself refused to back down or apologize for voting to impeach Trump. According to 
the Dispatch, she said:
a€oeSeveral members have asked me to apologize for the vote, theya€™ ve asked my colleagues who 
also voted to impeach to apologize for the vote. I owe you honesty, I owe you the truth, I cannot 
do that. It was a vote of
conscience. It was a vote of principlea€”a principle on which I stand and still believe. Some 
people have said I should apologize for my statement or for the timing or for the content of it, 
and I tell you again, I cannot do that.
I  believe that my oath, I believe that all of our oaths, is more important than politics or 
partisanship or political pressurea€Ua€!. GOP voters are still far more comfortable with Q than 
Cheney. By a lot. Via Axios:
"Republican respondents are three times as likely to say their views align with Greene than with 
Cheney, but nearly one-third say they dona€™t align with either, and half say they dona€™t know 
enough to saya€!

LINK: https://morningshots.thebulwark.eom/p/in-praise-of-secret-ballots

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

