I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the
group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: Tim Burke Is Profoundly Annoyed by AHA President James Sweet:

Advertisement for a Runaway Slave

[7 September 1769]

UN away from the subscriber in Albemarle, a Mulatto slave called Sandy,
about 35 years of age, his stature is rather low, inclining to corpulence,
and  his complexion light; he is a shoemaker by trade, in which he uses
his left hand principally, can do coarse carpenters work, and is

something of a horse jockey; he is greatly addicted to drink, and when drunk is
insolent and disorderly, in his conversation he swears much, and his behaviour
is artful and knavish. He took with him a white horse, much scarred with

traces, of which it is expected he will endeavour to dispose; he also carried his
shoemakers tools, and will probably endeavour to get employment that way. Whoever conveys the
said slave to me in Albemarle, shall have 40 s. reward, if taken up within the county, 41. if
elsewhere within the colony, and 101. if in any other colony, from

THOMAS JEFFERSON.

Here we are:

Timothy Burke: The Read: Past Presentism 
<https://timothyburke.substack.eom/p/the-read-past-presentism>: d~Friday's Child Is Still Thinking 
About James Sweet's AHA Addressd!. Sweet writes, dceThis new history often ignores the values and 
mores of people in their own times, as well as change over timed!. This sameness is ahistorical, a
proposition that might be acceptable if it produced positive political results. But it doesnd™ td!. 
[It] requires us to interpret elements of the past not through the optics of the present but within 
the worlds of our historical actorsd!. When we foreshorten or shape history to justify rather than 
inform contemporary political positions, we not only
undermine the discipline but threaten its very integrity d Id Dd™

In my experienced! [this position] most often arises as an objection to judging the slave-owning 
leaders of the early American republic by contemporary standards, but it is also a highly mobile 
objection applied tod! Roman spectators watching gladiatorial combat, Aztec sacrificial rites, 
classical Greek pederasty, public executions in early modern
Britain, colonial conquest and genocide.  Itd™ s hard to say doewell, the Founding Fathers were 
just different, it was a different timed □ and yet say, doeLetd™ s go read the Federalist Papers 
and learn some valuable things about our government todaydD Itd™ s harder to invoke the presumptive 
alterity of Thomas Jeffersond™ s moral

thought and yet read his own words and see that he himself was uncomfortably aware of his 
contradictions. Still more to see that some of his contemporaries were profoundly aware of his 
contradictions and called him out.  If you want to make the past out to be so foreign a country 
that we must approach it as alien and unknown (save for the labor of

expert historians), you dond™ t get to say doewell, except for this and that and that, which are in 
fact quite easily understood by contemporary people and very relatabledD. That, dear friends, is a 
political move and I dond™ t particularly care for the politics in it...

Let me dig in a bit deeper here, right on the specific case that I think is troubling Sweetd™ s 
mind the most, in the strange middle of his address, where positions himself and proper-thinking 
historians. between two oddly drawn extremes: American conservative culture warriors on one hand 
and on the other Black people on heritage tours, Black

intellectuals shaping the 1619 Project, and Black actors and creators making the upcoming film 
doeThe Woman KingdD, about the kingdom of Dahomey in West Africa at the height of the slave 
trade...

Game and set to Tim Burke.

We want to understand our past. We want to utilize our past. And the past is another country: they 
do things differently there.


If people in the past are so completely alien to us that we cannot empathize with and ourselves, 
with our emotions and perspectives, try to enter in, understand, and judge their thoughts and 
actionsa€”well, then the past is merely a set of curiosities. In that case, James, sweet should 
step down and go to the back of the line to join the videos of dogs walking on two legs on Tik-
Tok.

But it is false to claim that people in the past are so completely alien to us. Rather, they were, 
like we are, greedy, nasty, selfish, brave, noble, and thoughtful. They dazzle us with their 
insights. They appall us with their blindnesses. Their different places from which they stand give 
us access to parallax with which we can see things in three dimensions.
If                                                                                                  
                                                            you say that Thomas Jefferson had 
different a€oevalues and moresa€D, and that to judge him is to do the bad thing of a€ reinterpret 
[ing] elements of the past not through the optics of the presenta€n, you are then truly stupid. 
Thomas Jefferson knew what he was doing, and wrote:

indeed I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just: that his justice cannot sleep for 
evera€!. A revolution of the wheel of fortunea€! may become probable by supernatural interference! 
The Almighty has no attribute which can take side with us in such a contesta€!

Thomas Jefferson was also such a powerful voice that slaveholder confederates had to try to destroy 
his authority. And not just confederates. Northern Democratic-Party Senator John Pettit of 
free-state Indiana, for example, in 1854:

It is alleged that all men are created equala€!. It is not true in facta€! physically, mentally, or 
morallya€!. I hold it to be a self-evident liea€!. The slave in the Southa€! with but little over 
half the volume of brain that attaches to the northern European racea€!. You tell me that the 
native African, upon his burning sands, and in his native wilderness, is
my equal, and I hesitate not to hoota€!. It is not true that even all persons of the same race are 
created equala€!. Are you the equal of the man who daily and nightly wallows in the gutter, and 
vomits upon all?a€!. If you are, you are not minea€!


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

One Poem:

Bertholt Brecht:

Who built seven-gated Thebes?

The books are filled with names of kings.

Was it the kings who hauled the craggy blocks of stone?

And Babylon, so many times destroyed.

Who built the city up each time? In which of Lima's houses.
That city glittering with gold, lived those who built it?

In the evening when the Chinese wall was finished
Where did the masons go? Imperial Rome

Is full of arcs of triumph. Who reared them up? Over whom
Did the Caesars triumph? Byzantium lives in song.

Were all her dwellings palaces? And even in Atlantis of the legend
The night the seas rushed in,

The drowning men still bellowed for their slaves.

Young Alexander conquered India.
He alone?

Caesar beat the Gauls.

Was there not even a cook in his army?

Phillip of Spain wept as his fleet

was sunk and destroyed. Were there no other tears?
Frederick the Greek triumphed in the Seven Years War.
Who triumphed with him?

Each page a victory

At whose expense the victory ball?
Every ten years a great man,

Who paid the piper?

Sn manv nArti ml .


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Eric Berger: Europe Is Seriously Considering a Major Investment in Space-Based Solar Power 
<https://arstechnica.com/science/2022/08/european-space-chief-says-continent-will-lead-in-space-base
d-solar-power/>

• David Glasner: Robert Lucas and Real Business-Cycle Theory 
<https://uneasymoney.com/2022/08/17/robert-lucas-and-real-business-cycle-theory/>

• Panio Gianopoulos: The Next Big Idea Cluba€™ s September 2022 Nominees 
<https://nextbigideaclub.com/magazine/next-big-idea-clubs-september-2022-nominees/35222/>

•  Paul Krugman: Why We Dona€™ t Have a Carbon Tax 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nytimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&campaign 
id=116&emc=edit _pk 20220816&instance id=69451&nl=paul-krugman&productCode=PK&regi 
jd=64675225&segment id=101527&te=l&uri=nyt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2Fdeabffca-eb9c-50f6-92f2-
59dbef0da68d&user id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>: a€~Therea€™ s still a good case for giving 
people a direct financial incentive to limit emissions, and such a thing may become politically 
possible as the economy decarbonizes and green energy becomes a more powerful interest group. For 
now, however, wea€™re tackling climate change with
carrots,      not sticks, with subsidies, not taxes. And thata€™ s OKa€!

• Emma Goldman: Anarchism and Other Essays 
<https://theanarchistlibrary.Org/library/emma-goldman-anarchism-and-other-essays#toc3>

• Elvia Limon: U.S. Imposes New Restrictions as Talks on Colorado River Water Grow Heated 
<https://www.latimes.com/world-nation/newsletter/2022-08-17/colorado-river-new-water-restriction-tod
ays-headlines-newsletter-todays-headlines7utm id=64652&sfmc id=625826>

• Robert Kuttner: Free Markets, Besieged Citizens 
<https://www.nvbooks.com/articles/2022/07/21/free-markets-besieged-citizens-gerstle-kuttner/>

• Greg Payne: What It Means Now that the Inflation Reduction Act Has Been Signed into Law 
<https://www.kctv5 
.com/2022/08/17/what-it-means-now-that-inflation-reduction-act-has-been-signed-into-law/>
Leave a comment

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Zvi Mowshowitz: CDC Admits Mistakes

Don't Worry About the Vase

Covid 8/18/22: CDC Admits Mistakes

Two Covid-related things happened this week that I did not expect. The CDC admitted that it had 
failed us during the pandemic, withdrew at long last many of its remaining recommendations and 
promised reforms to be less academic and otherwise do bettera€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 3 likes A- 13 comments A- Zvi Mowshowitz


uuiii A I vvuiiiuii.           inuot VX«-A WJ x rymv/

Don't Worry About the Vase

Covid 8/18/22: CPC Admits Mistakes

Two Covid-related things happened this week that I did not expect. The CPC admitted that it had 
failed us during the pandemic, withdrew at long last many of its remaining recommendations and 
promised reforms to be less academic and otherwise do bettera€!

Read more

6 months ago A- 3 likes A- 13 comments A- Zvi Mowshowitz

• Matthew Yglesias: What's Long-Term About d€ceLongtermism"?


Slow Boring

What's long-term about "longtermism"?

I never know how much to worry about the names of things. Ita€™ s pretty clear, for example, that 
the conservative movement in the United States is not just the name of people who really like the 
status quo. When the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wadea€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 98 likes A- 309 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Get 50% off for 1 year

AJs:

The field of discussion here is William MacAskilla€™s quite good new book, What We Owe the Future 
<https://www.basicbooks.com/titles/william-macaskill/what-we-owe-the-future/9781541618633/>, which 
was published on August 16. It consists 3/4 of very good and clever observations about how a 
benevolent human interested in making a difference should acta€”
work                                                                                                
                                                                        on problems that are 
contingent, in that a small group of people can make a difference; significant, in that making a 
difference matters; and persistent, in that the difference made will attenuate only very slowly, or 
even compound. I am impressed by his command of history and politics, and by his ability to write a 
comprehensible prA©cis of much of the work of Derek
Parfit.

I find myself more skeptical of his belief that we ought to transfer wealth to and focus our energy 
on the future, as that is where we can do the most good. MacAskill thinks that the future will have 
little ability to revise itself according to its knowledge and powers, but will rather be set in 
stone by decisions we make in our generation. And he thinks that the most powerful
dimension on which it will be set in stone is in its moral philosophy. Hence not only are we 
special people with unique powers and influence, but among us moral philosophers are very special 
people with immense powers and influence never to be matched in all of future history.

Right.

Worry about, and action to benefit, the future does not crowd out, much, action to benefit the 
present. But when I look at the people where our help now could do the most good, I see the bottom 
billion here and now and the other six billion of the non-top billion today as those on whom we 
should focus our altruism, not people in the constellation Cygnus in 50000 years.

And even though I live on the fringes of Silicon Valley, I never understand the chain of logic by 
which people make the hard turn into a€oerapture of the nerdsa€D and a€oeRokoa€™ s basiliska€D 
territory which the book makes a quarter of the way into its text. Here I think Matt has it right: 
there is certainly a book to be written about Al-threat. There is certainly a book to be
written about Longtermism. They are not the same booka€”save for the fact that Longtermists, like 
all other people, think that the extinction of the human species within our own expected natural 
lifetimes is something we should take substantial care to avoid. Yet the Longtermist book, and the 
Al-threat book, and several other books are mashed together in a short book. And
that means that each piece of it leaves me unsatisfied, and wanting more:

Matthew Yglesias: What's Long-Term About a€oeLongtermisma€m:


Slow Boring

What's long-term about "longtermism"?

I never know how much to worry about the names of things. Ita€™ s pretty clear, for example, that 
the conservative movement in the United States is not just the name of people who really like the 
status quo. When the Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wadea€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 99 likes A- 309 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

a€~a€oeLongtermist[s]a€n.  The claim theya€™re making is that there is a significant chance that 
current AI research programs will lead to human extinction within the next 20 to 40 yearsa€!. The 
salient thing about this claima€”a€oemalevolent Ais will probably take over the world before your 
new roof needs to be replaceda€Da€”is that if

ita€™ s true, ita€™ s obviously very important regardless of your value system.... The outcome of 
growing E[ffective ]A[ltruist] interest in longtermism was... a€oethey identified what they believe 
is a high probability short-term riska€D...

I confess that I was totally flummoxed in the 1980s when RBC a€oetheoristsa€n took a prediction 
error, called it a variable, but it on the right-hand side of equations, and claimed to have 
a€cefita€D the a€cedataa€O and to a€ ce under st and a€D business cycles. I was even more flummoxed 
when they then stopped: rather than digging into the R&D- and the production-side
determinants of shifts in technology, they declared any attempt to measure a€cetechnologya€D other 
than as some kind of aggregate Solow residual to be out-of-bounds. This seemed to me to be neither 
theory nor measurement but only ideology of a particularly bizarre and pointless kind.

The terrible thing was that it did have a material and damaging impact on the worlda€™ s response 
to the financial crisis that triggered the Great Recession.
Moral RBC theorists should long since have given all they have to the poor, and taken up lives of 
anonymous service to others:

David Glasner: Robert Lucas and Real Business-Cycle Theory 
<https://uneasvmonev.com/2Q22/Q8/17/robert-lucas-and-real-business-cycle-theorv/>: a€~Lucasian 
macroeconomics gained not only ascendance, but dominance, on the basis of conceptual and 
methodological misunderstandings. The continued dominance of the offspring of the early
Lucasian theories has been portrayed as a scientific advance by Lucas and his followers. In fact, 
the theories and the supposed methodological imperatives by which they have been justified are 
scientifically suspect because they rely on circular, question-begging arguments and reject 
alternative theories based on specious reductionist argumenta€!

Give a gift subscription
Get a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the
group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


Subscribe now

