Very Briefly Noted:

• An aggressive rewrite of C.S. Lewisa€™ s The Last Battle'. a€oeonce a queen in Narnia, always a 
queen in Narniaa€D: Matt Mikalatos: The Problem(s) of Susan <https ://w ww.tor.com/2Q21 
/05/12/the-problems-
of-susan/>

• Brendan Murray & c.: Inflation Rate 2021 & Shortages: Companies Panic Buying as Supplies Run 
Short 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-Q5-17/inflation-rate-2Q21-and-shortages-companies-
panic-buying-as-supplies-run-short>


• Popehat: a€™ I had forgotten that 73 years ago, when South Pacific debuted, its rather mildly 
stated anti-racist themes were attacked as anti-American and communist-inspired, and were met with 
performative
legislation. Hmma€l <https://twitter.com/Popehat/status/1393992295834263554>

• Cosma Shalizi (2009): On the Certainty of the Bayesian Fortune-Teller 
<http://bactra.0rg/webl0g/612 .html>

•  Olivier Blanchard (2016): Rethinking Macro Policy: Progress or Confusion? 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2016/05/weekend-reading-olivier-blanchard-rethinking-macro-policy-p
rogress-or-
confusion.html>

Paragraphs:

Noah Smith: Yes, Lockdowns Were Good: a€~On the Left, many supported lockdowns, except when it came 
to protests (fortunately we lucked out when outdoor spread turned out to be very rare)a€!. 
Governors of
a€cebluea€D statesa€! were obviously anxious to minimize lockdowns in order to protect their 
economies (which actually doesna€™t work)a€!. Americans generally resisted lockdowns. And mobility 
data show that
Americans didna€™t even really follow the weak, patchy, and temporary lockdowns we put in place. So 
this entire post is a moot point. Lockdowns failed. A bunch of us died, until eventually we got 
vaccinesa€!. But now
that   the evidence is in, I feel a strange desire to set the record straighta€!. Lockdowns reduced 
transmission of the coronavirus. Some types of social distancing restrictions are more effective 
than others, and some sub­
populations benefit more than others, but overall, lockdowns did limit the spread and saved 
livesa€!. What did lockdown do to the economy?a€! Lo and behold, when we look at evidence, we find 
that lockdowns accounted
for   only a small percent of the economic slowdowna€!. Denmark locked down and saw its economic 
activity decline by 29%; Sweden chose not to lock down, and saw its economic activity decline by 
25%. The biggest
economic destroyer by far was not government policy; it was fear of COVIDa€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/yes-lockdowns-were-good>

Steve Matthews: Fed Officials Have Six Reasons to Bet Inflation Spike Will Pass: a€~Acceleration in 
U.S. price growth this year will have a€oeonly transitory effects on underlying inflation,a€D Fed 
Vice Chair Richard
Clarida said Wednesday. Governor Lael Brainard said the day before that officials should be 
a€oepatient though the transitory surge .a€D Powell has made the same argumenta€!. Measures of 
expected inflation suggest price
gainsa€! [after] the next year or soa€! [will] drop back to more normal levelsa€!.. Powell saida€! 
a€oelt seems unlikely, frankly, that we would see inflation moving up in a persistent way that 
would actually move inflation
expectations up while there was still significant slack in the labor marketa€Da€!. The sticky-price 
index rose a modest 2.4% over 12 months through Aprila€!. A number of structural factors have led 
to global disinflation
over    the past three decadesa€!. Outside of passing on commodities prices, most U.S. firms remain 
reluctant to raise prices on other goodsa€!. Business survey shows limited price increases over 
next 5a€“10 yearsa€!.
a€oeBase effects will contributed! to core inflation in April and May,a€D Powell saida€! a€oeand 
theya€™ 11 disappeara€Da€!

LINK: <https://www.bloomberg 
.com/news/articles/2021-05-13/fed-leaders-are-confident-inflation-is-transitory-here-s-why>

The Onion (2011): Mitt Romney Haunted By Past Of Trying To Help Uninsured Sick People: a€~BELMONT, 
MAa€’’Though Mitt Romney is considered to be a frontrunner for the 2012 Republican presidential 
nomination,
the national spotlight has forced him to repeatedly confront a major skeleton in his political 
closet: that as governor of Massachusetts he once tried to help poor, uninsured sick peopled!. 
doeMy hope is that Republican

voters will one day forgive me for making it easier for sick peopled’’especially low-income sick 
peoplea€”to go to the hospital and see a doctor ,dD Romney added, doelt was wrong, and Id™ m 
sorrydUd!
LINK: 
<https://politics.theonion.com/mitt-romnev-haunted-bv-past-of-trving-to-help-uninsured-1819572569>

Juan L. Linz (1990): The Perils of Presidentialism: d~The first is the presidentd™ s strong claim 
to democratic, even plebiscitarian, legitimacy; the second is his fixed term in officed!. The 
legislators, especially when
they represent cohesive, disciplined parties that offer clear ideological and political 
alternatives, can also claim democratic legitimacyd!. Who has the stronger claim to speak on behalf 
of the people: the president or the

legislative majority that opposes his policies? Since both derive their power from the votes of the 
people in a free competition among well-defined alternatives, a conflict is always possible and at 
times may erupt dramatically.
There is no democratic principle on the basis of which it can be resolved, and the mechanisms the 
constitution might provide are likely to prove too complicated and aridly legalistic to be of much 
force in the eyes of the
electorated!

LINK: <https://scholar.harvard.edu/levitsky/files/1.1 linz .pdf>

Karen Eggleston, Yong Suk Lee, & Toshiaki Iizuka: Robots & Labour in the Service Sector: 
d~Firm-level studies are important for understanding how robots augment some types of labour while 
substituting for others,
yet evidence outside manufacturing is scarce. This column reports on one of the first studies of 
service sector robots, which suggests that robot adoption has increased some employment 
opportunities, provided greater
flexibility, and helped to mitigate turnover problems among long-term care workers. The wave of 
technologies that inspires fear in many countries may be a remedy for the social and economic 
challenges posed by population
ageing  in othersd!

LINK: <https://voxeu .org/article/robots-and-labour-service-sector>

Henry A. Wallace (1952): Where I Was Wrong: d~Before 1949 I thought Russia really wanted and needed 
peace. After 1949 I became more and more disgusted with the Soviet methodsd!. But in other 
respects, ideasd!
have not changed and are as true today as they were then. I went to Asia in 1944 feeling that 
colonialism could easily be the downfall of the white race. I felt that the supreme problem of 
modern times was the unresting march
of the common man, and that most of the common men of the world were earning less than 
one-twentieth as much as the workers in the US, Canada, Britain, and western Europe. These people 
because of poor food, disease,
and ignorance now have a life expectancy 40 years less than ours. With education and good food they 
have jut as great capacity as we. I wanted the on-rushing common man on our side, and the best way 
to keep him with us
was to trade with him and help him to increase his productiona€!

LINK: <https://delong .typepad.com/sd 
j/2013/02/henry-a-wallace-1952-on-the-ruthless-nature-of-communism-cold-war-era-god-that-failed-webl
ogging .html>

Ethan Knights & al.: Hand-Selective Visual Regions Represent How to Grasp 3D Tools: Brain Decoding 
During Real Actions: a€~We examined the responses of independently visually defined 
category-selective brain areas
when participants grasped 3D toolsa€!. Whether a tool is grasped appropriatelya€! were decodable 
from hand-selective areas in occipito-temporal and parietal cortices, but not from tool-, object-, 
or body-selective areasa€!.

These effects were exclusive for actions with tools, but not for biomechanically matched actions 
with control non-toolsa€!. Finding a specificity for typical tool grasping in hand-, rather than 
tool-, selective regions challenges
the long-standing assumption that activation for viewing tool images reflects sensorimotor 
processing linked to tool manipulation. Instead, our results show that typicality representations 
for tool grasping are automatically
evoked in visual regions specialised for representing the human hand, the braina€™ s primary tool 
for interacting with the worlda€!

LINK: <https://www.ineurosci.org/content/earlv/2021/04/30/JNEUROSCI.0083-21.2Q21>

Jeet Heer: Two Paths to a Military Coup: a€~If this newsletter has a theme it can be summed up in a 
sentence: the threat of authoritarianism remains real. Ia€™ ve continued to hammer on this even at 
the risk of seeming
obsessed with the past and unable to move on. I think both the coup of January 6 and the subsequent 
widespread adoption by the Republican Party of the lie of a stolen election shows how real the 
threat remains in the United
States. Further, the Trumpian phenomenon has parallels in many other democracies. Authoritarianism 
isna€™ t the only issue of our time but it is a crucial onea€!

LINK: <https://ieetheer.substack.eom/p/two-paths-to-a-military-coup>

Charlie Sykes: Is This Working for the GOP?: a€~I respect EntenaC™ s work, so this is worth some 
thinking about, if only as a reflection of the internal ethos of the swamp. We can easily recognize 
this logic: Successa€”
measured by polls, or profits, or high gradesa€”is a€oesmarta€n if you dona€™ t dwell too much on 
other metrics. A company may pollute the environment, cut corners on quality, and game its taxes 
but be considered
a€oesmarta€n if it leads to profits. The kid on the playground who gets in his secret punches, but 
then gets a gold star from his teacher is a€oesmart.a€D A sports team that cheats to win the World 
Series and gets to keep the
ringa€”a€oesmart.a€n And a politician who gaslights and lies, but still polls well, can expect the 
muted applause of cynical punditry. Getting away with it is all that mattersa€!

LINK: <https://morningshots.thebulwark.eom/p/is-this-working-for-the-gop>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Hoisted from the Archives:


20 Yrs. Ago: Aze Monetarist Counterrevolution: Just as modern Keynesians are (in many respects) 
monetarists, so modern monetarists are really Keynesiansa€”even though they like to admit it even 
less. They are
Keynesians in the sense that they have the same profound and deep distrust in the laissez-faire 
market economy's ability to deliver macroeconomic stability. Moreover, they share the confidence 
John Maynard Keynes had that
limited and strategic government interventions and policies could produce macroeconomic stability 
while still leaving enormous space for the operation of the market. Thus there are no believers in 
true laissez-faire left, at
least  not as far as academic macroeconomics is concerneda€!.

The "neutral" monetary policy advocated in works like Friedman and Schwartz (1963) turns out to be 
a policy that pre-Keynesian generations would have called extraordinarily activist on a number of 
levels. The laissez-faire
rhetoric obscures the extraordinarily broad common ground that Milton Friedman shares with John 
Maynard Keynesa€!. The monetarism of the monetarist counterrevolution^! was as "activist" in its 
own way as John
Maynard Keynes could have ever wisheda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2016/04/hoisted-from-the-archives-from-fifteen-vears-ago-the-moneta
rist-counterrevolution.html>

15 Yrs. Ago: Envy and Spite in A3Ae Social Welfare Function'. a€~People who say that we should not 
count the disutility generated by the fact that the poor envy the rich in the social welfare 
functiona€!. I have also never
understood the ferocity of their adverse reaction to the reply: a€oeWell, if we are not going to 
count the disutility generated by envy, we should also not count the utility generated by 
spite.a€Ua€!

Daniel Davies: No Riff-Raff'. a€oeEntering into the Brad DeLong Eat The Rich Controversy I offer 
this observation: If it is not the case a€~that the rich are spitefula€”that they enjoy the envy of 
the poora€™ , then why is the
word a€~exclusivea€™ so popular in the marketing material for hotels, nightclubs, holiday resorts 
and residential property developmentsa€!. Ita€! means that the hotel, nightclub, resort etc is 
providing a bundled servicea€!
excluding a segment of the populationa€! the greasy, hairy polloia€!. In order to attract a better 
class of customer, you have to keep the riff-raff out. Basil Fawlty understood this; why doesna€™t 
the blogosphere?a€Da€l

Greg Mankiwa€!. a€oeln Brada€™ s world, a rich person conveys a type of negative externality, like 
pollution. High taxes on the rich can be seen as Pigoviana€!. But I am uncomfortable making envy a 
basis for public
policya€!a€D He misses the import of the phrase a€~conspicuous consumption.a€™ Ita€™ s not the hard 
work and entrepreneurship that is to be discouraged. Make inventions, build enterprises, donate 
money for hospitals
and librariesa€”that is all extremely meritorious and praiseworthy. Ita€™ s the conspicuous 
consumption that is the problem. Surely spite is at least as offensive an other-regarding 
preference as envy, isna€™t it?a€!

Perhaps some sociologist or psychologist or social psychologist can explain why the reaction is one 
of jumping to condemn the poor whom the displays by the rich make feel small, rather than to 
condemn the rich for making
the displays in order to feel largea€!

LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong .com/2016/05/hoisted-from-the-archives .html>

10 Yrs. Ago: Aze Inflation Slope Is NotAzt Slippery: Between the end of the early 1980s recession 
and the end of the early 1990s recession, inflation in the United States fluctuated between 1.5% 
and 6.0%a€”but at no time
was there any lack of confidence in the Federal Reserve's long-run commitment to low inflation, at 
no time did the United States slide down the slippery slope, and if there were any complaints that 
any average inflation rate
of 4% during that decade noticeably degraded the functioning of the price mechanism, I have not 
heard them.

Between the end of the early 1990s recession and the end of the early 2000s recession, inflation in 
the United States fluctuated between 1.7% and 6.0%a€”but at no time was there any lack of 
confidence in the Federal
Reserve's long-run commitment to low inflation, at no time did the United States slide down the 
slippery slope, and if there were any complaints that any average inflation rate of 3% during that 
decade noticeably degraded the
functioning of the price mechanism, I have not heard them.

Between the end of the early 2000s recession and the start of the subprime crash, inflation in the 
United States fluctuated between 1.25% and 4.5%a€”but at no time was there any lack of confidence 
in the Federal Reserve's
long-run commitment to low inflation, at no time did the United States slide down the slippery 
slope, and if there were any complaints that any average inflation rate of 3% during that period 
noticeably degraded the
functioning                                                                                         
         of the price mechanism, I have not heard them.

The argument that an average inflation rate of more than 2% per year sends us sliding down the 
slippery slope is unsupporteda€!

LINK: 
<https://web.archive.Org/web/20110514233338/http://delong.tvpepad.com/sdi/2011/05/the-inflation-slop
e-is-not-that-slipperv.html>

10 Yrs. Ago: Ron Paul Tells Chris Matthews He Favors Enforcement of No-Blacks Covenants in Deeds?'. 
Not sure I believe thisa€! UPDATE: Yep: Ita€™ s twue! Ita€™ s twue! Ron Paula€™ s American utopia: 
enforcing
covenants that property cannot be sold to Black people, and having the police pull Black people out 
of stores where the proprietor does not welcome thema€!.

Paula€! explained that he would have opposed the Civil Rights Act a€oebecause of the property 
rights element, not because they got rid of the Jim Crow laws.a€Da€! a€oeThis gimmick, ita€™ s off
the wall when you say Ia€™ m for property rights and for states rights, and therefore Ia€™m a 
racist,a€D said the Texas congressman. a€oeThata€™ s just outlandish.a€C Paul appealed to the free
market, and argued that if a business owner were to post signs declaring segregation in his or her 
business, people wouldna€™ t patronize ita€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2011/05/ron-paul-tells-chris-matthews-he-favors-enforcement-of-no-b
lacks-covenants-in-deeds.html>

10 Yrs. Ago: Scott Hodge ofA3Ae Tax Foundation Censors Himself. If you have been relying on the Tax 
Foundation as a source of information, it is time to stop. Mark Thoma has the storya€! a€™ I 
recently noted a post
from The Tax Foundation accusing the Wall Street Journal editorial page of of a€oea textbook 
example of how to lie with statisticsa€Da€l Brendan Nyhan notes today that the Tax Foundation post 
has been taken downa€!
LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2011/05/scott-hodge-of-the-tax-foundation-censors-himself.html>

5 Yrs. Ago: What Is A3Ae FOMC Thinking?'. I confess I could understand FOMC participants wanting to 
raise interest rates right now if projected growth over 2016 was 3.5% or higher. But we have a 
first quarter of 0.8% and
a second quarter of 2.3%: we may well not even get to 2.0% this year.I confess I understand FOMC 
participants worrying about a€ce imbalances a€D created by extremely-low interest rates, but: (1) 
If they are worried about
extremely-low real interest rates, they need to be all-in pressuring the Congress for more 
expansionary fiscal policy. (2) If they are worried about extremely-low nominal interest rates, 
they need to be all-in pressuring their
colleagues                                                                                          
          for a higher inflation target. Ita€™ s the absence of either of those two from the Fed 
hawksa€”and the Fed moderatesa€”that has me greatly concerneda€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2016/05/must-
read-i-confess-i-could-understand-fomc-participants-wanting-to-raise-interest-rates-right-now-if-pro
iected-growth-o.html#more>

1 Yr. Ago: Intro: How Do We Learn (Online Especially)?'. Universities will make a hash of moving 
online unless we answer the question: How do we learn? This video is the leadoff to a module that 
suggests some possible
answers. We also need to know what economics isa€”and how it is good for. And the module that 
follows this video intro suggests some possible answers to those questions also

<https://delong.typepad.com/files/UNFINISHED-module-0-before-class-begins.pdf>a€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2020/05/intro-how-do-we-learn-online-especially.html>

1 Yr. Ago: Noted: Campos: Trumpa€™ s Acquittal'. In the end, Trumpa€™ s acquittal may be viewed by 
future historians much like the Roman Senatea€™ s decision to block the Gracchi is regarded by 
current historians: as
the start of a huge downward spiral. That presidential corruption and malfeasance are subject to no 
checks as long as 34 senators fear their reelection chances would be damaged by removal is not a 
state I ever thought I would
ever see America reach, but it hasa€! LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong.com/2020/Q5/paul-campos- 
another-brow-furrower 
-this-looks-like-one-of-those-deals-where-the-president-savs-ill-stop-illegally.html>

6 Mos. Ago: Do I Really Need to Say, Again, Azat Judy Shelton Does Not Belong on A3Ae Federal 
Reservea€™ s Board of Governors? Apparently I Dod€\: It looks like even without Trump Republican 
senators will continue
to be orange-haired baboons: That any Republican senators at all are thinking of voting for Judy 
Sheltona€”a woman views whom Milton Friedman dismissed by saying a€oeit would be hard to pack more 
error into so few
wordsa€Da€”for a Fed Governor position reveals an astonishing lack of spine. Yet the Senate Banking 
Committee chair appears to be attempting to advance her nomination on Tuesdaya€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-
delong.com/2020/ll/do-i-reallv-need-to-sav-again-that-iudv-shelton-does-not-belong-on-the-federal-re
serves-board-of-governors-apparentlv-i-d.html>

3 Mos. Ago: For PresidentaC™ s Day : A Republic, If We Can Keep If. I do not know what todaya€™ s 
Republicans want America to be, but it is certainly not a democratic republic. And it is certainly 
not any form of
a€oepopulisma€D that I am aware of. Perhaps we should classify their goal as a minority 
ethnocentric demogocracy? a€ceNeofascista€D still seems the best word to me, but I am told that is 
much, much, much too impolite
to use, even on the internet: No, Alexander Hamilton was not a president. But he should have been: 
a€™It is impossible to read the history of the petty republics of Greece and Italy without feeling 
sensations of horror and
disgust at the distractions with which they were continually agitated, and at the rapid succession 
of revolutions by which they were kept in a state of perpetual vibration between the extremes of 
tyranny and anarchya€!. From
the disordersa€! advocates of despotism have drawn argumentsa€! against the forms of republican 
government^! [and] decried all free government as inconsistent with the order of societya€!. I 
trust America will be the
broad and solid foundation of other edificesa€! which will bea€! permanent monuments of their 
errors. But it is not to be denied thata€! if it had been found impracticable to have devised 
models of a more perfect structure
[than the petty republics of Greece and Italy], the enlightened friends to liberty would have been 
obliged to abandon the cause of that species of government as indefensible. The science of 
politics, howevera€! has received
great improvement^! distribution of power into distinct departmentsa€! balances and checksa€! 
judges holding their offices during good behaviora€! representation of the peoplea€! by deputies of 
their own electiona€! are
means, and powerful means, by which the excellences of republican government may be retained and 
its imperfections lessened or avoideda€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2021/02/for-presidents-day-a-
republic-if-we-can-keep-it.html>

1 Mo. Ago: I Do Not See d€ceOverheatingd€dAzis Yeara€\ - Brad DeLonga€™ s Grasping Reality. a€~Yes, 
there will be some inflationa€”base effects and sectoral shifts and simply the speed of reopening 
will create
bottlenecks in the system, and those with pricing power will take advantage. Buta€”unless the 
coronavirus plague has done a lot more damage to the economic division of labor than I believea€”it 
will not be because
production and employment are in any manner above stable-inflation a€cepotentiala€D. Think of 
whatever inflation might happen as skidmarks and burning rubber, rather than any form of 
boilovera€! LINK:

<https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/i-do-not-see-overheating-this-yeai>

1 Mo. Ago: Our EconomistsaC™ Letter on A3Ae Need for Public Investment'. We need this stuff, 
badlya€!. Dear Senate Majority Leader Schumer, Senate Minority Leader McConnell, Speaker Pelosi, 
and House Minority


1 Yr. Ago: Noted: Campos: Trumpa€™ s Acquittal: In the end, Trumpa€™ s acquittal may be viewed by 
future historians much like the Roman Senatea€™ s decision to block the Gracchi is regarded by 
current historians: as
the start of a huge downward spiral. That presidential corruption and malfeasance are subject to no 
checks as long as 34 senators fear their reelection chances would be damaged by removal is not a 
state I ever thought I would
ever see America reach, but it hasa€! LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong.eom/2020/05/paul-campos- 
another-brow-furrower 
-this-looks-like-one-of-those-deals-where-the-president-savs-ill-stop-illegallv.html>

6 Mos. Ago: Do I Really Need to Say, Again, Azat Judy Shelton Does Not Belong on A34e Federal 
Reservea€™ s Board of Governors? Apparently I Dod€\: It looks like even without Trump Republican 
senators will continue
to be orange-haired baboons: That any Republican senators at all are thinking of voting for Judy 
Sheltona€”a woman views whom Milton Friedman dismissed by saying a€oeit would be hard to pack more 
error into so few
wordsa€Da€”for a Fed Governor position reveals an astonishing lack of spine. Yet the Senate Banking 
Committee chair appears to be attempting to advance her nomination on Tuesdaya€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-
delong.com/2020/ll/do-i-reallv-need-to-sav-again-that-iudv-shelton-does-not-belong-on-the-federal-re
serves-board-of-governors-apparently-i-d.html>

3 Mos. Ago: For PresidentaC™ s Day : A Republic, If We Can Keep It: I do not know what todaya€™ s 
Republicans want America to be, but it is certainly not a democratic republic. And it is certainly 
not any form of
a€cepopulisma€D that I am aware of. Perhaps we should classify their goal as a minority 
ethnocentric demogocracy? a€ceNeofascista€D still seems the best word to me, but I am told that is 
much, much, much too impolite
to use, even on the internet: No, Alexander Hamilton was not a president. But he should have been: 
a€™It is impossible to read the history of the petty republics of Greece and Italy without feeling 
sensations of horror and
disgust at the distractions with which they were continually agitated, and at the rapid succession 
of revolutions by which they were kept in a state of perpetual vibration between the extremes of 
tyranny and anarchya€!. From
the disordersa€! advocates of despotism have drawn argumentsa€! against the forms of republican 
government^! [and] decried all free government as inconsistent with the order of societya€!. I 
trust America will be the
broad and solid foundation of other edificesa€! which will bea€! permanent monuments of their 
errors. But it is not to be denied thata€! if it had been found impracticable to have devised 
models of a more perfect structure
[than the petty republics of Greece and Italy], the enlightened friends to liberty would have been 
obliged to abandon the cause of that species of government as indefensible. The science of 
politics, howevera€! has received
great improvement^! distribution of power into distinct departmentsa€! balances and checksa€! 
judges holding their offices during good behaviora€! representation of the peoplea€! by deputies of 
their own electiona€! are
means, and powerful means, by which the excellences of republican government may be retained and 
its imperfections lessened or avoideda€! LINK: <https 
://www.bradford-delong.com/2021/02/for-presidents-day-a-
republic-if-we-can-keep-it.html>

1 Mo. Ago: I Do Not See d€ceOverheatingd€dAzis Yeara€\ - Brad DeLonga€™s Grasping Reality: a€~Yes, 
there will be some inflationa€”base effects and sectoral shifts and simply the speed of reopening 
will create
bottlenecks in the system, and those with pricing power will take advantage. Buta€”unless the 
coronavirus plague has done a lot more damage to the economic division of labor than I believea€”it 
will not be because
production and employment are in any manner above stable-inflation a€cepotentiala€D. Think of 
whatever inflation might happen as skidmarks and burning rubber, rather than any form of 
boilovera€! LINK:

<https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/i-do-not-see-overheating-this-veai>

1 Mo. Ago: Our EconomistsaC™ Letter on A3/4e Need for Public Investment: We need this stuff, 
badlya€!. Dear Senate Majority Leader Schumer, Senate Minority Leader McConnell, Speaker Pelosi, 
and House Minority
Leader McCarthya€! LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/our-economists-letter-on-the-need>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

