Subscribe now

Harry Jaffa (1959): Crisis of the House Divided: An Interpretation of the Lincoln-Douglas Debates: 
XX. The End of Manifest Destiny. a€~a€ [Lincoln knew that the vast acquisitions of the Mexican War 
were only a foretaste of what Douglas himself believed to be in store if he ever gained control of 
the nation s foreign policy. Only a national commitment to confine slavery, Lincoln believed, would 
put an end to the drive for foreign conquest and domination...
[given] the dynamism in the coincidence of the ambitions of Douglas and the slave power. It was 
this coincidence that repealed the Missouri Compromise.... Douglas did strike a bargain with the 
Southerners, and there was nothing in his policy or principles which inhibited him from indulging 
any requirement of slavery. That Douglas would have consented to the expansion of slavery as a 
means to other ends we can hardly doubt....

The fourth question Lincoln put to Douglas at Freeport has also been overshadowed by the famous 
second question. It, too, has a significance that can hardly be exaggerated. Lincoln asked: "Are 
you in favor of acquiring additional territory, in disregard of how such acquisition may affect the 
nation on the slavery question?" Here is an extract from Douglas's reply:

this is a young and growing nation. It swarms as often as a hive of bees, and... there must be 
hives in which they can gather and make their honey. In less than fifteen years, if the same 
progress that has distinguished this country for the last fifteen years continues, every foot of 
vacant land between this and the Pacific Ocean, owned by the United States, will be occupied. Will 
you not continue to increase at the end of fifteen years as well
as now? I tell you, increase, and multiply, and expand, is the law of this nation s existence. You 
cannot limit this great republic by mere boundary lines, saying, thus far shalt thou go, and no 
further." Any one of you gentlemen might as well say to a son twelve years old that he is big 
enough, and must not grow any larger, and in order to prevent his growth put a hoop around him to 
keep him to his present size. What would be the result?
Either the hoop must burst... or the child must die.

So it would be with this great nation. With our natural increase... with the tide of emigration 
that is fleeing despotism in the old world to seek a refuge in our own, there is a constant torrent 
pouring into this country that requires more land, more territory upon which to settle, and just as 
fast as our interests and our destiny require additional territory in the north, in the south, or 
in the islands of the ocean, I am for it, and when we acquire it
will leave the people, according to the Nebraska Bill, free to do as they please on the subject of 
slavery and every other questiona€!

Let us note that, according to this doctrine, the land area of the Western Hemisphere became usable 
only by being incorporated into the United. States’... Lincoln could see no reason in 1858 why 
every expansion of freedom would have to take place by an expansion of the boundaries of the United 
States. How Lincoln scorned Douglas's expansionism we may gather from the following rebuttal to 
Douglas's answer to his fourth Freeport question. It was delivered
at Galesburg:

If Judge Douglas s policy upon this question succeeds, and gets fairly settled down, until all 
opposition is crushed out, the next thing will be a grab for the territory of poor Mexico, and 
invasion of the rich lands of South America, then the adjoining islands will follow, each one of 
which promises additional slave fields. And this question is to be left to the people of those 
countries for settlement. When we shall get Mexico, I don't know
whether the Judge will be in favor of the Mexican people that we get with it settling this question 
for themselves and all others; because we know the Judge has a great horror for "mongrels", and I 
understand that the people of Mexico are most decidedly a race of "mongrels". I understand that 
there is not more than one person there out of eight who is pure white, and I suppose from the 
Judge's previous declaration that when we get
Mexico                                                                                              
                                                                                                    
   or any considerable portion of it, that he will be in favor of these "mongrels" settling this 
question, which would bring him some A-, what into collision with his horror of an inferior racea€!

The ugly potentialities of a policy of lebensraum combined with racial supremacy should hardly need 
explanatory comment today. The accents of sarcasm in the foregoing extract can scarcely escape 
notice. Of the "mongrels" to the south Douglas had spoken thus at Springfield, July 1,1858:

We are witnessing the result of giving civil and political rights to inferior races in Mexico, 
Central America, in South America, and in the West India Islands. Those young men who went from 
here to Mexico to fight the battles of their country in the Mexican war, can tell you the fruits of 
negro equality with the white man. They will tell you that the result of that equality is social 
amalgamation, demoralization and degradation, below the
capacity for self-governmenta€!

Douglas's white-supremacy American empire, would have been a very different polity from anything 
envisaged in the pristine purity of the republican ideal of the Founding Fathers. There would have 
been precious little "popular sovereignty" for the natives for whom Douglas had such contempt. And 
there might be many American states today in which, as in the case of the French in Algeria, a 
privileged minority would be engulfed in the swirling tides of
hatred of an unprivileged majority of a different complexion.

The problem of racial adjustment in America today is of an order of magnitude that we could hardly 
exaggerate. And this problem, as every informed person knows, although dramatized by the struggle 
of the Negro, is not limited to the Negro. Indians, Mexicans, Orientals have all had a desperate 
struggle, varying in times, places, and intensity, to achieve the dignity which our fundamental law 
and principles hold out to all. Aspiration must, as Lincoln implied in
his standard maxim doctrine, always transcend fulfillment. Yet it is essential that the possibility 
of fulfillment does not fall so far short of the aspiration as to make it not a source of hope but 
a mockery.

Douglas's formula for solving the slavery question, in which the nation was already hopelessly 
entangled, would have made that question infinitely more complicated. It is almost inconceivable 
that democratic processes could have survived such complications.
And we can only shudder to think what the twentieth century would be like if the United States had 
entered it as first and foremost of totalitarian powers.

The only moral justification of Douglas's policya€”as of revisionist historiographya€”is a tacit 
belief in the idea of progress, an idea that economic forces were "inevitably working for freedom", 
both on the plains of Kansas and elsewhere. Only such a belief could justify the principle that all 
harsh moral alternatives were to be avoided, that one could safely "agree to disagree". The silent 
forces of history were working for freedom, if only the politicians would
give them time.

Lincolna€™ s whole policy, on the contrary, was a denial that things would take care of themselves, 
that progress would result from anything but mana€™ s foresight judgment, and courage. The impulse 
of the Revolution had been a mighty one, Lincoln believed, and great things had been achieved 
because of it. But the spirit of '76 and the spirit of Nebraska were utter incompatibilities. The 
Nebraska bill could never even have been considered if there had not
been an enormous change in public opinion, a change for the worse that augured still further 
changes for the worse, changes which portended the utter extinction of a weary mankind's hope that 
there might at last be a demonstration of man's capability to govern himself.

Tn aw Art thACA rhannAC no rAliannA nonlrl KA nlarArl nn anx/thincr co ahcnrrl ac "coil anrl 
nlimatA " ’Th A onlv rAliannA th A onh/ rort noon whinh man'c nolitinal salvation micrht RA huilt 
wac man'c moral CAncA th A rlAtArmination of comA mAn to RA £TAA anrl th A awarAnAcc that no man 
nan ricrhtfnllv anhiAVA frAArlom for himcAlf or in th A nrACAnnA of a inct dor! lon<r rAtain hie 
frAArlom if hA would dAnv to anv othAr man of what At; Ar rarA or nation thA rierht to Arinal


freedom.

Crisis of the House Divided is both a great and a crazy book. It is, on one level, Jaffaa€™ s 
attempt to read the minds of Stephen Douglas and Abraham Lincolna€”what thoughts lay behind the 
words they spoke. Or, perhaps, it is something else: it is Jaffaa€™ s attempt to read the minds of 
what those who heard the words of Douglas and Lincoln, and took them seriously and into their 
hearts, would have thought in the fullness of time and historical development
as those words wrought their influence.

And there is more: Jaffaa€™ s reading assumes that the speaker (or the listener) thinks in the 
close-reading Talmudic-philosophical mode of Leo Strauss.

Not, I hasten to add, that Jaffaa€™ s image of the speaker or the listener thinks as Leo Strauss 
did. Leo Strauss was, as he boasted: fascist, authoritarian, imperial. Straussa€™ s vision of a 
good social order was one that scorned hoi polloi and their demagogic panderer-masters/slaves, 
whether socialist or Nazi. It was one in which rule was handled by gentlemena€’’think of the 
Athenian aristocrats of the classical age who admired Spartan disciplined’’advised by
philosophers, or at least taught by philosophers not to be pointlessly and counterproductively 
cruel. Thus when Strauss reads an author he likes, he is smart enough to twist what they write, via 
selective shifts of focus and attention, strongly toward that doctrine. And, as Sokrates said, the 
writings cannot then defend themselves against misinterpretation.

So is this procedure in the hands of Harry Jaffa bound to lead to similar misinterpretative 
disasters? I think not. Very few of the authors whom Srrauss pounds into his Procrustean beds share 
Straussa€™ s fascist, authoritarian, imperial values. But Jaffa shares Lincolna€™ s democratic, 
egalitarian, republican, American values. And Jaffa understands Douglasa€™ s expansionist, 
imperial, populist, American values. And they were both very smart men, eloquent,
and very clever at using words to say exactly what they wanted to say, and no more.

Thus both Lincoln and Douglasa€”even the stenographic-reported versions of their words published in 
the newspapers, which is what we now havea€’’repay a close reading undertaken with Talmudic care, 
and an awareness of and concern for the implications and ramifications of their positions, if it is 
carried out by someone able to empathize with their project, and willing to give them a fair 
reading via a hermaneutics of charity.
And,                                                                                                
                                                                                               
IMHO, Jaffa is able to do this.

And so I think his procedure produces many insights.

Do note that Jaffa is not unique here in so filling-in the thoughts and actions according to this 
particular model. He is tilling fertile ground. After all, Ronald Syme wrote his biography of 
Augustus and his age, The Roman Revolution, as if Augustus had thought like Mussolini Symea€™ s 
book is the best book on the age of Augustus,
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

