Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

Erik Loomis: Land Acknowledgements’. a€~ Again, the point of these politics is not to make you feel 
good or bad. The point is to provide fundamental change. Acknowledge the land all you want. But you 
also need to make real demands on your institution to erase the oppression of Native people in 
2021. Otherwise,
ita€™ s just diversity rhetoric that does nothinga€! <https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog 
.com/2021/11/land-acknowledgements>

Yakov Feygin: In Memory of Janos Kornai: The Contradictions of a Surplus Economy 
<https://building-a-ruin.ghost.io/in-memory-of-ianos-kornai/>


•  Gideon Rachman: Why Chinaa€™ s Elite Tread a Perilous Path'. a€~ Wealth, power and fame are no 
defence against the arbitrary power of the Communist party a€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/187427c5-424e-424b-bce9-62d8215ad6b4>

•  Jim Oa€™Niell: Twenty Years on, the Bries Have Disappointed'. a€~The challenge of how these 
countries achieve higher prosperity across society remains unsolveda€! LINK: 
<https://www.ft.com/content/034ba0e7-7518-437e-854c-7cQdd5d74e34>

•  Steven Roberts: H: a€~The circuit was completed after two years construction throughout to 
Calcutta on April 12,1870a€l <https://atlantic-cable.com/CableCos/Indo-Eur/index.htm>

•  Daniel Larison: Regime Change & Acknowledging Failed Policies'. a€~Admitting failure usually 
means acknowledging that the policy was misguided all along or that it sought to achieve something 
that was out of reacha€!

Eunomia

Regime Change and Acknowledging Failed Policies

Dan Drezner comments on the failure of U.S, regime change policy in Venezuela: This is a case, 
however, where hindsight makes the sanction decision seem worse than it might have appeared in 
early 2019. Even someone who is critical of the recent U.S, sanctions policya€!

Read more

a year ago A- 11 likes A- 4 comments A- Daniel Larison

•  Talia Bracha Lavin: Therea€™ s No Such Thing as a Lone Wolf: a€~What Kyle Rittenhouse, Dylann 
Roof, and Timothy McVeigh have in commona€!



The Sword and the Sandwich

There's No Such Thing as a Lone Wolf

Humans tell a lot of lies about wolves. Having lived for so long on the outskirts of civilization, 
only interacting with man in times of dire necessity, wolves are particularly susceptible to 
anthropomorphization: always a threat, a howl on the wind, preying on the imagination. An early and 
notable aphorism that gave human features to
wolves comes from a€ 1

Read more

a year ago A- 28 likes A- 3 comments A- Talia Bracha Lavin

• Matthew Yglesias: Omicron: A Reminder of How Little Wea€™ re Doing on Pandemic Prevention'. 
a€~Our science is impressivea€”our investments in logistics and manufacturing capacity much less 
soa€!


Slow Boring

Omicron is a reminder of how little we're doing on pandemic prevention

In January of 2021, the Bipartisan Commission on Biodefense issued a proposal for an ambitious 
Apollo Program for Biodefense. The Biden administration largely embraced this vision and released a 
call for a $65 billion pandemic prevention initiative, but that turned into a $30 billion budget 
request as part of the original White
House version of the Build Back Better proposal, which dwindled to aa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 94 likes A- 134 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

Paragraphs:

Stephen Diehl: The Handwavy Technobabble Nothingburger. a€~At this point pretty much every 
economist worth their weight in salt has given the public fair warning about the financial 
absurdity of crypto assetsa€!. Therea€™ s a simple inescapable truth at the heart of technical 
crypto scepticism that almost all software engineers
intuit at some level: Any application that could be done on a blockchain could be better done on a 
centralized database. Except crimea€!

LINK: chttps://www.stephendiehl .com/blog/nothing-burger.html>

Martin Wolf: Lessons in a€~Levelling Upd€™ from the Basque Country. a€~Having a favourable context 
and by taking the right decisions. Spaina€™ s EU membership was the context. But what were the 
decisions? A striking feature of these was how they were made, namely, by close co-operation among 
all levels of government
and between public and private sectors. The shared aim motivating it all has been one of balanced 
social and economic development. According to the Basque Institute of Competitiveness, the 1980s 
were a€oedefined by the creation of the new regional administration alongside the need to promote 
substantial industrial
restructuring^  □. This a€oeevolved in the 1990s into a strategy built around clusters and geared 
to improving efficiency, fostering non-R&D-based diversification, and promoting 
internationalisationa€D. That then evolved in the 2000s a€oeinto a sustained focus on innovation 
and science-driven industrial diversification^ Ela€!. As

in other cases of rapid economic development across the world, success created the foundations for 
the next stage. But running through the story of the Basque country seems to be an ability to work 
out the right response to what was happening in the world. Since successful development demands the 
creation of a range of vital public
goods, it depends on a development-oriented government. But the latter in turn relies on the 
ability of private business to seize opportunities. A good way to think about this is as a marriage 
of co-operation with competition within an open world economya€!. Those who live in and are 
responsible for the region should have both the
resources and the freedom to make decisionsa€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/bb2c627f-lbaa-4230-9cb8-3876c216b8f7>

Paul Krugman: Why Workers Are Quitting'. a€~Unlike the a€oeskills gapa€D invoked to explain 
persistent unemployment after the 2008 crisis, this time labor shortages seem to be real. Workers 
are quitting at record rates, an indication that they feel confident about finding new jobsa€!. So 
workers are clearly feeling empowered,
even though many fewer Americans are employed than in the past. Why? Earlier this year many people 
insisted that enhanced unemployment benefits were reducing the incentive to accept jobs. But those 
extra benefits were eliminateda€!. Another storya€! says that the extensive aid families received 
during the pandemic left
manya€! [with] the financial space to be choosier about their next job. A less upbeat story says 
that some employees are still afraid to go back to work, and/or that many cana€™ t go back to work 
because their child care arrangements are still disrupted. But therea€™ s at least one more 
possibilitya€!. The experience of the pandemic
may have led many workers to explore opportunities they wouldna€™t have looked at previouslya€!. 
People have a strong status quo biasa€!. I can easily believe that there were many workers who 
should have quit their lousy jobs in, say, 2019, but didna€™t because they werena€™ t really 
considering the alternatives. And

ita€™ s at least possible that the disruptions of the pandemic led to a great rethinka€!. [That] is 
actually a good thinga€”a small silver lininga€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes .com/2021/11/05/opinion/great-resignation-quit-iob ,html>

Noah Smith: How to Fix Twitter: a€~Three changes a€” 1) dropping blocked usersa€™ tweets from 
thread view, 2) allowing people more control over who can reply to their tweets, and 3) allowing 
people to opt out of being quote-tweeteda€”will remove much of the platforma€™ s shoutiness and 
toxicity, without restricting
dissent or speech on the platform overall. In addition, Twitter should implement the dislike 
buttona€!

LINK:

Noahpinion

How to fix Twitter

Jack Dorsey is stepping down as CEO of Twitter, to be replaced by Parag Agrawal. Ita€™ s not clear 
whether this will cause much of a change in the companya€™ s direction a€” Tim Cook and Dara 
Khosrowshahi dona€™ t seem to have radically altered the courses charted by Steve Jobs and Travis 
Kalanick, for instance. And
ita€™ s an open question whether the companya€™ sa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 41 likes A- 54 comments A- Noah Smith

Arindrajit Dube: a€™ A tight labor market (and policies that support it) are a critical ingredient. 
But I also think a combination of factors (pandemic, savings, social multipliers) amplified the 
impact leading to quits exceeding what youa€™ d expect at current tightness. Part of the reason 
there may be a social multiplier to quits:
workers at low wage jobs historically under-estimated how bad their jobs are. Something that can 
spur some workers to quit and look for better jobs can animate co-workers to follow suit. Ita€™ s 
useful to remember that recent (and much older) research shows that typically workers who are at 
very low-wage employers dona€™t
fully appreciate what range of opportunities there may be. Maybe that is changing here in America! 
Think of this as ana€! information cascadea€! or a spark that start a prairie firea€! but applied 
to understanding how bad or a good a job youa€™ ve gota€!

LINK:


How to fix Twitter

Jack Dorsey is stepping down as CEO of Twitter, to be replaced by Parag Agrawal. Ita€™ s not clear 
whether this will cause much of a change in the companya€™ s direction a€” Tim Cook and Dara 
Khosrowshahi dona€™ t seem to have radically altered the courses charted by Steve Jobs and Travis 
Kalanick, for instance. And
ita€™ s an open question whether the companya€™ sa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 41 likes A- 54 comments A- Noah Smith

Arindrajit Dube: a€™A tight labor market (and policies that support it) are a critical ingredient. 
But I also think a combination of factors (pandemic, savings, social multipliers) amplified the 
impact leading to quits exceeding what youa€™ d expect at current tightness. Part of the reason 
there may be a social multiplier to quits:
workers at low wage jobs historically under-estimated how bad their jobs are. Something that can 
spur some workers to quit and look for better jobs can animate co-workers to follow suit. Ita€™ s 
useful to remember that recent (and much older) research shows that typically workers who are at 
very low-wage employers dona€™t
fully appreciate what range of opportunities there may be. Maybe that is changing here in America! 
Think of this as ana€! information cascadea€! or a spark that start a prairie firea€! but applied 
to understanding how bad or a good a job youa€™ ve gota€!

LINK:

Arindrajit Dube @arindube

I think it ma  be...both. A tight labor market (and policies that support it) are a critical 
ingredient. But I also think a combination of factors (pandemic, savings, social multipliers) 
amplified the impact leading to quits exceeding what you'd expect at current tightness.

Matt Darling dYCEDdY’AYCEt @besttrousers

This thread (and many like it) tries to explain the "Great Resignation" as the result of some sort 
of Great Awakening in the American people. An alternate explanation is that it is the product of 
tight labor markets, and dependent on continued policies to keep them tight, https 
://t.co/qrghA7whYb
12:21 AMT™ Nov 3,2021

47Likes6Retweets
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

