Subscribe now

FOCUS: Mitch McConnell as Republican Leader:


Consider that so far in this century the concentration of democrats in large population states has 
meant that a 50-50 nation would generate a Senate that woul have a 56-44 Republican majority.

Consider that in 2009, Mitch McConnell and his Republican Senate leader laid down the law: we are 
going to do no legislating, but instead be as obstructionist as possible to underline partisan 
differences. It is true, he told his supporters in the Senate, that such obstructionism means that 
for the next two years you will have no joba€”you will find that you might as well have been a 
potted plant.
But afterwards, after we have focused Americans attention on how important the partisan differences 
are, we will have a durable majority, and will be able to do our jobs and succeed in changing 
America into what we want it to be.

How has that been working out for him? Well:

Democrats        Republicans

2009-11                        59               41

2011-13                        53               47

2013-15                        55               45

2015-17                        46               54

2017-19                        49               51

2019-21                        47               53

2021-23                        50               50

2023-25                       51.5              48.5

NOTE: For 23-25, not 515 but rather 50.5

Republicans will have held the Senate majority for only 6 out of 16 years. And they will never have 
managed to obtain the 56-seat majority that simply turning down the heat and expecting people will 
simply fill in their customary box on the ballot would have produced.

Moreover, what did McConnell get from his six years as Majority Leader? A lot of nut-boy and -girl 
judges appointed, yes. And a pointless upper-class tax cut that did nothing to encourage economic 
growth or investment in America, and that raised a lot of money by taxing Republican worthies via 
reduction in the SALT deduction.

Why have the results for McConnell been so extraordinarily subpar? On those very rare occasions 
when he speaks, he says things like "candidate qualitya€D. But what has led Republican primary 
electorates and Republican moneymen to choose low-quality candidates? The answer is this: when you 
turn up the partisan heat to 11, you make a political environment uncongenial for dealmakers and
very convenient for grifters and for the unhinged. Had McConnell turn down the partisan 
heaa€’’encouraged the 20 left-most members of his caucus to make deals and legislate where there 
was legislation to be donea€”he would, I think, I have spent not six but twelve of the sixteen 
years covered in the table above as majority leader.

Moreover, now he has created a Senate in which the right-most members of the Democratic Party are 
willing to vote for policies far to the left of those they are comfortable with just to stick it to 
McConnell.
And the Washington press corps portrays this as a successful stint as Republican leader?

Share

One Video:

TPM Newsmaker: Breaking Down the Midterms with Simon Rosenberg and Tom Bonier: Democratic 
strategists Simon Rosenberg and Tom Bonier were the two most prominent voices telling us for weeks 
that the 2022 Red Wave was a mirage. They were right. Yesterday afternoon Rosenberg and Bonier 
joined us for a live TPM Newsmaker briefing to discuss just what they saw in the polls and
early voting patterns that allowed them to see what others missed:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Alex Barinka: Meta Investors Are in No Mood for Zuckerberga€™ s Metaverse Moonshot: 
a€~Zuckerberg has defended the spending. a€oeThe future doesna€™ t just happen,a€D he said at an 
October product launcha€!

•  NIH Llamas: a€~ME: I want to start a financial services and investment company based on 
cryptocurrency, which fixes all of the terrible problems with fiat money. INVESTORS: So what do you 
want from us? ME: Half a billion US dollars of fiat money, which I do not supporta€!

• Adam Fisher: Sam Bankman-Fried Has a Savior Complexa€”And Maybe You Should Tooa€!

•  Michael Strain: The Republicans Lose with Trump: a€~The absence of the anticipated Republican 
a€oered wavea€D in the US midterm elections may be the moment when the party finally realizes that 
former President Donald Trump is an electoral liability. Enduring political success is built on a 
foundation of sound, effective policies that improve voters' lives and economic
prospectsa€!

•  William Janeway: The Rise and Fall of the Socially Beneficial Corporation: a€~The rise of the 
neoliberal order in the 1970s and 1980s coincided with the demise of the socially beneficial 
corporation. Since then, the US federal government and other institutions have managed to offset 
the loss of only part of the broader contributions that big business once madea€!

•  Addison del Maestro: Suburbia and Paranoia: a€~One of the things I think about, looking forward 
to owning a house one day, is whether I will become one of those people who wonders why anybody is 
out walking. a€oeWhat are they up to?a€D a€oeShould we call the police?a€D I can laugh at that now, 
but I wonder how much I will have to resist those attitudes which the
suburban lifestyle seems in some way to triggera€!

• The Editorial Board: The drone war in Ukrainea€!

•  Venkatesh Rao: The Muskening: a€~Musk and the society of hive-minds that is Twitter have gotten 
into each othera€™ s OOP A loops, leading to a kind of mutual collapse. Like two heavyweight boxers 
knocking each other out simultaneously^!. I call this situation the Muskening. Where every day is 
International Own Goal Daya€!

•  Clan Twomey: a€~Fair to say not many TDs besides @Paschald will read the latest book by @delong, 
never mind review it so cogently: Paschal Donohoe: "The pitfalls that beset progress: James 
Bradford DeLong presents a magnificent if slightly frustrating and occasionally drawn-out 
reflection on the history of our global economya€!

• David Gerard: Welcome to Twitter, Mr. Musk! Herea€™ s your accordiona€!

• Will MacAskill: a€~My thoughts and feelings about the actions that led to FTXa€™ s bankruptcy, 
and the enormous harm that was caused as a resulta€!
Leave a comment

AJs

Tom Hancock: Xi Starts Third Term Facing a Bitter Intellectual War: a€~The public debate among 
senior economists centers on the merits of a return to a Mao Zedong-inspired a€oepeoplea€™ s 
economy.a€D Ita€™ s witnessed otherwise-mundane news items about rural cooperatives and public 
canteens, features of the Mao-era economy, suddenly going viral online. The debate underlines a
widespread uncertainty in China about where the nation is headed under Xi. And that itself is a 
drag on an economy already in the doldrums due to the pandemic and a housing slumpa€!. One 
universal feature of Chinaa€™ s intellectual war is that everyone seems to feel like a victim. The 
tone of economists like Jia Kang suggests they feel somewhat under siege, while a response to the
agricultural cooperatives debate posted on Utopia suggested the left feels defeated, tooa€!

The Economist: [William Magnusona€™ a€oeFor Profita€D offers thrilling tales of commercial 
endeavour: a€~Corporations often start out with the public good in mind. It doesna€™t lasta€!. For 
much of corporate history, serving society was part of their charter. Romea€™ s publicani, or 
publicans, were government contractorsa€!. Over time, charters have gone, but corporations still 
bear
the public good in minda€”in some cases at least as much as profit. Henry Ford wanted to create 
low-priced cars made by highly paid workers.a€! He draws sensible conclusions from this. 
Corporations cannot hope to put public interest above all else for long; what the public wants is 
far too complicated for them to fathoma€!

Steve Schmidt: American politics remains broken: a€~American politics was broken before the Tuesday 
election. It remained broken on Wednesday morninga€!. Herschel Walkera€™ s candidacy is the living 
embodiment of George Washingtona€™ s farewell warning. Most of these extremist candidates were very 
narrowly defeated. It was razor thin. This line will not hold forever. It is an
astonishment to see Democrats claim credit for a great victory over the extremists who are fueled 
by their condescension, incompetence and ideological obtuseness. Instead of boastfulness, this 
should be an occasion for the deepest humility and gratitude that the a€oered wavea€D did not 
materialize. That it didna€™t is the result of the wisdom of the American people, not the genius of 
the Biden
White Housea€!

Lucrezia Reichlin: Melonia€™ s Choice: a€~The adoption of an anti-EU stance by Italy's government 
would threaten the future of the European project by undercutting efforts to advance the 
institutional reforms that are needed to support further integration. And such integration is 
essential to enable Europe to confront the biggest challenges facing its citizens.a€! Without a 
shared vision, the
EU will remain inherently unstable. But formulating such a vision, as Macron is attempting to do, 
takes work, such as forging consensus on thorny questions and implementing difficult governance 
reforms. Acting as a spoiler is much easier: simply thwart progress, and the edificea€™ s collapse 
will practically take care of itself. This a€“ not another fiscal crisis a€“ is the real danger 
posed by
Melonia€™ s government.

Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

