Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)The first reason that tax cuts on capital income and on income for the rich did not produce 
higher investment and faster economic growth is this: In an economy at full
employment (or in an economy where the Federal Eeserve has a very strong sense of the wedge it 
should maintain vis-A -vis full employment), any incentive effects of tax cuts on
investment will be offset by the drag imposed by the larger government deficit on investment. Only 
when the economy is not at full employment, and the federal reserve either is or
thinks  it is out of ammunition, can tax cuts have any significant effect on aggregate demand. And, 
even then, it is not clear that the component of aggregate demand that will be
boosted is the investment component. There is an income as well as a substitution effect associated 
with tax cuts for the elite and for capital income. And I have never seen any
convincing evidence that the substitution effect dominatesa€“and I have locked, hard:

Corey Husak: The Relationship Between Taxation & U.S. Economic Growth'. a€~In the 1980s, 
policymakers followed these models and drastically
lowered the top individual marginal income tax rate, from about 70 percent down to 28 percent, and 
lowered the top corporate rate from 46 percent down to
34 percent.5 But instead of booming, income growth slowed. As the government reduced statutory tax 
rates, especially for those at the top, inequality
exploded, and income growth rates went downa€!. Broad empirical data are the opposite of what 
neoclassical models predict. The U.S. national savings
rate,                                                                        for example, declined 
in the 1980s after taxes on capital dropped, and it again declined after capital tax cuts in the 
1990s and 2000sa€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/the-relationship-between-taxation-and-u-s-economic-growth/>

This I find depressing, but not surprising. I am enough of a material list utilitarian to believe 
that ex-ante skepticism about the value of these tax refunds does not translate into ex­
post lower utility. But it does mean that these tax refunds are not perceived as as large of 
benefit as they should be, and thus have a difficult time attaining political economy
salience:

Sydnee Caldwell, Scott Nelson, & Daniel Waldinger: Tax Refund Uncertainty: Evidence and Welfare 
Implications'. a€~Transfers paid through annual tax
refunds are a large but uncertain source of income for poor households. We document that low-income 
tax-filers have substantial subjective uncertainty
about these refunds. We investigate the determinants and consequences of refund uncertainty by 
linking survey, tax, and credit bureau data. On average,
filersaC™ expectations track realized refunds. More uncertain filers have larger differences 
between expected and realized refunds. Filers borrow in
anticipation                                                                      of their refunds, 
but more uncertain filers borrow less, consistent with precautionary behavior. A simple 
consumption-savings model suggests
that refund uncertainty reduces the welfare benefits of the EITC by about 10 percent.

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/tax-refund-uncertaintv-evidence-and-welfare-implications
/>

3) My view: the first policy priority here is anti-NIMB Yism: make it easy and profitable for those 
people who want to move to the growth polls to move to them. Then we can see
what remaining regional opportunity problems we have. Our ability to make public investments is 
limited. Having them having to be made in an environment in which housing
costs trap people in low opportunity placesa€’’places in which government expenditures have 
relatively low returns in terms of boosting overall productivitya€’’strikes me as a
lose-lose:

Equitable Growth: a€~People just cana€™tmove, says Gbenga Ajilore, regarding the idea that entire 
swaths of the country are beyond assistance.
Fiscal-federalism increases economic distortion, says Whitney Tucker. We need to reform the way we 
finance public goods. The question, why don't you
just   move?, is problematic, says Dominique Derbigny Sims, to Gbenga Ajilorea€™ s point. That's 
the wrong questions. Asking someone to uproot their
community, their whole history, is dismissive of their lived experience. Plus: It's really 
expensive. When you deplete the tax base, you can't give the public
servicesa€!. Then those firms move from the South to overseas. You're left with no tax base and a 
low-wage workforce, with no spending on education,
etca€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/equitablegrowth/status/1410313292975902727>

4) It now looks to me like end of 2022 is going to be our moment of retaining full employment. 
There is still a year and a half long slog before us, and that is if nothing else goes
wrong:

Equitable Growth: a€~For the week ending June 26a€”359,130 workers filed for regular unemployment 
benefits. Regular initial claims continue to trend
down. States reported that another 115,267 workers filed for initial PUA. Many states prematurely 
withdrew from the program before June 26. In total,
474,397 workers filed initial PUA or regular unemployment benefits last week. Regular continued 
claims, also referred to as insured unemployment, was

3.3 million the week ending June 19. Adding all Unemployment Insurance programsa€”including PUA, 
PEUC, and Extended Benefitsa€”a total of 14.7
million workers claimed benefits the week ending June 12

LINK: <https ://twitter.com/equitablegrowth/status/1410579184527806474>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)I would not say that the household survey tells a slightly less-promising story than the 
employment survey. I would say that the household survey tells a disturbingly less-
promising story then the employment service. I am going to dig deeper into this and try to figure 
out what the firm birth-death adjustments and what the seasonal adjustments are
doing right now, because, as Ceci Rouse rightly says, the noise these days is so great that a 
single datapoint should not move your beliefs by more than a smidgen:

Elise Gould: a€~Latest jobs report shows the economy added 850,000 jobs in June, a promising sign 
that the recovery continues on tracka€! a significant
uptick in job growth, increasing the speed of the recovery. Average monthly job growth over the 
last three months comes in at 567,000. At that pace, we
will likely get down to 4% unemployment this time next year with a full recovery by the end of 
2023. The largest rebound continues in leisure and
hospitality, adding 343,000 jobs in June. Most of these gains were in food and drinking places. 
There were also significant gains in education, professional
and business services, retail trade, and other services. The household survey tells a slightly less 
promising storya€!. Most measures were little changed and
the unemployment rate ticked up slightly to 5.9% as 151,000 additional workers returned to the 
labor forcea€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/eliselgould/status/1410940926227255298>

2) It is so nice to see smart, intelligent, rational, things from the CEA. For four years we had a 
combination of obsequious toad-eating towards the kleptocrat and his posse, and out-
and-out lies:

Cecilia Rouse & al:. Distinguishing Between Signal & Noise in Recent Jobs Data'. a€~The onset of 
the COVIDa€“19 pandemic resulted in historically
large job losses, and its retreat this spring has allowed millions of Americans to return to work. 
On average since January 2021, the U.S. has added about
500,000 new jobs per month. However, job growth has also been noticeably volatile month-to-month 
since January. This volatility in job growth during the
pandemic reflects both real volatilitya€’’economic reverberations of the pandemic shocka€”as well 
as heightened measurement error due to the challenge
of collecting statistical data amidst a pandemic. These considerations warn against placing too 
much weight on any single data point in assessing the
current state of the economy, even as the worst of the pandemic in the U.S. fades awaya€!

LINK: 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/cea/blog/2021/06/29/distinguishing-between-signal-and-noise-in-recent-io
bs-data/>


jj i must say mat i am extremely, extremely pieasua witn me mgmy competent ana iiigniy 
leuniiouraiiu JOD mat Brian ueese is aonig. nere ne says smart tilings, ana receives very

wise counsel From some of the very best in the business:

Hamilton Project: Policies to Protect Workers and Families: Rethinking Social Insurance: a€™ pening 
remarks from former U.S. Health and Human
Services Secretary Sylvia Matthews Burwell, as well as Q&A with former Chair of the Council of 
Economic Advisors Jason Furman a€ I. Brian DeeseaCI
and Robert Greensteina€!

LINK: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3Lg-7aSc Do>

4) And no sooner do I find one video that becomes a must-watch as I find another. Here, again, is 
Brian Deese being very very smart. Watch this as well:

Atlantic Council Front Page: A Special Event with Director of the National Economic Council, Brian 
Deese

LINK: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H92ivdaGy8I&t>

5) Here is Phil Lubin, one of the managerial and entrepreneurial forces behind Evernote and the 
video presentation program mmhmm, Hea€™ s talking his book here. But it is a
very good book to talk. We are still trying to figure out what our stuffing a decade of virtual and 
hybrid managerial business-model experimentation into a decade will do to the
pattern of future economic growth. It will certainly do something. And we need to find this out 
pronto:

Phil Libin: Lessons for CEOs: a€~Imagine a parallel universe where we never had to commute before, 
and I came in and said, a€oeListen up guys, I need
you to waste two hours of your day sitting in traffic. No, you wona€™ t get any work done, no, it 
wona€™ t be time spent with your friends or family, and
yes, ita€™ s terrible for the environment, but two hours a day, you have to sit in traffic.a€D 
Essentially thata€™ s what companies are asking employees to
do by telling them to come back to the office. So rather than saying that wea€™re only doing this 
because we have to, think about the amazing new
powers we have, and how much better our lives are if we embrace thema€!

LINK: <https://foundersfactory.com/news/lessons-for-ceos-from-phil-libin-evernote>

6) This is another serious silicon valley guru trying to figure out what the play gear will bring 
us in terms of office reconfiguration. The coming of high-voltage alternating current
electricity eventually, after a generation, brought us the assembly line as we have known it. The 
plague is cramming into a shorter time, we think. But what changes? We still do not
know, and need to find out:

Steven Sinofsky: Creating the Future of Work. From Trauma to Opportunity: a€~What comes next for 
work?a€l We have learned a whole new and
improved way many things can work, and it isna€™ t likely we will go back to our prior waysa€L The 
post-pandemic world will provide the impetus and
tools   to rethink the Corporation, and more broadly innovation, and how work is structured and how 
individuals contributed!. Making things, extracting
things, and moving them around the world remains remarkably difficult in its own right, but all of 
those businesses are now constrained and enhanced by
software as a primary source of innovation and operation. Every business is now a software 
businessa€!. The biggest change has been the move of
technology from a supporting role to a central role. It isna€™ t just that messaging became more 
important or that video meetings began to work, but that
people quickly realized these can actually be superior. The next step is to take these tactical 
lessons and apply them more broadlya€!. Those that believe
things will return to normal except maybe for that one thing, or that wea€™ 11 do what we always 
did just with this one extra step, will be the ones that are
ultimately disrupteda€!. Wea€™re emerging from a generation-defining event and therea€™ s every 
reason to think in the years to come that the
reinvention                                                                        of work and what 
it means to be a corporation will change as much going forward as those did in the period following 
the return from the
Wara€!

LINK: <https://medium.learningbyshipping.com/creating-the-future-of-work-449c66707e35>

7) It seems to be nobodya€™ s job to figure out how to do coalition maintenance and low-information 
voter briefings about items of real substance in the 21st-century. And right­
wingers are as bad off here as centrists and liberals:

Matthew Yglesias: a€ceFuturea€ce & the Future of Media: a€~The crucial thing is this wouldna€™t 
just be a news site with a left-of-center brand (there
are plenty of those), but rather one that deliberately tried to elevate left-of-center ideas that 
are popular with swing voters. Conventional mediaa€! [has]
young college graduates who live in big cities making stuff that appeals to their friends, who are 
also young college graduates who live in big cities. It
gives   a leftward spina€! but also a politically toxic framinga€!. Cultivate an older, more 
working-class audiencea€! mix straight news with coverage that
focuses on the concrete material stakes in government. Jon Tester delivering for Montana public 
lands. Joe Biden delivering an expanded Child Tax Credit.
ARP funding keeping cops and teachers alike employed. You could also do inverse-Fox and elevate the 
most unpopular right-wing ideas. Bring a well-
connected Republican economist on to talk about how the minimum wage should be $0. Find a House 
backbencher who agrees and interview him. Get
conservatives talking about how this is what theya€™ d do if political considerations didna€™ t 
stop thema€!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring.com/p/future-media>

8) This is, I think, 100% right. COVID-19 Was not made by human hands from RaTG13 In any form of 
gain of function research or otherwise. What Covid came from, or
something much much much closer, is still out there. And that we have not found ita€™ s near 
cousins means that our failure to find it exactly carries no information. And those
who claimed that it does carry information should be ashamed of themselves, if they can be ashamed 
of themselves:

Lindsay Beyerstein: Covid: Why a Natural Origin Story Is More Likely: a€~a€oeEven if youa€™re doing 
the most sophisticated gain-of-function
research you could possibly be doing, you have to start with a virus thata€™ s at least close. We 
would estimate 99 percent, [or] even higher than that,

99.9,a€D Dr. Robert F. Garrya€!. Therea€™ s no way to use laboratory tricks to overcome this need 
for a close source virusa€!. If RaTG13 were used as a
backbone for Covida€“19a€! youa€™ d expect to see big chunks of exact similarity with coherent 
chunks of new informationa€!. Insteada€! over 1,000
point mutationsa€!. Therea€™ s at least one wild virus thata€™ s at least 99 percent similar to 
Covida€“19 somewhere in naturea€l. Ita€™ s more likely
that it got out naturally (like SARS and MERS) than that it took an undetectable detour through a 
secure biolaba€l. Meanwhile, the natural-origin theory
just involves countless bat roosts with millions of bats doing what they do best: generating new 
viruses like the worlda€™ s most chaotic

supercomputer^ I

LINK: <https://newrepublic.com/article/162689/bats-covid-19-lab-leak-theory>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€ I weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

