Subscribe now

Michael Hiltzik: Column: How did America get addicted to a policy that fails everyone but the rich?

The neoliberalism of Ronald Reagan has served only the rich, yet it still governs American economic 
policy. UC Berkeleya€™ s Brad DeLong examines why in his new book.

Herea€™ s the central riddle of U.S. politics since the Great Depression:

Social Democratic policies crafted in the 1930s succeeded in creating a long era of widespread 
prosperity, then suddenly lost their credibility in the mid-1970s. They were replaced
by the neoliberalism of Ronald Reagan, which failed to help anyone but the rich, yet still governs 
American economic policy.

The ascent of neoliberalism and its staying power a€oeis a puzzle,a€D J. Bradford DeLong writes in 
his magisterial new economic history of the 20th century, a€oeSlouching
Towards Utopia.a€D Ita€™ s the central puzzle that DeLong, a professor of economics at UC Berkeley, 
a widely followed economics blogger and one of our leading critics of
economic inequality, aims to examine.

DeLong takes as the canvas what he calls the a€oelong twentieth century,a€D which he defines as the 
period from 1870 to 2010 and argues was a€oethe most consequential years
of all humanitya€™ s centuries .a€D

The a€oewatershed-crossing eventsa€D of 1870, in his view, include the emergence of globalization, 
the industrial research lab and the modern corporation. The era ends in 2010
with the developed world a€” specifically the countries of the North Atlantic a€” still coming to 
grips with the Great Recession of 2008.

The story DeLong tells doesna€™ t really end there, for its reverberations still are felt today. In 
that context, the most important portion of his book covers the shifting approach to
market forces. That portion starts with the Depression.

By bringing to the middle class and working class the recognition of their shared interest in a 
more inclusive economy, the Depression produced a drive for social insurance and
social justice. Franklin D. Roosevelta€™ s New Deal recognized those interests by creating programs 
such as Social Security and pro-labor policies through the National Labor
Relations Act.

This was the era of social democracy, reflecting the views of Hungarian economist Karl Polanyi, who 
rejected the conservative view that the market had to be permitted to function
without interference, even if it produced unjust outcomes.

a€oePolanyia€™ s counter was that whether saying the market can do it all or that ita€™ s all we 
can have, people will not stand for it,a€D DeLong told me during a lengthy
conversation about his book. a€oeYou will get a large group of people wanting to elect someone who 
will do something about the system.a€D

In the post-Depression era, it became understood that a€oenot only shouldna€™ t the market be left 
to do it all,a€D DeLong says, a€oeit cana€™ t do it all or very much unless it is
properly primed and aided and guided.a€D

a€oeSo you need things like the GI Bill to produce a money flow into education, and things like 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac [the government-sponsored housing finance
agencies], because otherwise funding homeownership expansion on the scale that America needed would 
be all but impossible .a€D

Social democracy, in DeLonga€™ s telling, encompassed a vast array of programs not normally thought 
of as core economic ventures a€” airport construction, the National Park
Service, government-funded research in health, Head Start in education.

However one defines it, social democracy worked, ushering in what DeLong calls a€oethirty glorious 
y earsa€D of prosperity (actually 1938-1973 a€” the phrase was coined by a
French economist, referring to the postwar French economy of 1939-1979). The developed economies 
grew by an annual average of 3% during those years.

The very breadth of economic expansion made the public highly receptive to all these programs, 
including the social safety net. As president, Dwight Eisenhower warned that
tampering with, much less abolishing, Social Security, unemployment insurance and other social 
programs would mean the extinction of the Republican Party.

But then it all came apart. It would have been hard to sustain annual growth of 3% under any 
circumstances, but the 1970s brought the oil shocks, which tripled the price of oil,
produced high inflation and provoked a sharp economic slowdown.

Opinion soured on redistribution of income to sustain the poor, and on environmental regulations. 
a€oeThe fading memory of the Great Depression ,a€D DeLong writes, a€oeled to
the fading of the middle classa€™ s belief ... that they, as well as the working class, needed 
social insurance.a€D

The stage was set for what DeLong calls aCcethe neoliberal turn.aCD Of course, a€oeneoliberala€D is 
a misnomer; the concept is more properly described as a return to
conservative market economics. The right wing yoked economic conservatism to a cultural critique 
aimed at discontent with the movement for racial justice.

Indeed, one insight that DeLongaC™ s approach leads us to is how little the rightaC™ s attack on 
social justice initiatives has evolved in nearly a half-century. In 1980, conservative
economist Martin Feldstein inveighed against unemployment insurance because it would produce 
inflation, health and safety regulations because they would reduce productivity,
and  welfare because it would a€oe weaken family structures ,a€D Medicare and Medicaid because they 
would drive up healthcare costs.

Even earlier, in 1962, Nobel economics laureate George Stigler lamented the a€oeinsolencea€D of 
civil rights demonstrators. Complaints about the a€oepermissivenessa€D of
liberal parents was a feature of Republican critiques.

Compare that to todayaC™ s GOP shibboleths. Republican governors competed to see which of them 
could rescind pandemic-related unemployment benefits faster; deregulation
has become a permanent plank in the GOP platform; Medicaid is still a target of right-wing 
a€oereformersa€D; Sen. Ted Cruz (R- Texas) depicts President BidenaC™ s student
loan relief program as one directed at aCcethe guy that studied queer pet literature,a€D and Rep. 
Lauren Boebert (R-Colo.) says it will rob hardworking Americans to pay for a
studentaC™ s aCcedegree in lesbian dance theory.a€D

Targeting ethnic and Black communities still exists on the right, though the GOP today also targets 
LGBTQ rights.
The social democracy movement a€oeran aground in the 1970s,a€D DeLong told me.

To some extent, social democracy foundered on an outbreak of bad luck.

aCceWith no Iranian revolution, no tripling of world oil prices, Jimmy Carter wins reelection and 
you get a reconfiguration of social democracy with more respect for the role of a
market economy with the right adjustments and the right distribution of income,a€D DeLong says.

a€oeSo it was just bad luck that landed us with Reagan and Thatcher, who had very little idea about 
how to actually accelerate growth, and who wound up doing nothing
constructive except greatly increasing income and wealth inequality and then entrenching the 
ability of inequality to put its thumb on the scale of elections .a€D

As DeLong writes, a€oeThe rich had the largest megaphones, and they trumpeted the fact that their 
incomes were growing rapidly. And those lower down ... were told that if only
they were sufficiently worthy, the unleashed market would give to them too, and they more than half 
believed it.aCD

Ita€™ s proper to acknowledge, as DeLong does, that even amid rising inequality the average 
Americana€™ s living standards have improved markedly, in part thanks to the fall in
prices of technology: Households with home air-conditioning have risen from 55% in 1979 to 90% in 
2010; microwave ovens from 5% to 92% of households; computers from 0%
to 70%.

Yet DeLong points out that the features of a middle-class life that used to be within reach have 
receded, such as a detached house in a good neighborhood, the ability to pay for a
good college without borrowing, health insurance that doesna€™ t leave one bankrupt after a heart 
attack.

Despite its obvious shortcomings, neoliberalism has wriggled its way into political orthodoxy. It 
was embraced by Bill Clinton who, as DeLong writes, declared in a State of the
Union address that a€oethe age of big government is overa€D and pledged to a€oeend welfare as we 
know ita€D (via a reform program that has had a disastrous effect on poor
households). Barack Obama, DeLong notes, called for government austerity when the unemployment rate 
rose above 9%.


DeLong posits that the neoliberal turn has survived because the end of the Cold War gave Reagan a 
halo that persists, and for some reason has infused his economic policies despite
their failure to produce economic justice.

So where does that leave us today?

a€oeResurrecting social democracy is not in the cards, because it rested on technologies of 
production and social organization as they existed in the 1950s,a€D DeLong told me.
a€oeNor is resurrecting Reaganism. But if there is no left-wing alternative to neoliberalism, the 
right-wing alternatives are much more unpleasant a€” a politics of a€~you have
enemies and you need to give me close to plenary power so I can protect you.a€™ Thata€™ s a 
dangerous situation, and one that we seem to be drifting towards.a€D

Whether the hands on Americaa€™ s economic tiller are capable of guiding us to a fair future 
remains in question. DeLong concludes his book with that question: a€oeA new
story,a€D he writes, a€oewhich needs a new grand narrative that we do not yet know, has begun.a€D

Subscribe now
Leave a comment

