Subscribe now
Berkeley City Club
2022-09-16 Fr

Every time I come to this building, I think that it is vastly underused, and that Berkeley is 
vastly under-communitized. My memories of my experiences here are what prompt me to
immediately accept any invitation to speak in the Berkeley City Club Building.

And so here I am.

After I leave, I think there ought to be a way to get many, many more people to three times as many 
people in this room for Breakfast Club, and to make much better use of this
wonderful, wonderful building that we have been bequeathed by Julia Morgan and companies. And then 
life takes over. And I forget that I promised that I would try to do
something     to make Berkeley even more Berkeley than it is. And so when someone like Larry calls, 
I say, oh, yeah, I really should do that. I really should get up and come early in
the  morning and drink more coffee than is probably great. In order to contribute to making 
Berkeley more Berkeley. Let me see if I can get up my slides. Let me see if I can get my
picture of the economic. Let me start by saying I have just published a book from Basic Books, 
Slouching Towards utopia and economic history of the 20th century. It is now six
624 pages, including the index. The manuscript for years ago was 1000 pages, plus there were 500 
pages worth of note. There weren't notes, outlines and dumb scattered passages
and quotations for another 500. Maybe I could have persuaded UC press to publish a 2000 page book. 
But I certainly could not convince basic and I decided I wanted to have the
basic audience because I thought I could make this thing actually readable. Lo and behold, so far, 
it looks like it's going well. You know, there's the basic editors Tom Libyan and
Brian distal Berg took a serious chainsaw to it then killed many, many of my darlings. And now for 
the first four days, we have 3600 hardcover copies sold and another 1600 ebook
copies sold. And we're well launched at number six in the New York Times nonfiction bestseller list 
and number four in the Wall Street Journal, business books bestseller list, which
surprises me because it's not really a business book. But which does open up the prospect of 
airplane bookstores, which is the holy grail for anyone who actually wants influence

and royalties. Unfortunately, at 624 pages, it's not the kind of thing for just a quick flight down 
to LA or up to Seattle. It's got to be the international terminal. And maybe if you're at
any of it. I start in 1870.1 start in 1870, because 1870 really is the hinge of history. Before 
1870 There was no chance humanity would ever be able to bake a sufficiently large
economic pie for everyone to have enough. Like before. 1870 technology was poor and was grown When 
only slowly, before 1870 resources relative population were scarce before
1870.  By and large, the rule was that whenever additional technologies emerge, say a strain of 
rice that would ripen more quickly so you could actually grow to rather than one in a
wet Southeast Asia summer. Well, back then, about 1/3 of women wound up who survived to 50 wound up 
reaching 50 Without surviving sons, and in the age of high patriarchy
that the world was in before 1870 If you're a woman, and if you're 50, and if you have no surviving 
sons, you have kind of zero social power. So whenever there were extra
resources, they tended to make people think I need to have more children to try to have more sons 
as insurance. Nevermind that one in seven mothers died back then die in
childbirth.                                                                                  And so 
humanity was under a Malthusian inherit.

Typical standard of living was very, very poor. $3 a day or so was what the World Bank would say it 
was if you look at them and compare it to people today, your average adult
male to your typical adult male was kind of five foot three at adulthood that while upper class 
males were average, something like five foot six. And you know, if my wife and I had
sent our children a diet that had made the boy five foot three at adulthood, Alameda County Child 
and protective services would have come in would have taken my son away, and
we would not have seen him again. Parents want their children to grow up well parents want their 
children to do well the fact that the typical human adult is five foot three before
1870 gives you a marker of how poor humanity was back then, except for an upper class. And for that 
upper class, it was the people with resources the people able to direct society
in one direction or another. They weren't directing their energy toward making society more 
prosperous. They were by and large and elite elbowing other elites out of the way. So
they could run a force and fraud, exploitation and domination game on the rest of society by and 
large thugs with spears and their team accountants, bureaucrats and propagandists.
And also they managed to create some kind of high culture among themselves. But most of their ideas 
were concerned not with how to make the world more productive, but how to
justify their place. That was the story of history before 1870. Come 1870 however, the last pieces 
of the institutional complex needed fall into place. And technology takes off like a
rocket so that every single generation humanity's technological competence deployed and diffused 
throughout the world economy doubles, humanity as a whole is twice as
productive  in 1900, as it wasn't 1870 and twice as productive again in 1930, as it was in 1900, 
and so on, and so on and so on. a doubling of humanity's technological prowess,
every generation, you know, human fertility simply could not keep up for the first time in history. 
And once society becomes more than so rich, and institutions like Social Security
become possible out of the surplus. And women learn to read and large numbers and high patriarchy 
begins to erode. We have the demographic transition, so that now we are on the
way  to a world of zero population growth and a population of perhaps 10 billion, while our 
technology continues to rocket forward. For the first time ever, there was the possibility
of  a truly human world a world in which people could have an index of how bad things were back in 
the 1870s. Here with the extremely unusual hair is philosopher John Stuart
Mill. In the final edition of his economics textbook published in the early 1870s. He wrote, quote, 
hitherto it is questionable, whether if all the mechanical inventions get made, that
is                                                                                  up until the 
1870s, railroads, steam engines Telegraph's ways of making steel etc. have lightened the day is 
toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to
live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers to make 
fortunes and they have increased the confidence and also the size of the middle
class. But from Mills perspective, in 1873, humanity was still in a very bad place, even though it 
was then the richest and most technologically progressive country in the world of
Britain.

After 1870 This was Different this was very different. This became very, very different. The 
problem is that as economist Joseph Schumpeter was pointed out most strongly, that
technological progress is not free and not without drawbacks. It is creation that creates immense 
wealth, but it is creative destruction, entire occupations and tire industries, and tire
livelihoods, and tire communities dry up and blow away, as technology grows, as forward as people 
deploy new technologies, doing what your father used to do, or your mother
used     to do, but doing it so much more efficiently and better, that you cannot, you literally 
cannot live your life the same way your grandmother your grandfather did. And then this
creative destruction happens again in the next generation, and the next generation. And in the 
generation after that. Trying to deal with this fact that not only is for the first time it
possible for governance to be something other than elite running a force and fraud, kind of grift 
on humanity. For the first time, it's possible for governance to try to build a truly
human world in which a sufficiently large economic pie is baked. But also that the social order is 
going to be upset every generation. That's the big story of the long 20th century.
That's  a new historical process that starts worldwide around 1870. And it is the particular Bronco 
that we have been writing since. Back before a king 70. Back before ap 70 People
assumed that the problem of production was the hard work. Right? That is yes, it was clear that 
humanity was not productive to produce enough. And it was also clear that most of
the  bad things about humanities social life appeared to be a consequence of the fact that humanity 
was not productive enough for it to be possible for everyone to have enough to
consider Aristotle writing back in the year minus 350, and writing about dumb economics in the 
first book of his politics. And he says economics has four branches. And the least
important is to understand production technologies, and market and market price fluctuations. The 
next to least important is figuring out how to negotiate and boss your
constitutional   rule over your wife. The second most the second, the next second most important is 
figuring out how to raise your children how to exercise your royal dominion over
your children. And the most important is how to boss your slaves. Learn how to boss your slaves and 
you haven't made do the other things not so much. And this had to be the case.
Aristotle said, if there ever was to be a good society, one in which suddenly even some people 
could practice art and science and philosophy. And that would be so sad Aristotle,
unless  we had harps that could play by themselves, looms that could we find themselves unless we 
had the robot blacksmithing servitors that the mythical inventor Didymus had
created to assist him at his job, unless we had these self propelled catering carts that brought 
the ambrosia and nectar into the banquet of the gods as they reclined on Mount
Olympus   so that they didn't actually have to have, you know, those grubby, grubby, you know, 
service sector workers coming in and out and standing behind the counters and didn't
have  to queue in lines to get their plates, but could instead simply be God's happy. We have 
everything of that except the self propelled catering carts now don't what Aristotle
thought was a fantasy we got. The view was that once you have potentially enough for everyone, then 
running the force and fraud regime is more trouble than it's worth and all the
bad things that come from the fact that elites are running a force and fraud machine melt away. 
Vladimir Lenin who has in the running for the meanest person in the 20th century,
thought that within a generation the Russia he was ruling would be a place where everyone had 
enough and where there would be no domination necessary. You know that simply
people would rotate through the administrative jobs and all you need to do an administrative job 
was to know how to add, multiply, divide, and subtract and be able to write
receipts. People thought that solving the problem of baking a sufficiently large economic pie which 
science engineering and technology were visibly doing after 1870

That that would be the big one and that the problem of slicing the pie equitably and pasting it 
That is absurd, distributing what we were producing in such a way that everyone did
have enough, and then properly utilizing it so that it enabled us to live lives in which we were 
safe, secure, healthy and happy, in which we could live our lives wisely and well, that
those will be easy problems to solve once you've solved the problem of production turned out not to 
be so, turned out that the problems of slicing and tasting the problems of
distribution and utilization still love. Why you know, and here I think the book has it nailed. 
Because the forces of production hardware base underlying human society is
transformed   every generation and is transformed in a not necessarily good Schumpeterian creative 
destruction way. And as the forces of production hardware changes, you know,
well,                                                                                    you know, 
the cobbled together, economics, sociological, even cultural, cobbled together rough running code, 
software superstructure of human society no longer works, there
are bugs and crashes. And people need to rewrite the superstructure on the fly to deal with the 
social impacts of technologies they do not understand. And they need to do so
extremely quickly. Because they don't have 10 years to experiment and then look back and see did 
that work or not, they have to do it now. Plus, Plus, there's an enormous fight
between how you're going to what kind of code you should write that as you need science, you need 
engineering, as Friedrich von Hayek, but genius in his way pointed out, you
also really need the market economy. Because any other system will be too stupid to do the job. If 
you have a bureaucracy, well, then the rules and the bureaucratic rulebook have to
be written down by a relatively small group. And once those rules are written down, everyone else 
simply becomes a software bot. I went to the DMV yesterday, I failed at the
DMV, I failed at the DMV, because they did not tell me Oh, and by the way, in order to do this, you 
need to have the car respond, even though it's not going to be respond for
another 18 months. So I went away from the DMV defeated, even though they didn't charge me my $98 
and said, once you get it smog, it'll be quick, but you will need another
appointment. That's a bureaucracy. That's not a terribly smart thing. Although they did have me in 
and out of there in 30 minutes telling me I can't put it do what I wanted to do
yesterday, which is a mercy it was not three hours before they tell me that a command and control 
thing, right? A command and control system is even worse, because there's a boss
at the top. And everyone else is supposed to be not software bugs following the rulebook, but 
simply obeying commands coming down on high which gets garbled as they come


UVW11 VJll 111^11. .TY11VX VJUU IV11LJW3 11 LI IV pVl OU11 133 Lillig LI IV VVU11111CL11L13 
CIVLUUllJ UllUVl 3 LCL11U3 dll J Llllllg UUUUL LI IV 31LL1CLL1V11 Vil LI IV glVUllLJ dL dll. ±VU 
K11UW, UUl 11 J VIA lldVV d llldlIVVL

economy with private property, then as long as you can align market prices with social values, 
action is taken by the people who are out on the periphery of society where the
knowledge of what to do is. And people are incentivized to do the right thing. Or at least the 
thing that makes them richer, because if they're rich, they then get social power, which
they  can use to accomplish their other purposes like you know, feeding their family. We're going 
up to Lake Tahoe sometime when it's not in a cloud of smoke.

And there's a big if you need to align market prices with social value through that mindset and 
things will work out extremely well. However, I have said you won't have anything
that's fair. Right? The market gives social power gives wealth gives social power to those lucky 
enough to have control over resources that are both scarce and productive. And that
does not correspond to what people deserve. Could we go to a better society than just a rich one 
with an unequal descend random distribution of wealth? It's like, well, no, we
couldn't. We tried to ask for more than the market can produce, I mean, wind up breaking the 
markets ability to do what it can do without achieving social justice. You're not when
Friedman would point out that social justice is not necessarily just at all, that a majority of the 
people of the American south from 1870 to 1960 thought social justice meant keeping
the black man down and half the income of white Southerners. And in the process of doing that they 
disrupted economic growth in the south, so much so that in 1960, the South

was only half as rich as the rest of America. The white except the South is a price worth paying, 
throwing away half their wealth just so they can make the blacks only half as rich as
they were and subordinate status. That's the kind of thing Milton Friedman said that happens when 
you reach for social justice. Much better said Friedman and von Hyack. To
recognize that our Gospel has to be the market give us the market taketh away, blessing in the 
market. Now, Hungarian British United States Canadian moral philosopher and semi
contemporary of von Hayek, Karl Polanyi, who ultimately became a Canadian because his wife had been 
one of Lenin, his six lieutenants in 1968, in Zurich, at a time when Lenin's
faction                                                                                    of the 
Communist Party only had six lieutenants. She was the junior member of Lenin's Communist Party, but 
she was a member said wait a minute, that's not going to work,
people will not stand for that. You try to create a society in which the only people who have power 
are those with property, which property rights are the only rights and you will
have a sociological political explosion. People demand that their communities kind of fit them 
comfortably. People demand that they have stability of their occupation, their
incomes, that their ability to earn a living is not disrupted by random decisions of some ruthless 
Cosmopolis financier 5000 miles away, who decides that but their livelihood no
longer passes a maximum profitability test. You know, people will demand that they have the income 
they deserve, and that other people, you know, have no more no higher
incomes, you know, than they deserve. You know, I have a good friend Jason Furman, the professor at 
NYU, a former director of the National Economic Council and Chairman of
the Council of Economic Advisers for Barack Obama, you know, a good guy and a relatively liberal. 
His reaction to Joe Biden's student loan forgiveness program, was, well, it
should be called the inflation acceleration act. Because you know, you're giving money to people, 
and they're going to spend it, it's going to increase inflation. At which point, the
rest of us said, Jason, what are you doing? We ran through the numbers, you said that sector is 
going to have a mid de minimis influence on inflation. But from one perspective, it
was too late, The Economist picked it up, and it's now a crack in The Economist, et cetera, et 
cetera. Why did Jason do this? Well, you know, he thought it was unfair, you know,
that the people getting the $10,000 student loan forgiveness, you know, are not America's poor, or 
at least not that many of them are America's poor. Yes, there are a bunch who owe
a $10,000 debt. As a result of trying for some associate's program that turned out to be actually 
useless. In terms of getting the higher incomes, there are a bunch who got an
associate's degree or a bachelor's degree that might have been worth something except they then 
landed into the awful labor market of the early 2010s. And these student loan
companies are very good at figuring out how to charge you extra fees and extra interest should you 
miss a payment. But you know, if you've got to spend $35 billion a year on
America for social welfare, there are an awful lot of people who are much poorer than people with 
some college debt. And Jason strongly thinks the money should go to them and

so it's unfair to give it to these people.

I think this is Jason's hindbrain taking control of him and making them say things he really 
wouldn't put he think it through but very few of us can think it through and then there are
the Grifters who want to say that? Well, you know, um, of course, this is grossly unfair. You're 
giving away a $10,000 present this lack of baristas who went to Sarah Lawrence and
major didn't lesbian dance there. That's Texas Senator Ted Cruz. The only thing good I can say 
about that is that here we have second generation immigrant Cuban Canadian
American Ted Cruz, attacking people with this kind of culture war. It's unfair. They don't deserve 
the $10,000 if they deserve to be really, really poor. But the people he's attacking
are   not people who are browner than he is the people who are he's attacking are people who have 
either come from or who have washed their ethnic origins in one of the last
institutions that are the Seven Sisters, women's colleges, so at least you're not punching down as 
far as the ethnic gradient in America is concerned. So that's a very small mercy.

That's a thing that's a thing. Lamesa this is a thing we have to deal with this thing. And hence we 
cannot say the market given the market taketh away is less would be the name of
the market, we have to say the market was made for man, not man for the market. And the no holds 
barred fight between those two currents of thought about what kind of social and
economic sociological code we should rewrite in order to deal with the changing forces of 
production hardware that has shaped all of human history since 1870. in a profound way.
If                                                                                    I had more 
time, I could go through various political orders and modes of production and talk about how all 
this works with the New Deal order with the neoliberal order, with
what people say is the decline of the New Deal and the deal. You know, like talked for a long time 
so far. I would like to point out that the Vaughn high expert versus Columbia,
Pike, is still as live and as important today as it has been, indeed, every generation since 1870. 
And if you look at world history since 1870, you do indeed see times when humanity
gets it right, or at least somewhat, right, the bell Apoc up until 1870, back into 1914. What John 
Maynard Keynes called an economic Eldorado. And what Winston Churchill
writing after the World War, one said was the time of the most extraordinary advance in technology 
and human betterment ever possible. But then Winston Churchill said, but along
with this came an enormous increase in the destructiveness of war, making it more destructive than 
anyone had ever imagined it would be certainly than I imagined. And for

Winston Churchill, not to have imagined how destructive World War One should be. It's kind of 
weird, because for five years, he was in charge of the British Navy, he was in charge
of actually buying the guns with the 15 inches barrel that can throw multitone shells 20 miles, 
where they then explode. And even he had not imagined what it might have been

times of great horror, times of genocide times of tyranny, times of enormous destruction. On the 
other hand, times of rapid and fairly equitable growth to the 30 glorious years in
Western Europe after World War Two. You know, the Eisenhower era, which those of us who are at 
least white and male often look back at relatively fondly as a time when
America seemed to be working and everyone was getting better. Nevermind other people.

Those worries are still with us today. Right now we have a world with more technological power for 
human betterment than ever before seen and it continues to advance. And yet,
there are still 500 million people who live at $3 a day or below, for whom life is a lot like those 
of our pre industrial ancestors that is going to bed hungry most nights and spending
at least a considerable amount of time during the day worrying about how hungry they are and where 
their 2000 calories are going to come from next year or next week or even
tomorrow. Right now we have killer robots stalking the skies of of Ukraine. Right now we have a 
surprising Nelly large number of old people, including some of my relatives, who
have  been terrified, and whose eyeballs have been glued to the screen. By very well paid and 
extremely ingenious marketers living South of Market working South of Market in San
Francisco. Why have they been terrified? And why up their eyes? Why do people want to glue their 
eyeballs to the screen to terrify them more. So they can be sold ads for fake
diabetes cures, and crypto Greeks. Plus, plus plus, this year, the monsoon is 200 miles south of 
where it's supposed to be. And given there are 3.5 billion not very rich people in the
world whose livelihoods depend on the monsoon being at the right place at the right time in the 
right volume. The result of which being that Pakistan a third of Pakistan is now
underwater and the Yangtze is 20 feet below where it's supposed to be right now. Plus, we have a 
huge amount of ethno nationalist fear and rage stopping the globe as a political
movement. So much so that people on the center left to 10 years ago were learned critiques of coke 
neoliberalism, unquote, are now saying that neoliberalism if you could get back
to     it would be a better thing than the Neo fascism that they threat that now seems to threaten 
us or the semi fascism. That now seems to threat that the Fulani versus von Hayek
dispute about how to rewrite our software code is not over no technology continues to change 
sufficiently fast that if our economic social software code worked a generation ago, it
does not work now. That's what history has been since 1870. That continues to be what history is 
today. What do we do? Well, you're back in 1924, John Maynard Keynes was if
anything more pessimistic than I am. And he said that he did not know what to do. Right? That any 
plan of action anything, we all need to gather and pull in this direction, we need
to rewrite the economic sociological software code in this way. Oh, that assumes that a plan 
exists. Yeah, but we lack more than usual a coherent scheme of progress a tangible
ideal, all and let me stress that Keynes said all including his, all the political parties alike, 
have their origins in past ideas and not in new ideas. No one has a gospel. The next move
must be for the hit. History does not repeat itself. History does not rhyme and picking up this 
from Keynes in 1924 makes me say that this that right now, the rhyme is extremely,
extremely close. And let me stop there having talked more than long enough

Subscribe now

