I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a
paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: Why Do So Many People Think $10,000 of Student Loan Forgiveness Is a Bad Idea?


The best thing on student loan forgiveness I have yet seen, from the learned and indsutrious Susan 
Dynarsky:

Susan Dynarski: Why I Changed My Mind on Student Debt Forgiveness: a€~I long thought that forgiving 
student loans was a crude and inequitable tool for fixing student aid. College graduates, after 
all, are the winners in our society. College certainly changed my life: My father was a high school 
dropout, but his daughter is a Harvard professor. My student loans (which I paid off just a few
years ago) were absolutely worth ita€!. But today many of those who borrow for college do not 
graduatea€!. I now firmly believe that targeted debt cancellation is the best way to undo the 
damage done to millions of borrowers by a persistently dysfunctional system of college funding and 
student loan repayment. What changed my thinking? Decades of political paralysis around fixing that
funding system. An unending increase in tuition prices and student borrowing. And a growing body of 
evidence showing harm to students who have borrowed to cover mounting college costs. College used 
to be nearly freea€!. A decade ago, we had only a sketchy portrait of how this debt affected 
borrowersa€™ livesa€!. It was the Obama administration that released more detailed dataa€!.
Contrary to the popular narrative, the huge run-up in defaults has not been driven by $100,000 
debts incurred by students at expensive private colleges. Rather, they are driven by $8,000 loans 
at for-profit colleges and, to a lesser extent, community colleges. These are the borrowers who 
will benefit from the Biden loan forgiveness policya€!

I confess that my attitude toward student loan repayment has long been a combination of:

1. Isn't there a better way to build the money to build capacity?

2. Isna€™t there a more progressive way to improve the distribution of wealth?

3. Dona€™t we want to retard rather than accelerate the shift of power to the presidency and so 
keep the United States from being a semi-elective dictatorship for as long as possible?

But as for (3), I now think that it is too late. People talk about how a€oesecret congressmen can 
still work. But that requires that issues not be a€oepartisanizeda€n. And looking forward at the 
Republican Party of the future, it seems to me that nothing can be departisanized. The only hope 
for technocratic policy in the future is for a (Democratic) president to say a€oethis is how things 
are going to be, but you can come
along on the train and get some credit.a€D

(2) and (1) still hold. But I find myself sliding towards a different set of questions. The 
questions I find myself sliding towards are:

1. Is this a bad thing? (Answer: no.)

2. Will this stabilize a coalition that will make it easier to do good things in the future? 
(Answer: yes.)

3. Is there a better thing that this forecloses that would otherwise happen with high probability? 
(Answer: no.)

Given the answers to those questions, the only remaining question is whether the costs of an extra 
$35 billion a year of federal deficit are higher than the benefits of this not-bad thing. I 
strongly think that there are no net costs to an extra $35 billion a year of federal deficit as 
long as the Fed continues to hold to its 2%/year inflation target. The2%/year inflation target 
world is one in which a€oesecular stagnationa€D
remains likely. It is one in which the world remains desperately short of U.S. Treasuries, and so 
creating an extra $35 billion/year of U.S. Treasuries remains a no-brainer.

Could we spend the money doing better things? Yes, but what? Show up with a plan signed by 50 
senators willing to use Reconciliation to accomplish it, and we can talk. Otherwise, I dona€™ t 
think critics have much to say.
And, indeed, the fact that critics dona€™t have much to say seems to me to be proved by the LOUD! 
criticisms I hear:

• Biden is giving $10,000 to women who majored in Lesbian Dance Therapy!

• Biden should call it the a€oelnflation Acceleration Acta€U!

• Biden should have put forward a plan for comprehensive higher education reform!

I do have a plan for higher-education reform: put some teeth in the inheritance tax and add-on a 
super-income tax bracket to have the federal government pay tuition for the first two years of 
state-run state and community college and training-apprenticeship programs. Build human capital 
capacity as we should have been doing for the past fifty years.
Whata€™ s that? You dona€™ t have 50 senators on board?

Too bad.
Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Takatoshi Ito: Japana€™ s Lessons for Taiwan

• Brad DeLong: Slouching Towards Utopia a€” Friendly City Books: a€™ September 12 at noona€!

•  Sarah Neville: The Growing Evidence that Covid-19 Is Leaving People Sicker: a€~The potential 
impact on heart and brain disease poses challenges to healthcare systems globally...

•  Paul Kedrosky: a€oeWith news today that Meta and Snap are doing layoffs, I am reminded that 
layoffs are accelerating in the U.S., especially in tech. Gonna be a lot of WFH transitioning to 
?FH and wondering WTF they're doing in Coeur da€™ Alenea€!

•  Michael Pettis: Chinaa€™ s Overextended Real Estate Sector Is a Systemic Problem: a€~The 
problems affecting four rural banks in Henan and the subsequent mortgage boycott in parts of 
Chinaa€! need to be seen not as isolated events but rather as signs of systemic problems that 
reveal a great deal about Chinaa€™ s finances and balance sheeta€!

•  Jerome Powell: Until the Job is Done: a€~The labor marketa€! is clearly out of balancea€! While 
the lower inflation readings for July are welcome, a single month's improvement falls far short of 
what the Committee will need to see before we are confident that inflation is moving downa€!

•  Max Moran: Economists Outraged That Politics Is Hard, Actually: a€~If Furman and Kearney really 
want to pass legislation to end the student loan system and make college affordable for all a€” 
great! Whata€™ s the plan, guys?a€! These are two of the best-positioned people on earth to lead 
the charge for more substantive higher ed reforma€!

•  John Ganz: Historya€”What Is It Good For? Absolutely Everything: a€~Part of me thinks history, 
which has its own muse on Mount Parnassus, is just one of humanitya€™ s fundamental cultural 
practices, like music or art, and it really doesna€™ t need much further justification^!. 
Historya€! is abused and simplified to provide some capsule, Twitter-thread explanation of a 
present practice or event based
on a single episode or ideaa€!. As I get older I am more interested in particular things than in 
general rulesa€!

•  Ross Barkan: You Don't Have a Mass Movement: a€~George Albroa€! said that Niou has a a€oemass 
movement behind her,a€D the type that could dislodge a Democratic nominee who only took about 26 
percent of the primary vote. This is not true at all, though it sounds very nicea€!

• Matt Levine: Musk Tries a New Way Out of Twitter

• Matt Yglesias: The Student Debt Crisis as a Macroeconomic Phenomenon: a€~Graduate student debta€! 
a pretty large number of programs that probably shouldna€™ t exisa€!. Undergraduate debta€! we are 
looking at two things: a demographic bulge and bad macroeconomic policy that happened to collide in 
what amounts to a really bad coincidence^!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

AJs:

Remember the Thomas Friedman Unit: November 2003: a€~a€oeThe next six months in Iraqia€”which will 
determine the prospects for democracy-building therea€”are the most important six months in U.S. 
foreign policy in a long, long time.a€D June 2004: a€oelt might be over in a week, it might be over 
in a month, it might be over in six months, but whata€™ s the rush? Can we let this play out 
please?a€D
October 2004: a€oeWhat wea€™ re gonna find out, Bob [Schieffer], in the next six to nine months is 
whether we have liberated a country or uncorked a civil war.a€D November 2004: a€oeThis is crunch 
timea€!. Iraq will be won or lost in the next few months. But it wona€™ t be won with high 
rhetoric. It will be won on the ground in a war over the last mile.a€D September 2005: a€oel think 
wea€™ re in the end
game nowa€!. I think wea€™re in a six-month window here where ita€™ s going to become very 
cleara€Da€!


Tim Miller: The Mystery of the Missing Republican Ad Money: a€~One Republican has been raking in 
the donations and siphoning dollars away from GOP candidates. It's just that this (former) guy 
isn't on a ballot this time arounda€!. [So] Republicans are heading into the midterms at a 
significant financial disadvantage^!. Ronna and Rick and Kevin dona€™t want to say [why] on the 
record because they live in fear
that a crotchety, heavily made-up old-man will send a nasty RETRUTH about them on a scam social 
media site. The real answer to the question: a€oeWhere did all the GOP campaign money go?a€D Ita€™ 
s in the ball room with Colonel Mango and the classified documentsa€!

Noah Smith: Decade of the Battery: a€~Batteries solvea€! problemsa€! [of] mov[ing] energy around 
through both time and spacea€!. When it comes to storage, batteries are not yet as good as fossil 
fuelsa€!. For transporting energy, there are some ways in which batteries are qualitatively 
superiora€!. Most importantly, though, a battery doesna€™t require a bulky combustion engine in 
order to extract the energya€!.
Your smartphone has a battery in it instead of a little gasoline-powered enginea€!. And as 
batteries continue to improve, their disadvantages compared to fossil fuels will decrease. We will 
develop batteries with longer life spans, greater power density, and so ona€!

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

