Subscribe now

FIRST: No, Recessions Are Not a€oeFunctionala€D

The extremely sharp and articulate Jason Calacanisa€”who will, somewhat unfairly, be best known to 
history for his declaration that he would "jump on a grande" for Elon Musk, he loves Elon so much:

The Chancery Daily @chancery_daily

4:47 PM r™ Sep 30,2022

35Likes IRetweet

a€’’claims that downturns and recessions do you have a "cleansing effect" on the economy.

They are, he says, useful for society. The way you can make money in the downturn is by cutting 
expenses, expenses do need to be cut to keep an organization taut, and a downturna€”when smart 
management has to focus on expenses, because there is no point of no return to focusing on 
growtha€”is when that necessary function is carried out:

In the downmarket, the best way to make money is to cut expenses. You may have problem growing your 
earnings, your profits. You can't grow your profits, your top line, because businesses aren't 
spending money. That's the headwinds. What you can do is cut expense stash. I've been doing this 
myself.  this is why the boom bust cycle in economies. It's a good thing because it fleshes out 
inefficienciesa€!

<https: //overcast ,fm/+65 w6sllpc>

This is a case of what we economists call a "fallacy of composition".

It is certainly true for the individual company that cutting expenses makes the organization more 
taut. Moreover, there are sociological advantages to cutting expenses in a downturn. Then the boss 
can accurately plead that it is not personala€”that they are only doing this under duress, under 
the pressure of force majeure.

But can an organization that can only rationalize expenses during a downturn succeed in rationally 
cutting expenses at all?

More important, your expenses are someone else's income. From the perspective of the economy as a 
whole, a situation in which everyone has cut expenses is a situation in which everyone's income has 
gone down the drain as well. The result is that you have no idea what the underlying demand will be 
for what you might make when the downturn ends. Thus the entire "creation" part of creative 
destruction drops to zero. Thus, from the perspective of the
economy as a whole, the effect of a downturn is to move a lot of people from relatively 
low-productivity activities into the zero-productivity activity of having no job. No constructive 
reallocation of economic activity takes place during a depression.

Moreover, depressions become self-sustaining vicious cycles. There is no natural and inevitable way 
out. There needes to be some kind of active stimulus from somewherea€”an active kick to boost 
demand for something. Unless that active kick turns out by luck to be aligned with the long-run 
structural-change desirable destiny of the economy, at least the first round of constructive 
reallocation that take place as the economy comes out of the downturn will shift
the economy in a wrong direction.

No: In total, and in sum, at the aggregate level of the economy as a whole, the destructive effects 
of recessions and downturns substantially outweigh any constructive or "cleansing" effects. 
Shifting people from low-productivity jobs to zero-productivity does none of the work of figuring 
out how to get people into high-productivity jobs.
So when does the a€cecreativea€D part of creative destruction take place? And when should the work 
of making a firm more taut and efficient by focusing on expenses take place?

Let me detour for a moment:

We are going to have recessions and episodes of inflation. John Stuart Mill put his finger on why 
back in 1829: If there is, say, a shift in demand so that there is suddenly an excess demand for 
lattes and a deficient demand for yoga lessons, then we are going to have a boom in the 
latte-producing sector and a slump in the yoga-teaching sector. Yogateachers will retrain 
asbaristas.Coffee shops will expand. Managers of yogastudios wona€™ t be searching for
new teachers, and will instead focus on making their operations more efficient so that they can 
stay open. The economy will get more productive. The worka€”of creative destruction, and of pushing 
for firm efficiency under threat of bankruptcy a€”will go on, and go on without a downturn, without 
a recession, without a bust.

Now let us consider another situation: Suppose there is a shift in demand so there is suddenly an 
excess demand for money, and deficient demand for lattes and yoga lessons. Then there is a slump in 
the latte-producing sector. Then there is a slump in the yoga-teaching sectors.

But there is no compensatory boom in employment in producing "money "a€”at least, there has not 
been since the days "money" consisted of small silver disks, with an owl on one side and Athena on 
the other, made from ore dug out of the slave-worked mines in the south of Attica.

When there is an excess demand for money, the government can print some and use it to buy stuff; 
and the central bank can print some and manipulate the financial system to cool off the excess 
demand, but these processes do not take place instantaneously. And until they do take placea€”until 
the excess demand for money is satisfieda€”businesses cut back on their spending, which means 
businessesand people lose income, and that income loss forces a
second-round reduction in spending

To conclude: We do not "need" recessions. Recessions are not "functional". Claims that recessions 
are necessary in order to spur desirable structural changes are as close to completely false as 
they could possibly be. During a recession, next to no businesses are profitable, and few are 
hiring.
It is in the boom, not in the recession, that desirable structural changes take place as people are 
pulled into higher productivity, sectors and businesses learn how to expand and increase 
efficiency.

Share

One Video: Remembering Steve Jobs


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Tesla Sankey Chart:

Tesla Q3 FY22 Income Statement

Net profit

$3.3B

16% margin

+3pp Y/Y


Tax

($0.3B)

Other

($85M)


$0.3B

Regulatory credits +3% Y/Y       $1.1 B

+39% Y/Y

Energy generation & storage

$1.6B

+84% Y/Y

Services

Cost of
revenue
($16.1 B)

SG&A

($1.0B)

R&D

($0.7B)


Source: Quarterly results                   @EconomyApp

<ft> APP ECONOMY INSIGHTS

Data source: Shareholder Letter.

Leave a comment

& OA%er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Brian Walsh: 60 years ago today, this man stopped the Cuban missile crisis from going nuclear: 
a€~The person who likely did more than anyone else to prevent that dangerous day from becoming an 
existential catastrophe was a quiet Soviet naval officer named Vasili Arkhipova€!

• MaxRoser: How much economic growth is necessary to reduce global poverty substantially?a€!

• Grover Cleveland: Dedicates Statue of Libertya€!

•  Packy McCormick: Weekly Dose of Optimism #18: a€~[Matt] Levinea€™ s perspective is an important 
one: hea€™ s neither a crypto shill or arrogant skeptic. Hea€™ s a finance nerda€!. He appreciates 
the value of trustless systems, calls-out bad behavior and naked speculation, and thinks that 
whatever is happeninga€! is important, or at least illuminatinga€!

•  Misha David Chellam: The What, How, and Why of Abundance: a€~In the early 1900sa€! Teddy 
Roosevelta€! Progressivisma€!. FDRa€! New Deal liberalisma€i. Which political party will be the 
first to adopt a new set of problem-solving ideas?a€! The center of gravity in todaya€™ s GOP is 
Trump and Trumpisma€!

•  The Economist: Battery-makers are powering a circular economy: a€~Gigafactories are not yet 
exemplars of the circular economy, but they are laying the foundationsa€!. Renaulta€! and 
Stellantis, owner of brands that include Fiat, Chrysler and Peugeota€! are both setting up 
circular-economy businessesa€! not just for batteries, but also for repairing and reconditioning 
parts and vehiclesa€!

•  Duncan Black: The Rough Streets Of The Main Line: a€~Haley's kid goes to Villanova, which is in 
the old money Philly suburbs. The Main Linea€!. If we're meant to understand that PHILLY IS SCARY, 
Villanova is 6 miles from the border of Phillya€!

• Bill Bishop: Xi takes the new Standing Committee to Yana€™ ana€!

• Porfolios Lab: FAANG Portfolioa€!


Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Jay Willis: Questioning the a€ceIntegritya€D of Sam Alito Is Good, Actually: a€~None of these 
mealy-mouthed statements should have fooled anyone into believing that Roe was safe, because each 
of these mealy-mouthed statements carefully avoids making a promise while sounding reassuring to 
people eager to hear onea€!. a€oeSam Alito is a smarmy duncea€D or a€oeClarence Thomas is an 
embarrassing hacka€D or a€oeBrett Kavanaugh is a partisan
stooge who happens to wear robes to worka€D are all reasonable conclusions for people to draw from 
the available evidencea€!

a€0 Jonathan Katz: James Bennet and the rewriting of 2020: a€~Why is Wemple dragging out a 
carefully conscribed, misleading defense of an editor who rightly lost his job two years ago and 
promptly landed another? Ita€™ s because, as I noted earlier, a€oela€™ affaire Cottona€D (and la€™ 
affaire Bennet) have achieved an almost mythological status among those who need to rewrite the 
story of the 2020 civil rights protestsa€”a protest movement that
threatened, for a moment, to address deep injustices of the U.S. systema€”into something else.... 
In this fantasy, it is Tom Cotton and the defenders of the existing hierarchy who are the 
resisters, the a€ceheterodoxa€D truth-tellers whose free speech rights have been mercilessly 
trampled upon. This fiction did more than launch the most profitable Substacks. It has been used as 
a justification for the Jan. 6,2021 storming of the Capitol. That is why James

Bennet must have been right. Ita€™ s too hard for someone like Erik Wemple to imagine the world any 
other way...

Zhuroran Li: Chinaa€™ s Gradual Reform Dilemma: a€~Numerous efforts to rebalance the Chinese 
economy, including Xi Jinpinga€™ s, have failed. Why?... The core of ChinaaC™ s economic imbalance 
is excessive investment... and suppressed]] domestic consumption.... Numerous efforts to rebalance 
the Chinese economy... have failed.  At the political level, the key to initiating and sustaining 
Deng XiaopingaC™ s economic reform was creating and

expanding a pro-reform winning coalition.... Deng summoned provincial leaders who shared reform 
interests with him to Beijing, most notably Zhao Ziyang from Sichuan and Wan Li from Anhui. Deng 
entrusted them with economic management roles.... The vested interest groups of the Maoist system 
decided to take advantage of the expanding foreign direct investments and business alliances with 
coastal provinces.  In many ways, ChinaaC™ s gradual

reform does not solve problems; it kicks them forward and hopes they disappear due to fast growth. 
In reality, the CCP is not so much kicking cans down the road as kicking snowballs downhill: 
shifting these problems forward only makes them accumulate until they are too big to move...

Dan Gardner: The Perils of Predicting Technology: a€~Zuckerberg's Metaverse bet is an old story 
with three possible endings.... I do have an opinion about Zucka€™ s plan that I can summarize 
succinctly: I dona€™ t get it.  Human communication is so nuanced, subtle, and complex that even a 
live video feed can give rise to barriers that dona€™ t exist face-to-face. So how on earth will 
replacing live video with cartoon avatars do anything but create more

impediments?... Evolution has made us social animals... highly attuned to the people physically 
around us.... This is human nature. We can work with it, and build on it, but we push it aside at 
our peril. And no technology will change it, at least not for the foreseeable future.... Let me try 
to distance myself from my own opinion and ask what the history of technology tells us about this 
situation.... There are three possible conclusions. The Resolute Hero.  The

Forgotten Man.... And finally... Vindicated, Eventually.... [But]] consider investors who lost 
millions in wireless in 1905. Were they thrilled when radio finally took off in the 1920s? Again, 
probably not...

John Ganz: More Shadi Business: a€~If you follow me on Twitter, you may have noticed Ia€™ ve been 
in a bit of bad temper.... To the point nowa€”Shadi Hamid recently was on Morning Joe arguing with 
Mehdi Hasan, again about the whole fascism debate.... Let me summarize the political situation and 
you can see what it sounds like: Trumpism at its core is a movement fixated on restoring national 
greatness through... charismatic leadership of a single
providential individual.... The movement is obsessed with national decline and attacking the 
internal enemies.... MAGA also has paramilitary formations that have tried to carry out this 
project to the point of attempting the overthrow an elected government.... Trumpa€™ s political 
appeal has been centered on the denigration of the citizenship of his opponents. That does not mean 
we are destined to end up in a totalitarian nightmare. On the contrary, the

actual study of the history of fascism tells how contingent and complex the actual seizure of power 
of these movements were...
Get 50% off a group subscription

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

