Subscribe now

MUST-READ: A Woman Called a€oeToada€D:


For a clear-sighted appropriation of Classical Mediterranean civilization:


iBrad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Phryne Fisher, Core Curricula, Cultural Appropriation, & Falling Victim to Victorian-Era Grifters

The extremely sharp Timothy Burke writes, on his a€~stack: Timothy Burke: a€~The program, he says, 
does have to focus on 'core texts', it does have to be chronological (which means that authors 
besides wha€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong
Reacting against:


Eight by Seven

Academia: Straight to the Core

I feel some attraction to the curricular ideal of a a€oecore curriculuma€D, some set of classes 
that all students at an institution all must take, as at Columbia University. Roosevelt Montas, the 
director of Columbiaa€™ s Core program, offers a lucid defense of the ideaa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 4 comments A- Timothy Burke
Share

FOCUS ON: Slouching Towards Utopia Book Sales so Far:

■ Hardcover Amazon Sales Rank in Books (Lower Is Better)

6000

4500

3000


CMCKICMCMCMCMCMCUCMCM

CMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCMCM

Figuring out how many copies Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> is actually selling in 
anything close to real time seems remarkably difficult. Amazon has a daily sales ranking. I took a 
snapshot of category best sellers. Amazon reports the following for categories a€ceeconomicsa€D and 
a€oemacroeconomicsa€n:

1. In economics, the book sales rank best seller is Benjamin Grahama€™s nearly fifty year-old 
classic The Intelligent Investor. Its sales rank is #403 in books. The 20th best-seller is the 
audible audiobook version of my Slouching Towards Utopia, which is rank #917 in audible; the book 
next to it is ranked #2177 in books (and the hardcover version of Slouching was at book rank #3859 
when I took the snapshot).

2. In macroeconomics, the best seller is Ray Dalioa€™ s Principles for Dealing with the Changing 
World Order: Why Nations Succeed and Fail, at book sales rank #619. The 20th best seller is the 
audible audiobook version of Nick Timiraosa€™s Trillion Dollar Triage: How Jay Powell and the Fed 
Battled a President and a Pandemica€” and Prevented Economic Disaster, which has audible sales rank 
#9847. The book next to it has book sales rank
#30340. The audio, hardback, and kindle version of Slouching appear on the macroeconomics chart at 
numbers 5,8, and 13, with sales ranks (as of the snapshot) of #917 in audible, #3859 in books, and# 
11729 in kindle, respecively.

What do these mean?

It appears that a sales rank of 1000 in audible is selling about the same number of copies (albeit 
in a different format) as is a sales rank of 2200 in books; a sales rank of 10000 in audible is 
about the same as a sales rank of 30000 in kindle. My guess, which is probably not correct, is that 
a kindle sales rank of X sells three times and a book sales rank of X sells 2.2 times as many books 
as does an audible sales rank of X.

My other guess is that the actual number of hardcover books being sold on a day, all channels, 
isa€”in the range I am playing ina€”roughly 130000/[book sales rank]: selling 1000 hardcover copies 
a day at a book sales rank of 130, and 50 copies a day at the current, as of this moment, book 
sales rank of 2600. Perhaps all-format sales, including overseas, are twice U.S hardcover 
salesa€”but that will change over time: Amazon right now is selling more of my
audiobook than my hardback.

And these are just my guessesa€!

Amazon Best Sellers: Best Economics:

1. Benjamin Graham: The Intelligent Investor (book rank 403)

2. Ray Dalio: Principles for Dealing with the Changing World Order: Why Nations Succeed and Fail 
(hardback) (book 619)

3. Sun Tzu: The Art of War

4. Michael Shellenberger: San Fran-Sicko: How Progressives Ruin Cities

5. Ray Dalio: Principles for Dealing with the Changing World Order: Why Nations Succeed and Fail 
(audiobook)

6. Ramit Sethi: I Will Teach You to Be Rich (audiobook)

7. Chris Miller: Chip War: The Fight for the World's Most Critical Technology (hardback)

8. Nouriel Roubini: Megathreats: Ten Dangerous Trends That Imperil Our Future and How to Survive 
Them (hardback)

9. Peter Zeihan: The End of the World Is Just Beginning: Mapping the Collapse of Globalization 
(hardback)

10. Scott Gallaway: Adrift: America in 100 Charts (hardback)



Give a gift subscription

One Image: CEO Pay:

CEOs make 399 times as much as typical workers

CEO-to-worker compensation ratio, 1965-2021


500

400

300

— Realized CEO compensation
Granted CEO compensation

392.9                    398.8


200

100

0                                                         i            r

Chart Data

Notes: Average annual compensation for CEOs is for CEOs at the top 350 U.S. firms ranked by sales.
Typical worker" compensation is the average annual compensation (wages and benefits of a full-time,
full-year worker) of production/nonsupervisory workers in the industries that the top 350 firms 
operate
in.

Source: Authors’ analysis of data from Compustat’s ExecuComp database, the Bureau of Labor
Statistics’ Current Employment Statistics data series, and the Bureau of Economic Analysis NIPA 
tables.

Economic Policy Institute

Get 50% off a group subscription


O A34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  MajorA4: What Is Mastodon And How Does It Work?: a€~Pick a home instancea€!. Post a personal 
#introductiona€!. Searcha€! for hashtags that interest you and big accounts you know from 
Twittera€!. Make friends, post thingsa€!

• Klaus Marre: GOP Morphs From Political Party to the Greatest Threat to Humanity in 50 Yearsa€!

•  Ben Smith: Media Newsletter 1106: a€~This week is about squinting past the momenta€!. The crisis 
at Twitter begs the question: Whata€™s next? Nothing lasts forever in social mediaaCI Buy: Discord 
and Slack...

•  Robert Armstrong & Ethan Wu: a€~Unhedged newsletter. Good morning. The big hedge fund Elliott 
Management thinks we are on the road to hyperinflation, much deeper market declines, and possibly 
global strife. The Federal Reserve seems a bit less worrieda€!

•  Rana Faroohar: Elon Muska€™ s coming out election party: a€~We all know what happens when half 
the votership doesna€™ t trust the process.a€! The entire business model of targeted advertising 
was pushing us therea€!. Muska€! is certainly a danger, but surveillance capitalism is the bigger 
problem. Ita€™ s a business model designed to appeal to and perpetuate our worst impulses. In my 
dreams, the entire model would be banned; sadly, that
wona€™t happena€!

Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Sarah Breeden: How did a small corner of the pensions industry threaten financial stability?: a€~On 
the afternoon of 28 September, I found myself in a rather unusual position: having to explain to 
journalists why a part of the pensions industry, unheard of to most of their readers, had posed 
such a large threat to financial stability that it warranted intervention in the gilt market from 
the Bank of Englanda€!. Some liability-driven investment (LDI) funds were
creating an amplification mechanism in the long-end of the gilt market through which price falls 
had the potential to trigger forced selling and thereby become self-reinforcing. Such a 
self-reinforcing price spiral would have resulted in even more severely disrupted gilt market 
functioning. And that would in turn have led to an excessive and sudden tightening of financing 
conditions for households and businessesa€!. The root cause is simplea€! poorly managed
leverage...

David Sacks: a€~Herea€™ s why wea€™re in a pickle. Biden does what the staff tells him. The staff 
does what the media tells them. The media does what the Twitter mob tells them. And the Twitter mob 
is a bunch of keyboarda warriors who think they suffer no consequences from their virtue 
signallinga€!

Kara Swisher: a€~Blah blah blah blah, blah blah: . (Welcome to my world for the last 25 years 
everyone a€” now you dona€™t have to wonder why I sometimes get testy.): David Sacks: a€oel love 
how all these blue-checks whoa€™ ve been advocating greater censorship for years are suddenly 
citing Supreme Court cases to maintain that any removal of fraudulent accounts would violate First 
Amendment principlesa€!.a€D Let me say that tech has many
thoughtful and insightful peoplea€L Then there is a class of second and third tier people who suck 
up to the bigs, riding in the wake and at some point thinking they are as important. They are not. 
Many moguls have these remora fish swimming about them, licking them up and down, and thinking they 
matter a€ I. Some let these unctuous enablers remain and everyone quietly snickers at them. You 
should see my texts I get. One quality they always have to feign
an  image as a man of the people and to slag the elite, while they lives of obscene comfort and 
luxury with multimillion-dollar parties, private jets and almost no connection to the life most 
people leada€L Most of all, they are profoundly ignorant about things they nonetheless spout off 
on, frequently wrong but never ever in doubt. They are the worst part of tech, which is too bad 
since there are so many amazing people in techa€!

Nitih Pahwa & Manu Saadia: A Guy Who Already Got Booted From Twitter for Impersonating Elon Musk 
Explains Himself: a€~I had deleted the app from my phone a couple months prior to see if it would 
help with writing. It did wondersa€!. I realized I did not care that much about Twitter anywaya€”in 
fact, it had become an impediment. So, lighting my verified Twitter account on fire was, uh, the 
funniest thing to do. Kind of a last contribution to my
weird friends on herea€”a potlatch, if you will. I impersonated Elon, with the handle and the 
profile pic, and I started tweeting things like a€oeSUPPORT UNIONS,a€D a€oeSUPPORT TRANS RIGHTS 
,a€D a€oeTHE ACQUISITION OF THINGS IS NO LONGER THE DRIVING FORCE IN OUR LIVES ,a€D and a€oeAn open 
society cannot tolerate intolerance^ □. Lots of jokes. It took off and quite a few people fell for 
ita€”some blue checkmarks too,
but not gonna name names. It took about a couple hours for my account to be locked and 
suspendeda€!. You could say I moved fast and broke thingsa€!


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

