Subscribe now

Very Briefly Noted:


Share

• Wikipedia: Late Bronze Age Collapse <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LateBronzgAge_collapse>

•  Ryan Avent (2011): Growth: The Great Stagnation: a€~Has the world temporarily run out of big 
innovatiom?a€! LINK: <https://www.economist.com/free-
exchange/2011/0 l/27/the-great-stagnation>

•  Tyler Cowen (2011): The Great Stagnation: How America Ate All The Low-Hanging Fruit of Modern 
History... <https ://books .google .com/books?
id=tHMNnGFVFQYC>

• Wikimedia Comons: File: Arabia Steamboat Museum-Kansas City, MO 
<https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Arabia5feam£>oaZMuseum-KansasCzA,MO-
DSC07246.JPG>

•  Eric Boehlert: Foxa€™ s Maria Bartiromo Lied About Covid for a Yeara€ "Her Producer Just Died 
From It <https://pressrun.media/p/foxs-maria-bartiromo-lied-
about-covid>

•  Ragnarok Lobster: a€™ Its been well over 10 years since Ia€™ ve taken Andrew Sullivan seriously 
but its still a decision Ia€™ 11 regret for the rest of my lifea€! one
of the sins I have to apologize fora€! <https://twitter.eom/eclecticbrotha/status/l 
374719844772352000>

•  Kathrin Hille: TSMC: How a Taiwanese Chipmaker Became a Linchpin of the Global Economy 
<https://www.ft.com/content/05206915-fd73-4a3a-92a5-
6760ce965bd9>

• Peter Diamond (1965): National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model <https://www.aeaweb 
.org/aer/top20/55.5.1126-1150.pdf>

Three Paragraphs:

1) The bare monetarist modela€”that the only relevant commodities were (outside) money on the one 
hand and currently-produced goods-and-services on the other, and that the
only shocks were shocks to (outside) money supply and money demanda€”was always, obviously 
inadequate. And it always seemed to me that the bare IS-LM modela€”that the
only relevant commodities were (outside) money on one hand; currently-produced goods-and-services 
on another hand; and (safe) bonds on the third handa€”always seemed to me
greatly inadequate as well: it needed not just price expectations, price adjustment, and a labor 
market, but also risk as well. Indeed, what happens with capital inflows depends on
whether those capital inflows are accompanied by risk-bearing capacity when they flow in, or not:

Olivier Blanchard, Jonathan D. Ostry, Atish R. Ghosh, & Marcos Chamon (2015): Macro Effects of 
Capital Inflows: Capital Type Matters:
a€~Expansionary or contractionary effects of capital inflows: It depends what kind: Some scholars 
view capital inflows as contractionary, but many
policymakers    view them as expansionary. Evidence supports the policymakers. This column 
introduces an analytic framework that knits together the two
views.   For a given policy rate, bond inflows lead to currency appreciation and are 
contractionary, while non-bond inflows lead to an appreciation but also to
a decrease in the cost of borrowing, and thus may be expansionarya€!

LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/macro-effects-capital-inflows-capital-type-matters>

2) I dona€™ t think this is right: Republicans have nevera€”nevera€”been opposed to social 
insurance for the right kind of people. Subsidies for a€oejob creatorsa€D have always
been golden. Subsidies for hard-workers who play by the rules have also always been golden. But 
programs that give money to African-Americans? No. And programs that give
money to the wrong kind of people, usually ethnicsa€’’featherbedding unionized workers, elderly who 
spent their money on drink and did not save because they lack the American
thrift, the wrong kinds of public employees with too much book-learning who are too clever and 
aclien? Nope as well.

The line between the a€oeworthya€n who are deserving of subsidy and the a€oeunworthya€D has, 
however, always been shifting and contestable. Which ethnics are good hard
workers? Which are overly-clever, lazy, and alien? What kind of economic shocks and catastrophes 
are no fault of your own? What kinds of economic shocks and catastrophes are
things that the lazy should have insured themselves against ex ante, and because they did not it is 
important now to hold up their poverty as an example?

In a semi-democracy, Republican politicians need to convince not a majority but a plurality that 
they are among the electa€’’worthwhile a€oejob creatorsa€oe and a€oehard
workersa€oe. As the Republican electorate has aged, Medicare has shifted in Republican mythology 
from being a program for the leeches to a program for the worthy. But to call
this a€oemore moderatea€D is, I think, to mistake what is going on:

Matthew Yglesias: Is Asymmetrical Polarization Real?: a€~The GOP is both crazier than the 
Democratic Party and also acting crazier than it did in the
recent pasta€!. But this increasingly loopy version of the Republican Party is also mostly more 
moderate on policy than the Bush-era incarnationa€!. On
Medicarea€! Obama used to argue with Paul Ryan about whether the program needed small cuts (the 
left view) or huge cuts and privatization (the right
view).   Now, the debate ranges from no changes to Medicare for All, with Trump again positioned to 
Obamaa€™ s lefta€!. When liberals freak out about
the GOP these days, they a€™ re mostly not talking about policya€!. Ita€™ s not like Trump invaded 
a medium-sized country on false pretenses, ran a
global network of secret torture prisons, or was caught running a huge illegal surveillance 
programa€!. The flipside of all this is that todaya€™ s
Republicans seem dangerous and authoritarian.,,, After he lost the election, he and many other 
Republican Party leaders told people the election had been
illegally stolen and encouraged a mob to gather, which eventually stormed the Capitol building. The 
part of this that created a literal threat to the lives of
congressional Republicans did provoke a fair amount of intra-party criticism, but ultimately the 
vast majority of his party opted for impunity. When
Trumpa€™    s misconduct didna€™t affect them personally, they mostly supported it. Chris Hayesa€™ 
headline a€oeThe Republican Party is Radicalizing
Against Democracya€D is pretty dramatic, but I dona€™ t think hea€™ s wronga€!. Liberals find Trump 
so abhorrent that they generally refuse to
recognize  that the Trump-era GOP decisively pivoted to the center to ameliorate huge electoral 
vulnerabilities on several key issues. Democrats probably
dona€™  t need to do anything as drastica€!. They probably dona€™ t even need to pander to 
immigrant-hating racists as much as Obama did. But you can
pander a little !a€!

LINK: <https ://www.slowboring .com/p/is-asymmetrical-polarization-real>

3) This has been our world all our lives:

Jody Rosen: a€™In a 1991 commencement address, George H.W. Bush decried a€oepolitical 
correctness.a€D Among the examples of a€oepolitical
correctness [on] campusesaCD cited by the NYT: a€oeAt Harvard, two students who hung a Confederate 
flag out a dormitory window were denounced by
black students.a€Da€! Cancel culture scam is decades old, the rhetoric hasna€™t changed, and none 
of the catastrophes forecast by huckstersa€”from the
purging of Homer and Shakespeare to the collapse of the First Amendmenta€”have come to passa€!. 
Notably in that same U of Michigan commencement
speech President Bush conflated a€cePCa€D with Johnsona€™ s Great Society anti-poverty push. 
Culture war baloney, full of racist doublespeak, serving
an agenda of deregulation, austerity, and war on the poor. Plus ca changea€! LINK: 
<https://t.co/HXYpUDiQkm>

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Hoisted from the Archives:

2015: Musings on the Current Episteme of the Federal Reservea€\: Larry Summers attributes the 
Federal Reservea€™ s decision to tighten policy, in what appears to him and to


me to be a weakly-growing and high-slack economy, to four mistakes, which are themselves driven by 
a fifth, overarching mistake. The four mistakes are: (1) The Fed has much too
much confidence in its models that tell it that the unemployment rate takes the temperature of the 
labor market and the Phillips Curve now still has the slope it had in the 1970s. (2)
The Fed operates as though FOMC members are tased whenever inflation rises above 2%/year, with no 
countervailing painful consequences of low inflation, low employment, or
low output. (3) The Fed believesa€’’without empirical support anywhere that I can seea€”that quick 
sharp moves up or down in interest rates have larger effects in total than the
same interest-rate change made gradually and over a longer term. (4) The Fed thinksa€’’without 
theoretical support that I can seea€“that zero interest rates are not a reflection of an
economy in a pathological state, but rather a cause of economic pathology that is dangerous now 
that the economy is once again a€oenormala€n.

And Summers sees the fifth, overarching mistake the Fed is making right now as: (5) The Fed is 
excessively committed to a€oeexisting models and modes of thoughta€! in the
thrall of orthodoxya€D:

Why is the Fed making these mistakes if indeed they are mistakes? It is not because its leaders are 
not thoughtful or open minded or concerned with growth
and employment. Rather I suspect it is because of an excessive commitment to existing models and 
modes of thoughta€!

I do thinka€’’confidentlya€’’that Summers is absolutely 100% correct in his identification of the 
four component intellectual errors that the Federal Reserve is currently making.
And it is certainly true that these are the result of an excessive commitment to some current modes 
of thoughta€’’there are, after all, a lot of people who join the Fed in thinking that
zero interest rates are a cause rather than the proper treatment of pathology right now, that the 
Fed needs to raise rates now to give it the space to lower them if need be later, that it
is dangerous for inflation to rise above 2%/year ever, that the Phillips Curve somehow has a 
steeper slope than the recent evidence of the past generation can justify belief in, and
that the unemployment rate rather than the detrended employment-to-population ratio gives the 
temperature of the labor market.

But do these beliefs on the part of the Fed really reflect an excessive commitment to existing 
models? There I have my doubts. Or, rather, it depends on what you think the proper
function of economic modeling is. Are models properly idea-generating machines, in which you start 
from what you think is the case and use the model-building process to generate
new insights? Or are models merely filing systemsa€“ways of organizing your beliefs, and whenever 
you find that your model is leading you to a surprising conclusion that you

find distasteful the proper response is to ignore the model, or to tweak it to make the distasteful 
conclusion go away?

Both can be effectively critiqued. Models-as-discovery-mechanisms suffer from the Polya-Robertson 
problem: It involves replacing what he calls a€oeplausible reasoninga€D,
where models are there to assist thinking, with what he calls a€oedemonstrative reasoninga€O. in 
which the model itself becomes the object of analysis. The box that is the model
is well described but, as Dennis Robertson warned,there is no reason to think that the box contains 
anything real. Models-as-filing-sy stems are often used like a drunk uses a lamp
post: more for support than illumination.

In the real world, it is, of course, the case that models are both: both filing systems and 
discovery mechanisms. Coherent and productive thought is, as the late John Rawls used to
say, always a process of reflective equilibrium^”in which the trinity of assumptions, modes of 
reasoning, and conclusions are all three revised and adjusted under the requirement
of coherence until a maximum level of comfort with all three is reached. The question is always one 
of balance.

But it is clear to me that if you give even minor weight to the firsta€”see well-founded models as 
a way of generating new insights rather than just organizing old beliefsa€”that the
line of work into the economics of the liquidity trap that I see as well-represented by Krugmana€™ 
s (1999) a€oeThinking About the Liquidity Trapa€D tells us, very strongly, that
the Federal Reserve is on the wrong track intellectually right now. It tells us that what is out of 
whack has not been and is not the real money stock, but is instead the expected
inflation rate. Or, rather, that because the expected inflation rate is too low, there is no value 
of the real money stock consistent with full employment equilibrium. If expected
inflation were higher, the existing money stock would be ample, or even require shrinking.

This is the conclusion of Krugman (1999): that the economy needs higher expected and actual 
inflation, and that the free-market economy with full price flexibility would deliver
that inflation. But the Fed does not appear to acknowledge either that the economy needs higher 
inflation, that the flexible-price benchmark would deliver this inflation, or that the
job of the Fed is to mimic that full employment-generating price structure as closely as possible.

Moreover, the Fed does not engage in reflective equilibrium. It rejects the conclusions of what I 
regard as the standard Patinkin-style existing model of Krugman (1999). But it does
not propose an alternative model. There seems to me to be no theoretical ground, no model even 
considered as a filing system, underpinning the a€oeorthodoxa€n modes of

thought that the Fed believes. And it does not seem to feel this absence is a problem.
I find that lack of faith in the usefulness of our toolsa€! disturbinga€!

LINK: <https ://www.bradford-delong 
.com/2015/12/musings-on-the-current-episteme-of-the-federal-reserve.html>
Leave a comment

