I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your email 
inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: Economist Review of a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D

Ryan Aventa€™ s Economist review of Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> is very very kind, 
and very blurbable indeed, for which I thank the reviewer profoundly:
a€~Slouching Towards Utopia is an impressive achievement, written with wit and style and a 
formidable command of detaila€!

And so I do blush, and I do hope that people who are impelled to pick it up are not disappointed 
wirh what they find they have bought. People who are not just my friends and relatives are willing 
to say that they really like the book!
Moreover, the Economist review provides a very nice precis:

Economist: Bradford DeLong Reconsiders the 20th Centurya€™ s Economic History: a€~DeLong seeks to 
redraw the temporal mapa€!. 1870 to 2010a€! a coherent whole: the first eraa€! in which historical 
developments were overwhelmingly driven by economic ones... hurtled towards a€oeeconomic El 
Doradoa€D.  Had the denizens of the 19th century known how fantastically wealthy their descendants 
would become, many

would have supposed those heirs lived amid peace and contentment. Yet building harmonious societies 
out of material abundance has proved maddeningly difficult...

Thus today, flying back from Boston at the end of the workweek, I feel profoundly blessed by Tykhe. 
I could have fantasized about a better launch three days for Slouching Towards Utopia, but I really 
could not have rationally expected a better one.

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century

Formats and editions

TOWARDS

UTOPIA   Hardcover, September 5, 2022


AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
6F THE TWENTIETH CENU RY

' J. BRADFORD DELONG

uJ I—J1-J lJ uJ

This format is currently ranked #523.

As of today: 2 Weeks 1 Month | 6 Months I 1 Year | 2 Years | All Available

Sales Rank


3500

7000

10500

09/03/2022

value: 121


14000

17500

08/27/2022             08/29/2022              08/31/2022             09/02/2022              
09/04/2022             09/06/2022         09/08/2022

On Amazon, at least, the hardcover peaked at sales rank 121 on September 3.1 confess I am very 
interested in seeing what people do in response to this review, and to all the other reviews when 
they hit. And then I am also eager to learn what people who are neither my friends or relatives 
want to say about the book after they read it. And then there is the question of what people who do 
not read the book think about what, and whether they will actually worry
over and change their minds for the better as a result of their thinking and talking about what the 
book says. That is: I am worried abou the question of the reception of the book. Which reminds me I 
should write my review of my sometime student Glory Liua€™ s forthcoming Adam SmithaC™ s America: 
How a Scottish Philosopher Became an Icon of American Capitalism chttps: //ww w.amazon 
.com/dp/0691203814> on the reception of Adam Smith in
America.

I would like to take exception to the reviewera€™ s belief that I portray post-WWII social 
democracy a€’’the New Deal Order, as Gary Gerstle calls it chttps://www.amazon.com/dp/0691006075> 
chttps://www.amazon.com/dp/B09SGHRK4H>a€”as a a€oehappy marriagea€D between Friedrich von Hayek and 
Karl Polanyi. I wanted the dominant metaphor to be one of a shotgun marriage, in which John Maynard 
Keynes was the guy with the shotgun who gave
the a€ceblessinga€D. And is the reviewer just telling the reader that I know whereof I speak 
because I was there in the 1990s when politicians and policymakers who wished the return of the New 
Deal Order found themselves trying to maneuver within the Neoliberal one?:

Building harmonious societies out of material abundance has proved maddeningly difficulta€! a duel 
between the insights of Friedrich von Hayeka€! and Karl Polanyia€!. [After] the second world wara€! 
a happy marriage of Hayek and Polanyia€”a€oeblessed by Keynesa€D (as Mr DeLong puts it),a€! bore 
fruit, in the form of a three-decade post-war run of torrid growtha€!. [Yet] when growth sagged and 
inflation rose in the 1970s,
market-friendly, or a€oeneoliberala€D, reformsa€! of which Mr DeLong was himself a stewarda€! 
failed to keep growth high and led to worse inequality a€”yet rich countries pressed on [with 
them]a€L [His] analysis underestimates how deeply neoliberal ideas took root across both the left 
and the righta€!

I think not. Often people from the other side of the Atlantic are too polite. But here I think that 
readers are definitely being warned that I cease to be a reliable narrator when my own career 
begins to entangle itself with history, as we come to the fall of the New Deal Order in the late 
1970s, and the subsequent Neoliberal Turn. In response, I would ask the reviewer: Who does a better 
job of describing the fall of the New Deal and the subsequent rise and strange (to
my eyes) stubborn persistence of the Neoliberal Order? I am arrogant enough to say that I do as 
good a job as Gary Gerstle does in his excellent The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order chttps: 
//ww w.amazon .com/dp/B09S GHRK4H> (albeit in a much-shorter and hence much-overcompressed form, so 
my book is not a substitute for Garya€™ s: readers of my book really need to go read his too).

The piece of the review I took to heart was the reviewera€™ s belief that I have failed to thread 
the Strait of Messina between the Sky Ila of overstressing social beinga€’’forces of production and 
patterns of lifea€”and the Kharybdis of overstressing social consciousnessa€”what ideas people have 
and spread about how the world does and should worka€”and so have had six of my crew devoured by 
the monstrous heads of Skylla:
If this book has a weakness, it is its occasional reluctance to give credit to peoplea€™ s beliefs, 
rather than narrow economic concerns, as a driving force of historya€!. Slouching Towards Utopia 
shows how economic growth can transform the world. It also demonstrates that material prosperity 
alone cannot transport people to the promised land. The future may well be shaped by fights about 
what can.

That is a disappointment. That was not my intention. I will have to go back and see if I can fix 
the balance.
But for that it needs to do well enough for Basic to be willing to publish a revised edition!

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Garfield Clinton Reynolds: Jumbo Jumbo Jumbo: a€~Central bankers are mostly busy delivering the 
rapid policy tightening they gave fulsome notice was on the way when they met at Jackson Holea€!

•  Gillian Tett: Philosopher William MacAskill: a€~The world is a darker place than it was just 
five years agoa€™ . The prophet of a€~Effective Altruisma€™ on giving away his earningsa€”and how 
we can save the world, one small act at a timea€!. 7,400 (mostly youngish) community members who 
have signed up to embrace his a€oeEffective Altruisma€D pledge to donate time and money to pursue a 
moral patha€!

•  J. Bradford DeLong: resenting Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth 
Century <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>, in conversation with LAWRENCE H. SUMMERSa€!. Thursday September 8,2022 
7:00 PM ETa€!

•  Nick Troiano: Why Some Trump Critics Survived This Primary Season and Some Didna€™ t: a€~Ranked 
choice voting and other electoral reforms are showing the way to depolarize American politicsa€!

•  Noah Smith The War Economy: Batteries & Drones: a€~ Another major cluster of high-technology 
industries that the U.S. should target with industrial policya€!. Currently, China dominates both 
of these industriesa€!

•  Andrew Keen: KEEN ON the End of the Future: a€~DeLong explained on Keen On this week that this 
economic juggernaut originated in 1870 with the globalizing German industrial revolution and came 
to a shuddering halt with the Great Global Recession of 2008a€!

•  Jon Brodkin: Judge Slams Musk: a€~For withholding text messages, cites a€oeglaringa€n 
omissionsa€! also chides Musk for wasting time, says there's no time for a€oejust kiddingsa€Da€!

• John Gruber: The Steve Jobs Archive

• Anna Mindess: CafA© Ohlone's Triumphant Return: a€~The Berkeley a€oelove song to Ohlone 
culturea€D isna€™ t a historic recreation: ita€™ s a reflection of a living and resilient culturea€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

AJs

Yuri Slezkine: a€~He Loved Handing Out Decorationsa€™: a€~The admiring biographer of Leonid 
Brezhneva€! finds him an affable heartthrob who longed for peace a€oewith every fibre of his 
bodya€Da€!. Neither capable nor ambitious, he would likely have become a low-level administrator 
had the Great Terror of 1937a€“1938 not eliminated most party and government officeholders^!. 
During the postwar a€oerestoration period,a€D when stolidity was
in greater demand than ruthlessness or daring, they were lined up and told to lead by example. They 
symbolized survival and embodied a new bureaucratic standard. They wore suits, knew how to listen, 
and sat behind long desks. They would offer you a soft handshake, invite you to sit down, ask about 
your children, nod thoughtfully as you spoke, make a good-natured joke, and promise to look into 
the matter further. In their free time, they liked steam baths and
huntinga€!

Matthew Yglesias: Janet Yellen Explains Bidenomics: a€~The case for modern supply-side 
economicsa€!. Biden has mostly delivered on his pro-worker growth agenda, with its emphasis on tax 
fairness and geographically broader economic opportunitya€!. Michigan is the center of U.S. car 
manufacturing, an industry thata€™ s been impacted by all the major legislation during the Biden 
years. That starts with the simple fact that demand for new cars has
remained robust throughout the entire period with no collapse of demand. The Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act invests in creating charging stations for EVs, the Inflation Reduction Act 
invests in American EV manufacturing, and the Chips Act tries to address a key supply-chain 
bottleneck thata€™ s held back production. Therea€™ s more to Bidenomics than cars, but the auto 
industry is emblematic of the approach Yellen calls a€oemodern supply-side
economicsa€D that aims to harness *all* the major factors of production and not just shower private 
financial capital with tax incentivesa€!. The Biden administration will probably be haunted for 
years by the charge that the American Rescue Plan was too largea€!. What the administration says 
now, to quote Yellena€™ s speech, is that a€oethe tail risk of the pandemica€™ s impact on our 
economy was a downturn that could match the Great Depressiona€D
and      a super-sized ARP eliminated that tail risk. I dona€™ t think that fully answers the 
smarter criticisms of ARP by any means, but it does set up one of the larger themes of Bidenomics, 
which is prioritizing certain forms of resilience over a narrow sense of efficiencya€!. America has 
had the best economic performance in the world over the past few yearsa€!

Matt Levine: Crypto Securities: a€~a€oeA basic premise of Web3a€! a€oeis that every product is 
simultaneously an investment opportunitya€Da€!. The good thing is that Web3 and crypto have solved 
the cold-start problem for network-effects businesses. It is hard to build a social network or a 
marketplace or a ride-sharing app or lots of other businesses, because those businesses are useful 
mainly if they have a lot of users, so they are not very useful for
their first users. But if you add a crypto token, the first users get the most tokensa€!. The bad 
thing is that every project is simultaneously a Ponzi scheme, and it is hard to know if people are 
using the project because they get utility out of it or because they hope to dump their tokens on 
future suckersa€!

Subscribe now



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription
Give a gift subscription

Leave a comment

