Subscribe now

FIRST: Zach Carter REVIEWS a€oeSlouchinga€D for a€oeDissenta€n

Very nice, and very thoughtful. I am going to be digesting this review for a long time. So, for 
now, just a few passages and comments:

Zachary D. Carter: A Dose of Rational Optimism: a€~DeLong delivers this material with the clarity 
and dexterity of Kindleberger at his besta€!a€™

Now that does make me blush, and does make me think that it is time to sing the Nunc dimittis: in 
the words of Clark Kent: a€oeMy work here is donea€!a€D

a€oeWhy, with such godlike powers to command nature and organize ourselves, have we done so little 
to build a truly human world, to approach within sight of any of our utopias?a€D DeLong asks in his 
final chapter, only to dodge an answer: a€oeA new story, which needs a new grand narrative that we 
do not yet know, has begun.a€D
Modesty is a virtue in a historian of long centuries, but after the persistent enlightenment of the 
booka€™ s first 450 pages, this limping denouement is a disappointment^!

Well, I could have ended the book with some version of "the arc of the universe tends towards 
justicea€D. But it does no such thing.

The arc of the universe does not clearly tend toward anything, except possibly heat death followed 
by the periodic emergence of Boltzmann Brains. Books that are successful in any sense need to 
conform to and work with the ways humans think; and humans think in narratives; and narratives, 
have to have a beginning, middle, and an end. As of now, the narrative of
the long 20th century ends with our substantial success at baking, a sufficiently large, economic 
pie, and our failure to properly slice and taste ita€”we continue to be flummoxed by the problems 
of equitably distributing our wealth and then utilizing it properly to create a truly human world. 
Plus, as Keynes wrote back in 1924: a€oeWe lack more than usual a coherent
scheme of progress, a tangible ideal. All the political parties alike have their origins in past 
ideas and not in new ideasa€I. No one has a gospel. The next move is with the heada€!a€D

It is what it is. Sorry.

DeLonga€™ s story begins in 1870 because you cannot have the diversity of travel, consumption, art, 
and entertainment that defined the twentieth century without the inventions of the Gilded Age. But 
none of these fancy gadgets would have developed into a transformative mass culture without 
DeLonga€™ s later plot pointsa€’’particularly
the coming of John Maynard Keynes. He enters Slouching Towards Utopia like Orson Welles in The 
Third Man, the brilliant man of mystery whose ideas have colored the entire work at last given room 
to explain the world and its problems. (Keynes was not a sinister villain like Wellesa€™ s 
character, though he would eventually be chased
from the scene.) Keynesa€™ s great genius, DeLong argues, was his recognition that economic 
troubles had ceased to be matters of resource scarcity alone; they had become problems of systems 
managements!

Yes. Exactly. Before 1870 governance and politics had to be, at base, an A©litea€’’thugs with 
spears, and their team accountants, bureaucrats, and propagandists^’’elbowing other potential 
elites out of the way, and running a force-and-fraud domination-and-exploitation game on the rest 
of humanity so that the members of the A©lite could, themselves, have enough

and live an approximation to the good life.

This was, I think, true even of the era of the Democratic Revolution. Otto von Bismarck and 
Benjamin da€™ Israeli were not completely wrong in their responses to the technologies of education 
and communication that produced the age of mass politics. Their response was a€oeTory Democracya€D. 
Their point was that the business-class liberals of the day sought
the von Hayekian dystopia in which the only rights that mattered were property rights. Thus the 
aristocracy and the working class had a common interest in the preservation of and strengthening of 
a€oesocietya€C in which other sources of social power could be deployed and exercised.

After 1870, successful societies switch governments from an A©lite-domination to a 
technology-and-prosperity-system-management mode. This entails a severe reduction in inequality in 
both power and wealth. But smart A©lite members recognize the benefits to themselves of a smaller 
share of a much larger pie and the benefits to their descendents, many of whom
will be non-A©lite, of the bigger pie equitably sliced.

Unfortunately, most A©lite members have not been smart. And one way this shows itself is in the 
extraordinary outsized hatred of Keynes. But that is a topic for another time.

Keynesian ideas opened the door to an extraordinary array of compromises and collaborations^! 
a€oeThirty Glorious Years of Social Democracya€Da€!. And then the neoliberals took over. The great 
puzzle of neoliberalism, DeLong astutely maintains, is how it preserved and even consolidated its 
intellectual grip even as it straightforwardly
failed to achieve the social outcomes it promised. Milton Friedman, DeLong notes, insisted that 
repealing the elaborate economic management apparatus of the New Deal would produce price 
stability, something close to full employment, and a socially tolerable distribution of income. But 
none of that actually happeneda€!. True believersa€!
insist that their program wasna€™ t sufficiently libertarian^!. Buta€! higher unemployment and 
deeper inequalitya€! should have been enough to discredit the program. Instead, DeLong notes, Bill 
Clinton declared the era of big government to be over, and Barack Obama called for deficit 
reduction with unemployment over 9 percenta€!

Here I think Zack puts his finger on the big flaw in my book. The speed of the fall of the New Deal 
Order, and the extraordinary persistence of the Neoliberal Order, are things that I do not 
understand, and cannot really believe happened. Neither can others: Noah Smith, for example, sees a 
single continuous story of social democracy and inclusion slowly, fitfully, and
haltingly advancing.

DeLong is not a triumphalist about the experience of what he calls a€oehyperglobalizationa€n in the 
1990s. He acknowledges that the overwhelming majority of the gains from this project came in China, 
where the glory of new material prosperity must be balanced against the abuses of authoritarian 
surveillance and ethnic persecution^!.
Chinaa€™ s economic managers tried everything they could to give Chinese exports a leg up on 
international competitorsa€!. The United States, like Britain in the nineteenth century, played 
along, believing that a broader, wealthier Chinese middle class would be good for human rights and 
global stability. The question for China, and the
world,  is whether this protectionist first step will lead to a€oeThirty Glorious YearsaCD levels 
of shared prosperity without the social democracy that fostered it in the United Statesa€!. The 
last quarter century clearly demonstrates that this program does not worka€!.

Herea€”alongsidea€”the puzzle of the rapid fall of the New Deal and the stubborn persistence of the 
Neoliberal Ordera€”is the second major flaw in what Mentor of Arisia would call my Visualization of 
the Cosmic All. my education fettered my brain, with the chains of the Barrington Moore 
problematic, and I have been unable to escape. Barrington Moorea€™ s

Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracy is perhaps the ultimate Harvard Social Studies book. 
Its argument, in a nutshell is:

1. Landlord-bureaucrat-aristocrats blocking economic modernization produces revolution from below 
and Leninism

2. Landlord-bureaiicrat-aristocrats iitilizatinp the state to force economic modernization nroduces 
revolution-from-above and fascism.


3. Landlord-bureaucrat-aristocrats overwhelmed by commercial-industrial interests produces 
democracy.

The reading of China that was dominant in the United States in the 1980s and 1990sa€’’certainly 
within the Clinton administration^’’was the Deng Xiaoping and his successors were attempting to 
move China out of (1), and our task was to strengthen commercial-industrial interests as much as we 
could by making China grow as fast as possible so China would wind
up in (3) rather than (2). It still seems to me to have been the best bet to make with the hand 
that history had dealt us. Plus all of our descendants here in America will be safer and happier if 
children in China in 2100 are taught that the United States helped China grow rich rather than 
tried to keep it poor and barefoot as long as possible.

Did not work. Once again: a€oeWe lack more than usual a coherent scheme of progress, a tangible 
ideal. All the political parties alike have their origins in past ideas and not in new ideasa€!. No 
one has a gospel. The next move is with the heada€!a€D

We are running out of time. The acceleration of climate change will stress the global economya€™ s 
capacity to support human life. DeLong is right to fear that humanity is not slouching into the 
next phase of its history, which looks very little like a utopia.

Yes. Exactly.

And another comment, on:

Zach Carter: A Dose of Rational Optimism: a€~And though he does at times take excessive detours 
into dorky cul-de-sacsa€”the book does not need quite so many pages on the development of 
alternating current or the tr ans is tor a€’’these indulgences can be skimmed easily enougha€!a€™

Huh. Looking at how the book is being read, I now think that I did not include enough of these 
sections that I had to rescue from the a€ceLandes-Schumpeter" version of the book that I wrote in 
some alternative timeline. Adding to AC electricity and the transistor, the book would be stronger 
with equivalent sections on skyscrapers, the assembly line, and oil.
Share Brad DeLong1 s Grasping Reality

Must-Read:

John Halpin: The Healthy Parks Theory of Governancea€D: a€~Politicians often forget that what 
really matters to most people is a proper sense of place. For citizens across the world, this 
mainly means the economic stability of their own families and home life. But it also includes, 
importantly, the social and physical conditions of the local community where they
live. Call it the healthy parks theory of governance. If you live in a nice and safe town with 
plenty of welcoming public spaces, you probably are happier about the state of things and proud of 
where you live. If you live in a dirty or crime ridden place with lots of sketchy public spaces, 
you probably are unhappy about the state of things and have less pride in
your hometowna€’’especially if youa€™re not doing well economically. In general, political leaders 
who provide high quality, safe parks and other public spaces will be rewarded by voters come 
election time and supported while in officea€!

Leave a comment

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• Hermione McKenzie: Review of Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracya€\

•  Noah Smith: We still haven't solved the Nuclear Age: a€~Maybe Feynman was right after all. Maybe 
now that humans have nukes, wea€™ 11 inevitably use them (again). Wea€™ ve used every other weapon 
wea€™ ve ever created, multiple times. Maybe war obeys the principle that everything possible is 
mandatory. I hope this is not true, obviously. But
if wea€™re going to make sure it isna€™ t true, we need to be more purposeful about finding a 
solution to the Nuclear Agea€!

•  Kos: Ukraine Update: Russians in disarray, as Ukraine presses their advantage: a€~Russia is 
desperate for trucks and other military gear. Youa€™ ve seen the WWII era buggies on their way to 
the front? This is almost guaranteed a wartime requisition, with the side benefit of panicking 
observers into thinking Russia might go nucleara€!

•  Matt Yglesias: To save downtowns, we need to embrace windowless bedrooms: a€~Ia€™ m not telling 
city officials anything they dona€™ t already know about the merits of office-to-residential 
conversions as a means to help urban cores address economic pressuresa€!. But for a major downtown 
redevelopment project, I dona€™ t think that kind of
wink-wink strategy would worka€!

•  Chris Anstey: A Decisive Turn: a€~Ita€™ s not just corporate anecdotesa€! suggesting a decisive 
turn in the worlda€™ s manufacturing cycle. Macroeconomic data are starting to align that way as 
wella€!

•  The Onion: No. 22-293 <https://www.supremecourt.gov/DocketPDF/22/22-293/242292/20221003125252896 
35295545 l-22.10.Q3 - Novak-Parma - Onion Amicus Brief.pdf> In The Supreme Court of the United 
States :: BRIEF OF THE ONION AS AMICUS CURIAE IN SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS

•  Lincoln Michel: Understanding the Reader Without Pandering to the Reader: a€~As writers we 
should try as much as we can to experience the text as another reader would. As just a text. Only 
the words on the page in the order they appear on the pagea€!

• Massimo Livi-Bacci: A concise history of world populationa€!
Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

