Subscribe now

FIRST: Of the Rings of Power, and the Second Age: RECOMMENDED

On 39:12-49:08 of 1:8 a€oeAlloyeda€n, of The Rings of Power <https://en.wikipedia.0rg/wiki/The 
L0rd_0f the Rings:_The Rings_of Power>.
Actors Morfydd Clark, Charlie Vickers, Will Fletcher, and Robert Aramayo absolutely nail it.

While not all is forgiven of the showa€™ s infelicities, awkwarnesses, blunders, and attempts to 
make art via cookie-cutter, a great deal is. The first season as a whole is definitely recommended 
(even though I think the Wheel of Time show is doing a better job, albeit with lower-quality cloth.)
Three pieces of background:

1. a€oeSauron was of course not a€~evila€™ in origin. He was a a€~spirita€™ corrupted by the Prime 
Dark Lord (the Prime sub-creative Rebel) Morgoth. He was given an opportunity of repentance, when 
Morgoth was overcome, but could not face the humiliation of recantation, and suing for pardon; and 
so his temporary turn to good and a€~benevolencea€™ ended in a greater relapse, until he became the 
main representative of Evil of later ages.
But at the beginning of the Second Age he was still beautiful to look at, or could still assume a 
beautiful visible shapea€”and was not indeed wholly evil, not unless all a€~reformersa€™ who want 
to hurry up with a€~reconstructiona€™ and a€~reorganizationa€™ are wholly evil, even before pride 
and the lust to exert their will eat them up.

a€DThe particular branch of the High-Elves concerned, the Noldor or Loremasters, were always on the 
side of a€~science and technologya€™, as we should call it: they wanted to have the knowledge that 
Sauron genuinely had, and those of Eregion refused the warnings of Gilgalad and Elrond. The 
particular a€~desirea€™ of the Eregion Elvesa€”an a€~allegorya€™ if you like of a love of 
machinery, and technical devicesa€”is also symbolised
by their special friendship with the Dwarves of Moria.1 should regard them as no more wicked or 
foolish (but in much the same peril) as Catholics engaged in certain kinds of physical research 
(e.g. those producing, if only as by-products, poisonous gases and explosives): things not 
necessarily evil, but which, things being as they are, and the nature and motives of the economic 
masters who provide all the means for their work being as they are, are
pretty certain to serve evil ends. For which they will not necessarily be to blame, even if aware 
of thema€;a€Da€”J.R.R. Tolkien: Letters ofJ.R.R. Tolkien <https://w w 
w.google.com/books/edition/The Letters_Of_J_r_r_Tolkien/9eLC Ag A AQB A>

2. a€oeOf old there was Sauron the Maia, whom the Sindar in Beleriand named Gorthaur. In the 
beginning of Arda Melkor seduced him to his allegiance, and he became the greatest and most trusted 
of the servants of the Enemy, and the most perilous, for he could assume many forms, and for long 
if he willed he could still appear noble and beautiful, so as to deceive all but the most wary. 
When Thangorodrim was broken and Morgoth overthrown,
Sauron put on his fair hue again and did obeisance to EAJnwA«, the herald of ManwA«, and abjured 
all his evil deeds. And some hold that this was not at first falsely done, but that Sauron in truth 
repented, if only out of fear, being dismayed by the fall of Morgoth and the great wrath of the 
Lords of the West.

a€DBut it was not within the power of EAJnwA« to pardon those of his own order, and he commanded 
Sauron to return to Aman and there receive the judgement of ManwA«. Then Sauron was ashamed, and he 
was unwilling to return in humiliation and to receive from the Valar a sentence, it might be, of 
long servitude in proof of his good faith; for under Morgoth his power had been great. Therefore 
when EAJnwA« departed he hid himself in
Middle-earth; and he fell back into evil, for the bonds that Morgoth had laid upon him were very 
stronga€!a€Da€”J.R.R. Tolkien: Of the Rings of Power and the Third Age 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=uFKaXu23ovoC>

3. a€oeThere comes a point in writing, and ita€™ s a spear-point, ita€™ s very small and sharp but 
because ita€™ s backed by the length and weight of a whole spear and a whole strong person pushing 
it, ita€™ s a point that goes in a long way. Spearpoints need all that behind them, or they dona€™ 
t pack their punch in the same way.

a€oeExamples are difficult to give because spear-points by their nature require their context, and 
spoilers. They tend to be moments of poignancy and realization. When Duncan picks the branches when 
passing through trees, hea€™ s just getting a disguise, but we the audience suddenly understand how 
Birnam Wood shall come to Dunsinanea€!. One I used as a title for thisa€”in The Farthest Shore, a 
minor character shouts out her namefor all to
hear. For someone who read that page alone, this would be inexplicable and possibly silly. For 
someone who has come all the way through Earthsea as far as Lorbanery already, ita€™ s terrible and 
revelatorya€!.

a€oelt isna€™t always possible to build the spear so that it will work the first time through. If 
you keep stepping back to show the reader that there is irony here, that there is a wider context, 
that things work out this way, you risk losing absolute raftloads of immediacya€!. You certainly 
need to do a lot of set-up, carefully, towards what you want to do later, andthe reason for that is 
so that when you actually get to doing it, it can stand alone at that
point, be that point, because the spear needs to be behind it, and a spear-point supported right 
there with scaffolding doesna€™ t have any impact at all. It needs to be moving when it hits you, 
and it needs to have the spear already therea€!. a€oe

Sometimesa€! ita€™ s better to suck that up and trust the reader to think, to come back and 
re-read, to get the impact then, than to try to hammer the spear-point in when there hasna€™ t been 
time to build the speara€!a€Da€”Jo Walton: The Dyer of Lorbanery 
<http://www.iowaltonbooks.com/23rd-februarv-2004-the-dver-of-lorbanerv-spearpoint-theorv/>

SPOILERS

a€oel have been awake since the breaking of the First Silence. In that timea€”I have had many 
namesa€!a€D

a€oel told you the truth. I told you that I had done evil, and you did not care. Because you knew 
that our past meant nothing, weighed against our futurea€i. All others look on you with doubt. I 
alone can see your greatness. I alone can see your lighta€!. I would make you a queen. Fair as the 
sea and the Sun. Stronger than the foundations of the eartha€!. Not dark. Not with you at my side. 
You told me once, that we were brought together for a purpose. This is it.

You bind me to the light. And I bind you to power. Together, we can save this Middle-eartha€!.a€D

a€oeAt last it comes! You will give me the Ring freely! In place of the Dark Lord you will set up a 
Queen. And I shall not be dark, but beautiful and terrible as the Morning and the Night! Fair as 
the Sea and the Sun and the Snow upon the Mountain! Dreadful as the Storm and the Lightning! 
Stronger than the foundations of the earth. All shall love me and despair !a€!a€D






THE DOMED HALLS OF ILMARIN ON MOUNT TANIQUETIL, VALINOR
THE HIGH COUNCIL OF THE VALAR IS IN SESSION

SECOND AGE

MANWAc Well, this has been a long meeting. I hope that there is no further business...

VAIRAc There is something in the pattern, something in the weave... We may developing another 
Middle-Earth problem...
MANWAc I guess this is something that cannot wait until our next regular council meeting next 
millennium?

TULKAS: I am afraid not. You remember Marion?

MANWAc Yes! One of your guys, AulA«, I think? I have not seen him around lately?

AULAc Well, I am afraid I managed him badly, I shrugged off his suggestions for using unstable 
nitrogen compounds for entertainments, and the next thing I knew he was upset at having been 
scooped by OlA3rin in the making of pyrotechnic fireworks, and was off with (shudder) Morgoth...
MANWAc But I thought all that was wound up? I scanned his mind just after we broke the towers of 
Thangorodrim. And he seemed genuinely repentant. You offered him a pardon, EonwA«, right?

EONWAc Well, it is complicated. It is really the programmer's fault. The drop-down picklist on the 
pardon web form did not have an entry for "Maia". So I told him that he would have to come back 
here in person so we could handle him as a special case...
MANWAc And he never showed up?

AULAc I heard that he was too embarrassed. He wanted to perform some great dees of rebuilding and 
restoration so that he would be less ashamed when he had to look into your eyes, Lord. You can be 
somewhat intimidating. But I am confident he will come around.
VAIRAc I am not.

AULAc But what could go wrong? He is so immensely talented! He has so much he could teach the 
man-smiths of Numenor and the elven-smiths of Eregion, and do so much good! Then he can come back 
with some pride, and beg for his pardon.

MANDOS: But right now his fate stands on a knife edge. Because he crossed oaths with Finarfin's 
daughter, sister of Finroda€”vou remember, the fairest and most beloved of all the house of 
FinwA«...


MANWAc Galadriel? Wasn't there some problem with her, too? I remember her name on thea€”now rather 
shorta€”list of those still under your ban, Mandos. How did that happen?

EONWAc She refused to even sit down at the keyboard. She refused to fill out the form. "What wrong 
did the golden house of Finarfin ever do, that I should ask for the pardon of the Valar?" she said. 
She is one of those who wanted out from under our collective thumb. She wanted to rule. Plus she 
really wanted to hunt down the killer of her brother Finrod Felagund.
MANWAc Who was her brother's killer?

TULKAS: Mairon. Or, rather, he calls himself Sauron these days. He took the form of a werewolf and 
ate Fiord in Tol-in-Gaurhotha€”part of that Beren-and-Luthien thing, if you remember...
MANWAc You get too much pleasure out of tangling the threads here, VairA« the weaver.

VAIRA<; Me? The wheel weaves as the wheel wills...

MANWAc But I still don't see the problem. You are about to tell me that whena€”Sauron, I guess we 
should call him nowa€”crossed paths with Galadriel, they did not get along?
YAVANNA: Actually, I think they got along too well...

TULKAS: They fought together! They saved each other!
MANDOS: He is one of the Maiar.

TULKAS: OK! He saved her! She thought she saved him! He admitted: "You don't know what I did.... 
You don't know how I survived.  When these people discover it, they will cast me out. So will you." 
And she said: "Whatever it was you did: be free of it!"!

MANWAc And?

AULAc So he asked her to be his Bright Queena€”to bind him to the light, as he would bind her to 
power to rule.
MANWAc And?

VAIRAc She spurned him.

MANWAc EonwA«: Take a memo. Subject: Relationship counseling for Maiar. Text: Trust is important in 
a relationship, as is communication. Do not say "You don't know how I survived". Say, rather: "I 
transformed myself into a werewolf, and ate the person you loved most in the world, more than your 
husband. I ate your brother."
TULKAS: That would be very good. But we need to do something now. As a result, Mairona€”Saurona€”is 
spiraling down into evil, and will spread fire and sword all over Middle-Earth.

TULKAS: A rogue turned to evil, one of the most powerful of the Maiar, loose wreaking destruction 
in Middle-Earth. It would take a prince of the House of FinwA« to have even a chance of rallying 
forces to stand against them. Who among the elves who has seen Valinor is still in Middle-Earth?
EONWAc Gil-galad and Celebrimbor alone.

YAVANNA: Sexists!

EONWAc And Galadriel, of course...

TULKAS: Gil-galad, Celebrimbor, and Galadriela€”that should be enough to constrain Sauron. There is 
just one of him.

MANDOS: Have you taken proper account of the missing Balrog? And of the children of Ungoliant? And 
do you not remember that Gil-galad cannot stand against one whose hand is flame unquenched?
AULAc Sauron is much cleverer than Celebrimbor. He might find way to neutralize whatever devises 
Celebrimbor can create...

MANWAc reinforcements? Of the Noldor slain in Middle-Earth who have been re-embodied and are now 
here, are there any who might be willing to go back across the sea?

EONWAc There is Finroda€”but he says that he has already had his liver eaten once by Sauron, and 
that once is enough. Glorfindel, however, says that his foot slipped, and wants a rematch with the 
balrog.
NIENNA: Do not forget that we have already sent the Star...

MANWAc Good. Send Glorfindel. But other ideas?

TULKAS: Surely we can hope that the istar, Glorfindel, Gil-galada€”even if fated to die from wounds 
received from Sauron's hand of flame unquencheda€’’Celebrimbor, and Gil-galad will be enough to be 
able to handle things?
MANDOS: Hope is not a plan.

EONWAc So the worst case is Gil-galad falls to the flame of Udun, Celebrimbor's devises are turned 
to the service of Sauron, and then if Galadriel gets... thirsty...
MANDOS: Galadriel's husband, Celeborn, is still a shade in my halls...

Share

MUST-READ: Yesterday in a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D Reviews and Views:

Very, very nice to see. Thank you, Ben:

Ben Friedman: Where We Went Wrong: a€oeDeLong[a€™ s]a€! account of this historical 
experiencea€”like Galbraitha€™ s before hima€”at least implicitly points a way toward improving 
mattersa€! rolling back many of the changes made in the U.S. tax code over the past half-century, 
as well as reinvigorating antitrust policy to blunt the dominance, and therefore outsize profits, 
of the mega-firms that now tower over key sectors of
the economy. He would also surely reverse the recent trend moving away from free tradea€!. Offering 
recommendations is not DeLonga€™ s purpose. His stark sense that the world is different in the wake 
of the 2008-10 financial crisis is what allows him to draw a Buddenbrooks-like line, ending his 
rich historical account there. It also precludes drawing firm conclusions from the a€celonga€D 
century that he so thoughtfully examines
for the era to followa€!.

What will future readers of Slouching Towards Utopia conclude? No doubt the historical 
vignettesa€’’about the Great Depression, the two World Wars, and the other episodes examineda€”will 
hold up well. If anything, DeLonga€™ s narratives will become more valuable as those events fade 
into the past. Alas, his description of fascism as having at its center a€oea contempt for limits, 
especially those implied by reason-based
arguments; a belief that reality could be altered by the will; and an exaltation of the violent 
assertion of that will as the ultimate argumenta€D will likely strike a nerve with many Americans 
not just today but in years to come. But what about DeLonga€™ s core explanation of what went wrong 
in the latter third of his, and our, a€oelong centurya€D? I predict that it too will still look 
right, and importanta€!

Ben joins Bob Reich as one who correctly sees that my argument is much more Galbraithian than I 
realized while I was writing ita€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: The Course of Our Current Inflation:

Focus on the underlying UIG measure:

UIG Measures and 12-Month Change in the CPI


— UIG: Full data set measure — UIG: Prices-only measure — CPI inflation
Percent

-3


Give a gift subscription

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• New York Fed Staff: Underlying Inflation Gauge (UIG)a€!

• Even Armstrong: Who Wins the AI Value Chain?a€!

•  Davis Kedrosky: a€~The Masters of the Blogosphere return... excited for @tylercowen's upcoming 
Conversation with @delong.Some things I will need to know from Brada€!

• William Butler Yeats: The Second Cominga€!

•  Matt Levine: Elon Gets Three Weeks to Change His Mind: a€~No decision by Musk in the Twitter 
deal has lasted that longa€!

•  Hamish McKenzie: Please stop calling it the a€~newsletter economya€™: a€~It is needed. Our work 
today, and for as long as Substack exists, is to keep this new economy powering forward. You can 
help. You can start a paid newsletter. Or better yet, start a Substacka€!

• Andrej Karpathy: YouTubea€!

•  Bloomberg: How Xi Rewrote Chinaa€™ s Rulebook to Build the Party Around Himself: a€~Xi Jinping 
climbed to the center of Chinaa€™ s political universe by rewriting the rules. Hea€™ 11 have to 
break at least three key ones this month to ensure power revolves around him for years to comea€!

• Paul Szoldra: Tracking China's preparations for war: a€~Beijing "would not be subtle," says a 
long-time CIA analysta€!

•  Rachel Adams-Heard: Land Is Power, and the Osage Nation Is Buying Theirs Back: a€~Over a 
century, theft, murder, and business dealings stripped the Osages of oil and land wealth. Theya€™re 
clawing it back, tract by tracta€!


Give a gift subscription

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• New York Fed Staff: Underlying Inflation Gauge (UIG)a€!

• Even Armstrong: Who Wins the AI Value Chain?a€!

•  Davis Kedrosky: a€~The Masters of the Blogosphere return... excited for @tylercowen's upcoming 
Conversation with @delong.Some things I will need to know from Brada€!

• William Butler Yeats: The Second Cominga€!

•  Matt Levine: Elon Gets Three Weeks to Change His Mind: a€~No decision by Musk in the Twitter 
deal has lasted that longa€!

•  Hamish McKenzie: Please stop calling it the a€~newsletter economya€™: a€~It is needed. Our work 
today, and for as long as Substack exists, is to keep this new economy powering forward. You can 
help. You can start a paid newsletter. Or better yet, start a Substacka€!

• Andrej Karpathy: YouTubea€!

•  Bloomberg: How Xi Rewrote Chinaa€™ s Rulebook to Build the Party Around Himself: a€~Xi Jinping 
climbed to the center of Chinaa€™ s political universe by rewriting the rules. Hea€™ 11 have to 
break at least three key ones this month to ensure power revolves around him for years to comea€!

• Paul Szoldra: Tracking China's preparations for war: a€~Beijing "would not be subtle," says a 
long-time CIA analysta€!

•  Rachel Adams-Heard: Land Is Power, and the Osage Nation Is Buying Theirs Back: a€~Over a 
century, theft, murder, and business dealings stripped the Osages of oil and land wealth. Theya€™re 
clawing it back, tract by tracta€!

AJs:

David French: Therea€™ s Only One Group to Blame for How Republicans Flocked to Trump: a€~They 
wanted a street brawler, and when (they believed) Romney campaigned with one hand tied behind his 
back, they were angry. Yes, there was anger at Democrats and reporters for their treatment of 
Romney, but the raw anger that really mattered was their anger at Romneya€!. And so the Republican 
establishment and the Republican base moved apart, with
one side completely convinced that Romney lost because he was perhaps, if anything, too harsh 
(especially when it came to immigration) and the other convinced that he lost because he was too 
soft. Trumpa€™ s nomination was a triumph of that basea€!. When Trump won, the base had its proof 
of concept. Fighting worked, and not even Trumpa€™ s lossa€’’along with the loss of the House and 
the Senate in four short yearsa€”has truly disrupted that
conclusion. And why would it? Many millions still dona€™ t believe he lost. The Mitt Romney martyr 
theory thus suffers from a fatal defecta€!. Large numbers of Republicansa€! already hated Democrats 
and the media, and when Romney lost, their message to the Republican establishment in 2016 was just 
as clear as it was in South Carolina in 2012. No more nice guys. The a€cecharactera€D that mattered 
was a commitment to punching the left right in the
moutha€!

