I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

I surf on over to <http://rytr.me>, which tells me:

Malthusian economies are economic systems that have a high fertility rate and a low technological 
progress rate.
The slow technological progress is the result of the elites exploiting the lower class, which in 
turn leads to a lack of
investment in education, health care and other social services.

In these types of economies, there is an overpopulation problem because the fertility rate is 
higher than the
mortality rate. This means that population growth will always be greater than economic growth.

The Malthusian model of population growth is based on the idea that population growth will outstrip 
the food
supply, because there are too many people.

This type of economy is based on a need to control and limit population, usually by preventing 
births or by having
fewer children. This can be done through patriarchal systems, where men have more power than women 
and make
decisions about how many children their wives have.

The Malthusian economy also relies on exploitation of elites by the poor. The elites are those who 
have more
wealth, power, and resources than others in society and they exploit this to keep their status quo.

Malthusian economies are economies where population growth is controlled by a positive and 
preventative checks.
The positive check is the death rate and the preventative check is the birthrate.

The Malthusian model of economic development assumes that population growth will slow down as 
resources
become scarce.


Malthusian economies are characterized by high rates of exploitation, low wages for workers, high 
fertility rates,
and slow technological progress.

The prompt was a€oeMalthusian Economiesa€U, with keywords: fertility, slow technological progress, 
A©lites, exploitation, fertility, patriarchy, positive check, preventative check.
Get 50% off for 1 year

Reading each of these under exam-grading conditions, I would be likely to conclude that there was a 
mind behind each answer, a mind that had a B-level understanding of the concept of Malthusian 
economies.
I would also say that they are all far from perfect:

• In the first, fertility does not exceed morality, but they, rather, balance.

•  In the second, I would not say that a Malthusian economy relies on exploitation, but rather that 
it provides very powerful pressures that produce exploitation.

• In the third, the sentence a€oeThe positive check is the death rate and the preventative check is 
the birth ratea€D is just wrong.
Thus all three are well below A-level understanding. But they appear to be at B-level 
understanding. And this is a problem.

This is a problem, of course, because there is no mind back there. There is no understanding. There 
is just a bag of words and a set of numbers that are correlations.
And this fact, of course, provokes three reactions from me:

•  Perhaps this demonstrates how powerful is our tropism to attribute human mind-level competence 
to systems for which that attribution is a major category error. There is no more a human-level 
mind behind each of these answers than it is the case that the lightning is a very large red-haired 
guy with a big hammer and major anger management problems who drives a cart with two goats. You can 
make the sociobiology move that such attribution was
useful in the environment of evolutionary adaptation, for the potential loss from assuming that 
something is much dumber than you can be very large. But whether you want to claim this tropism is 
a€oeadaptivea€D or not, I do believe that it is a fact.

•  Perhaps this demonstrates how much a€oereadinga€D is a€oetaking black marks on a page, and from 
them spinning-up a sub-Turing instantiation of a human mind, which we then run in a separate 
sandbox on our Wittwer and interrogatea€n. Perhaps this demonstrates how enormously wide the gap 
can be between the mind of the author that wrote the words and the mind that we construct from the 
words. Perhaps this demonstrates how much
reading takes place between the ears. (And, of course, perhaps this demonstrates how much success 
in school work evaluations comes not from learning the material, but rather from learning how to 
spread out the chicken-feed in front of the instructor, that they will then glom onto, and leave 
them to conclude that you know much much more than you in fact do.)

•  Perhaps this should lead us to wonder how much of our own thought is really thought, really 
understand it, and how much is just that somewhere inside our brains is a bag of words, and a set 
of numbers that are correlations.

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Get a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app

Available, for iOS and Android


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

