Subscribe now

I wrote that there are, typically, four kinds of conservative parties since the start of the modern 
age:


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

PROJECT SYNDICATE: The Strange Death of Conservative America

J. Bradford DeLong: The Strange Death of Conservative America: American conservatives once sought 
to ride the waves of markets and innovation toward ever-greater wealth and prosperity, but now they 
cower in fear. And, as the trajectory of todaya€™ s Republican Party shows, that makes them a 
threat to democracya€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong

1. a€oeWhig measures and Tory mena€d.

2. The party not of tradition and inherited status but rather of wealth and businessa€”of creative 
destruction and social darwinism.

3. Reactionaries who see themselves at war with a dystopian a€oearmed doctrinea€n with which 
compromise is neither possible nor desirable.

4. The fearfulDa€’’those who believe it is they who will be creatively destroyed by the processes 
of historical changea€”and the grifters who exploit them.
Commenters on twitter have added more:

(5) Mercantilist/protectionist/autarkic conservatives seeking a self-sufficient polity with natural 
resources and a labor policy capable of supporting a semicapitalist, aristocratic elite:

ABD from the Citadel, known in Eregion as Fleagol @JSelbl

@delong This is an interesting categorization of the various strains of conservatism. However, it 
seems to leave out two big groups of conservatives. The first are the 
mercantilist/protectionist/autarkic conservatives who searched for a self sufficient polity (either 
an empire or 1/
7:33 PM r™ Oct 4,2021

(6) Those who seek a new caste system with themselves on top:


ABD from the Citadel, known in Eregion as Fleagol @JSelbl

@delong The second group of conservatives are those who wanted to create a new caste system of some 
type with their group on top. The American Redeemers of the post Civil War era or the Europeanish 
citizens of former colonial states seem like this type of conservative. 4/
7:44 PM r™ Oct 4,2021

2Likesl Re tweet

All I can say is that my neglect of these reflects one of my blind spots: my perennial tendency to 
down weight racism and nationalisma€l
Share

One Audio:

Jeet Heer: Dune Bugs: a€~David Klion shares his enthusiasm for Frank Herberta€™ s science fiction 
classica€!


7he TIME of MONS TERS

The Time of Monsters
Dune Bugs

Listen now (75 min) I Like many people I know, Ia€™ m super excited at the prospect of Denis 
Villeneuvea€™ s new movie, Dune, based on Frank Herberta€™ s 1965 novel of the same name. Ita€™ s a 
book I first read when I was twelve years old and have frequently revisited. It has a spotty record 
in terms of adaptation. Alejandro Jodorowskya€™ s a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 comments A- Jeet Heer
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Janeway Institute: Welcome <https://www.janeway.econ.cam.ac.uk/>

• Ross Murray: Mary, 487 Thunder Road, Neptune, NJ 
<https://www,mcsweeneys.net/articles/mary-487-thunder-road-neptune-nj>

• Matthew Yglesias: The Median Voter Is a 50-Something White Person Who Didna€™ t Go to College


Slow Boring

The median voter is a 50-something white person who didn't go to college

So much in politics is uncertain or difficult that I think even professionals tend to underrate the 
upside to doing things that are obvious and easy. Back in 1992, James Carville supposedly hung a 
sign in Clinton campaign headquarters that said, a€oeita€™ s the economy, stupida€!

Read more

a year ago A- 165 likes A- 463 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

Paragraphs:

Jagdish Bhagwati: a€™ [Chicago was] very Friedmanesque a€! The seminars seemed to oscillate between 
proving that elasticities were large with markets therefore stable, and formulating competitive 
hypotheses for apparently imperfectly-competitive industries and coming up with high enough R2s. 
Econometrics was the handmaiden of ideology: things looked imperfect to the naked eye,
especially to that of Chamberlin and Joan Robinson, but they were a€~reallya€™ not so and the world 
was a€~as ifa€™ competitivea€!. Market imperfections were a€~demonstrateda€™ to be negligible and 
the imperfections rather of government intervention were the subject of active researcha€!

Raghu Rajan: Chinaa€™s Risky Business Crackdown'. a€~Like the earlier campaign against corruption, 
Chinese President Xi Jinpinga€™ s effort to control Chinaa€™ s private sector is agreeable in its 
stated intentions, but questionable in its implementation^!. The campaign for a€oecommon 
prosperitya€D [may] undermine the economic sectors that China needs to reorienta€!. For Chinese
domestic consumption to increase, both wages and household incomes from invested savings must grow. 
And for that to happen, China must depart from a growth model that has hitherto relied on 
significant repression to keep workersa€™ wages and returns paid to savers low. That means moving 
toward higher-skill industries that pay workers more, with investment intermediated by a
sophisticated financial sector that can senerate reasonable returns even without access to cheap 
capitala€!. Having previously emphasized fixed-asset investment. China now must deal with a massive 
overhang of unserviceable borrowinga€!. When restructuring overleveraged entities. Chinese 
authorities tvoicallv force investors to bear the lossesa€!. But when there is fear of a 
generalized loss of


confidence, especially among foreign investors, these entities have instead been bailed outa€!. The 
authorities insist that the crackdown on magnates like Ma and their firms is being carried out in 
the interest of a€oecommon prosperity a€Da€ I a move againsta€! billionairesa€! monopolya€! and 
exploitation of workersa€!. The problem lies not with the stated objectives, but rather with the
pursuit of them in a system lacking checks and balancesa€!. Once trust in markets or the government 
is lost, it is not easily restored. This is especially true of confidence in the financial sector, 
where millions of Chinese have their savings tied up in half-finished houses and in 
wealth-management products sold by weakly regulated investment firmsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentary/china-risky-business-crackdown-common-prosperity-campa
ign-bv-raghuram-rajan-2021-09>

Brooke Harrington: Vaccine Refusers Dona€™ t Want Blue Americaa€™ s Respect: a€~The Anti-vaccine 
Con Job Is Becoming Untenable. Why targets of deliberate deception often hesitate to admit theya€™ 
ve been deceiveda€!. Erving Goffmana€! a€oeOn Cooling the Mark Outa€da€! targets of con artists 
eventually come to understand that they have been defrauded, yet they almost never
complain or report the crime to authorities. Why? Because, Goffman argues, admitting that one has 
been conned is so deeply shameful that marks experience it as a kind of social death. The victim, 
he writes, a€oehas defined himself as a shrewd man and must face the fact that he is only another 
easy mark. He has defined himself as possessing a certain set of qualities and then proven to 
himself
that  he is miserably lacking in them. This is a process of self-destruction of the selfa€!a€D

LINK: 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/202l/08/vaccine-refusers-dont-want-blue-americas-respect/
619627/>

Gail Carriger: The Heroinea€™ s Journey: a€~Tired of the heroa€™ s journey?Frustrated that funny, 
romantic, and comforting stories arena€™ t taken seriously? Sad that the books and movies you love 
never seem to be critically acclaimed, even when they sell like crazy? The heroinea€™ s journey is 
here to helpa€!. What do Agatha Christie, JK Rowling, and Nora Roberts all have in
common? They all write the heroinea€™ s journey. Read this book to learn all about ita€!

LINK: <https://gailcarriger.com/books/the-heroines-journey-for-authors-book/>

Joan Walsh (2012): When the Big Lie Works: a€~Twice as many conservatives believe our Christian 
president is Muslim as they did in 2008. Congratulations, Mitt!a€! If you wonder why a desperate 
Mitt Romney rushed to lie about President Obamaa€™ s handling of crises in Cairo and Benghazi and 
make the ugly claim that Obamaa€™ s first response was a€oeto sympathize with those who
waged the attacks,a€D the latest poll from the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life helps fill in 
the blanks. Unbelievably, the poll finds that the percentage of Republicans who believe that Barack 
Obama is Muslim, not Christian, has doubled since October 2008. It was actually a little higher in 
August 2010, right before the GOP administered its midterm a€ ce shellacking ,a€C But in the most
recent Pew poll on the topic, in July 2012, an astonishing 34 percent of a€oeconservative 
Republicansa€D and 30 percent of all Republicans described the president as Muslima€!. When House 
Speaker John Boehner dismissed evidence that a growing number of Republicans believe Obama was a 
Muslim, telling NBCa€™ s David Gregory, a€oeita€™ s not my job to tell the American people
what  to thinka€D; when presidential candidate Rick Santorum refused to correct a supporter who 
called Obama a€oean avowed Muslim,a€D saying a€oethe presidentaC™ s a big boy, he can defend 
himself and his recorda€D; when Romney likewise remained silent when an audience member accused 
Obama of a€cetreasona€D and later told reporters, a€oel dona€™ t correct all of the

questions that get asked of mea€D; and of course, when Romney a€cejokeda€D that a€oenobodya€™ s 
ever asked to see my birth certificatedDa€“well, moments like those reinforced the big lie and 
encouraged the right wing to continue to believe ita€!
LINK: <https://www.salon.com/2012/09/13/when_the_big lie works/>

Om Malik: The iPad Mini (2021) Review: a€~I switched my entire workflow to the 12.9-inch iPad Pro. 
I own a Mac Mini (attached to an XDR Display) because I use Photoshop to edit my photos. Adobe 
Photoshop is subpar on the iPada€!. The Mega iPad does everything I need to doa€”from Zoom calls to 
writing documents, answering emails, reading articles, watching videos on various
streaming services, and indulging in Twittera€!. Most of my iPad use during the day (and sometimes 
in the evening) is akin to a traditional computera€’’keyboard-based inputs, and very rarely using 
alternatives such as Pencil. In the evening, I remove the keyboard, put on the softcover, and watch 
some YouTube, baseball, cricket, or an occasional TV seriesa€!. I do my reading in the
morninga€”with the iPad sitting on the kitchen table and coffee steaminga€!. Apple sent me a review 
unit of the brand new iPad Minia€!. For the past few days, I have been using it as my primary 
iPada€!. The lighter weight, lower price, and Pro-matching capabilities make it a worthy purchase 
for any iPad buyer. But to get the best out of it, one has to reimagine how we interact with
computers.                                                                                          
                                                                                          I find 
myself scribbling and talking to this piece of glass. Thata€™ s not a bad starta€!

LINK: <https://om.co/2021/09/22/the-ipad-mini-2021 -review/>

Steve Campbell: a€™ Ia€™ m struck by how much [Paul Krugmand€™ s] Peddling Prosperity- is like 
Merchants of Doubt, the prize-winning book by Naomi Oreskes and Erik Conway. Oreskes and Conway 
showed the climate denialism came from a small group of physical scientists in the Cold War, 
primarily Bill Nierenberg, Frederick Seitz, and Fred Singer. Similarly, Krugman shows that
supply-side economics came from a small number of eccentric economists on the fringe of academia 
who just happened to have very good PR and a built-in readership at the WSJa€.\. It cana€™t be 
emphasized enough that supply-side economics and climate denialism were so disreputable that 
virtually no honest academics took them seriously. Ia€™m adding an ever longer list as to why
professors are liberala€!. Ita€™ s not because of any inherent bias among professors and 
intellectuals. Ita€™ s because the conservative political party in the US is so insistent on 
propagating ideas that dona€™ t live up to any academic scrutiny or rigora€!

LINK:

Steve Campbell ©Historian _ Steve

I'm struck by how much Peddling Prosperity is like Merchants of Doubt, the prize-winning book by 
@NaomiOreskes and @ErikMConway. Oreskes and Conway showed the climate denialism came from a small 
group of physical scientists in the Cold War, primarily.
7:42 AM r™ Dec 21,2019

Noah Smith: What Happened to Construction Productivity? Part 1: Measurement: a€~America is finally, 
FINALLY beginning to wake up to the problem of its ruinous construction costs. The next step is 
figuring out why those costs are high, so that eventually we can bring them down, thus ushering in 
a paradise of cheap housing and transportation^!. The BLS finds that productivity in
multifamily housing construction in 2015 was double what it was a decade ago, after remaining 
stagnant for a long time, while productivity in single-family housing construction has increased by 
only 21 %a€!. Similarly, they find that productivity in the construction of industrial buildings 
grew by over 70% from the mida€“2000s to 2015, while road and bridge construction productivity fell 
by
27%!                                                                                                
                                                                                   In fact, the BLS 
finds that over the period from 2006a€“ 15, productivity in industrial building construction 
outpaced productivity growth in manufacturing!a€! Construction productivity is not doing well. Now 
ita€™ s time to figure out why, and what can be done to improve it. Stay tuned for the next posta€!

LINK:

Mnahnininn


multifamily housing construction in 2015 was double what it was a decade ago, after remaining 
stagnant for a long time, while productivity in single-family housing construction has increased by 
only 21 %a€!. Similarly, they find that productivity in the construction of industrial buildings 
grew by over 70% from the mida€“2000s to 2015, while road and bridge construction productivity fell 
by

27%! In fact, the BLS finds that over the period from 2006a€“15, productivity in industrial 
building construction outpaced productivity growth in manufacturing!a€! Construction productivity 
is not doing well. Now ita€™ s time to figure out why, and what can be done to improve it. Stay 
tuned for the next posta€!
LINK:

What happened to construction productivity? Part 1: Measurement

America is finally, FINALLY beginning to wake up to the problem of its ruinous construction costs. 
The next step is figuring out why those costs are high, so that eventually we can bring them down, 
thus ushering in a paradise of cheap housing and transportation^!

Read more

a year ago A- 28 likes A- 29 comments A- Noah Smith
View comments

Subscribe now

