Subscribe now

The past three months in the United States have been both shocking and hopeful.

They have sen the end of a 220 year tradition: the end of an unbroken chain in which the transfer 
of political power at the national (although not the state: not in the South) level is 
_peaceful_a€”a tradition that began in 1800 when president John Adams acceded to Thomas 
Jeffersona€™ s electoral college victory without choosing violence. We lost that on January 6th, 
2021.

Many who wish to make excuses for Donald Trump say that it was not really an attempt by Trump 
(while preserving plausible deniability that the attempt was his own action and at his behest) to 
have his goons and fans shoot dead the Speaker of the House, hang the Vice President, and prevent 
the counting of electoral votesa€”that it had been, rather, a spontaneous popular outburst. 
Nevertheless, we came remarkably close to watching the Speaker of the House
shot dead and the Vice President hanged. The counting of the electoral votes was delayed. Speaker 
Pelosi and Majority Leader McConnell made it a point to finish the counting that day, so that the 
delay was short. But there was a delay.

However, we did get our transfer of power, albeit not peacefully.
Share

B|den $i.9T Rescue

Program

—10% of a year’s national income

—remarkable agreement among
Democratic legislative caucuses

common view of the mistakes of

2009


—peculiar
Sinema

role of Sens. Manchin &


Now we have a $1.9 trillion programa€”10% of a year's national incomea€’’devoted to rescue, relief, 
support and recovery. This is a remarkably large package. It is the result of a remarkable degree 
of agreement within the Democratic legislative caucuses. In the past, in both 1993 and 2009, senior 
Democratic legislators have been very, very interested in demonstrating that they are independent 
actors rather than loyal members of the party. They have been
interested in demonstrating that they think for themselves rather than serve the party leader.. 
They have been interested in using their control of veto points to shape policy to their personal 
liking. Even more so, I think, they have been interested in demonstrating that they can require 
policy must be to their liking.

That is much less the case this time.

I think this shift is produced by a common view of the mistakes of 2009, and probably of 1994. The 
legislators, I think now understand that, if they want to govern in the public interest, they have 
to demonstrate that the president of their party is a successful manager, and that he has their 
support, and that he deserves to have their support because his policies are good policies.

Here I must insert an asterisk: Senators Manchin and Sinema appear to still be playing the game by 
the old rulesa€’’demonstrating that they are independent voices, and hence can be trusted to do 
what their constituents and they believe is in the national interest on each and every issue, no 
matter how the party tries to corral them. Thus they hope to convince centrists, plus Republicans 
who are unhappy with the neo-fascist notes currently being sung by the
soloists and chorus of the Republican party, to vote for them. But note that even Sinema and 
Manchin are only taking on this role and pose in a very moderate degree. They cheerfully voted for 
$1.9 trillion, even if not for changing the rules of the Senate to also include an increase in the 
minimum wage to $15/hour.

Why $1.9 trillion? Is that the right size? The U S government right now does have exorbitant 
privilege. Rich people and state actors with large amounts of money all around the globe believe 
that their assets held in dollars in the United States are safe assets. I do not have time to go 
into why they believe this. But they do. In this environment the near-consensus among the 
Democratic policy intellectuals is that it is appropriate to take advantage of this
extraordinary demand for U.S. assets. When investor expectations and confidence shift, and when 
interest rates rise, then will be time to deal with the problems thus created: sufficient unto the 
day is the evil thereof. We bet that our successors will be intelligent and farsighted enough to 
deal with the economic problems of tomorrow when they arise. We do not let the fact that we are 
unsure about how to deal with the economic problems of tomorrow keep us from
solving  the economic problems of today.


“Exorbitant Privile

take advantage of this
demand while we can...

ge

asset

sufficient unto the day is the evil
thereof

—end of neoliberal hegemony

—“the market was made for man,
not man for the market”

—vs.


“the market giveth, the marKe
mar y bethenameof

taketh away: blessea

the market

Perhaps this is the end of the neoliberal intellectual hegemony established in the 1970s, when a 
critical mass of thinkers came to fear that the market had its own logic that could not be resisted 
but that could only be accommodated. The market giveth; the market takeeth away. And the only 
possible response, to those who became the neoliberals, was then to say: blessed be the name of the 
market.
The view today is different. It is: the market was made for man, not man for the market.

One indication of this is that those of us who are still thinking in a more neoliberal 
the-market-has-its-reasons logica€”most prominently now my long-time friend, teacher, and patron 
Larry Summers and my longtime teacher Olivier Blanchard, both of whom I love dearlya€”have gotten 
very little traction in their attempts to issue warnings that perhaps $1.9 trillion is too large, 
and we should be prepared to recognize that it isa€”if it turns out to be soa€”and
then rapidly act to reverse course. Those warnings have gotten almost no traction despite all their 
intellect and influence. That is an interesting signpost to the shifting intellectual climate.

Thus I forecast that the United States is in a position to have a rapid recovery from the 
coronavirus plague depression. I forecast a high-pressure U.S. economy for at least a while. That 
will be a marvelous thing. That will be a good thing for Latin America and others who export to the 
United States. A United States that becomes once again the worlda€™ s importer of last resort may 
become a locomotive for the world, or at least for the Americas.
Now there are deeper issues,

A generation ago there was a very effective right-wing political tactician, Lee Atwater. He used to 
argue that American conservatives were no longer committed to white supremacy a€’’that their 
arguments, instead, really were economic arguments about the best economic policy, and bourgeois 
cultural-order arguments about the best forms of social order. How could you tell that these 
surface rationales were not masks for positions truly rooted in white
supremacy? You knew, Atwater said, because no significant fraction of Republicans was calling for 
the repeal of the Voting Rights Act and the mass disenfranchisement of African Americans. You knew, 
Atwater said, because no significant fraction of Republicans were calling for the state to sanction 
open discrimination.

Lee Atwat  er’s View

~"9ht-win9 politico, taaidon „ a

generation ago

argued that American
conservatives  were  no  longer
committed    to  white  supremacy

—would know they were when:


—reversal of the Voting Rights Act

—open support for discrimination

w- Whae tTtXo dKoXat the leg

Well, guess what.

John Roberts and his Supreme Court majority have constructively repealed the Voting Rights Act, and 
Republicans hope that they can now disenfranchise 20% of African-American voters in states they 
control. Ita€™ s not an attempt to disenfranchise 100%. But 20% is a thing. What do we call this 
open and notorious embrace of what I think is generally acknowledged to be white supremacy-light?

And state-sponsored discrimination? As I understand it, there has been one trans-female high school 
athlete in all of South Dakota in the past decade. Yet banning such is the highest priority of one 
of the Republican Partya€™ s stars, South Dakota Governor Noem. The Republican Partya€™ s position 
is clear: where we cana€’’wherever we can construct phony religious or phony national-security 
rationales for discrimination, and wherever the center of the
electorate does not have a strong revulsion that would put us in electoral jeopardya€”we will 
discriminate! Is this a€oewe can no longer openly discriminate against African-Americans, yet here 
is earnest money that we hope to be able to do in the futurea€D?

This white supremacy-light is so very much softer than the white supremacy of even two generations 
ago, let alone four, or six when the twenty-five million white citizens of the United States held 
five of the six million African-Americans in the bondage of slavery. That it is so very much softer 
is a mercy. And for that we give thanks.
Nevertheless, I believe that Lee Atwatera€™ s deathbed hopes that his Republican Party was no 
longer anchored on white supremacy a€’’that the real message intended for the base was not 
a€oeNia€”er! Nia€”er! Nia€”er!a€Da€”have been proven wrong.

And once you start shrinking the electorate, you do damage to the prospects for a recovery of 
democracy that may be permanent.

Which brings us to the issue of countering voter suppression at this moment, when the Democratic 
Party has control over the all the major political veto points except for the Supreme Court. And 
this brings us to the so-called a€oefilibustera€n in the U.S. Senate.

First, it is called the a€oefilibustera€D. A filibuster is an extraordinary, a contrary to normal 
procedure, a contrary to morality, raw use of power. I think none of the U.S. reporters covering 
the filibuster in the United States know the origins of the term in things like William Walker's 
1856-1857 expedition to make himself President of Nicaragua in the middle of that country's 
then-civil wara€”an office from which he was expelled by a coalition of Central
American armies in 1857, and thena€”IIRCa€”executed by the government of Honduras in 1860. That was 
the original a€oefilibustera€n: to take over a country by force, and loot it.

Filibuster...”

required supermajorities in the
Senate for legislation


required supermajorities in the
Senate for legislation


—required permission
senators forjudges

—Erosion

—Reconciliation...

—Judges...

   Voting Rights...

   Missing middle?

of local

That procedural requirements for supermajorities in the U.S. Senate for legislation are called the 
a€oefilibustera€n suggests that there is something wrong with them. We have been seeing such 
procedural requirements erode. It used to be that a statea€™ s senatorsa€™ acquiescence, at least, 
was required for federal judge confirmations. Reconciliation was supposed to be immune from the 
filibuster because it was an unimportant, technical procedure that needed
to be done and that should not be allowed to become a pressure point that groups of senators could 
use to get their way by threatening obstruction. But Reconciliation has now become the way that 
business gets done in the Senate: either by or under threat of Reconciliation.

Erosions of the power of the filibuster have, with the exception of BidenRescue now, ObamaCare in 
2010, and the very successful Clinton federal financial rebalancing in 1993, been overwhelmingly 
used to advance Republican policy priorities: tax cuts for the rich and right-wing judges. Voting 
rights and perhaps minimum wage expansion are equally strong Democratic legislative priorities 
right now. Perhaps a procedural move to carve out some more
exceptions to the general legislation-requires-60-votes will win the acquiescence of Sinema and 
Manchin. I think the prospects for that are good. But only the senators know what the senators are 
thinking. It is often to their political advantage to make their thinking opaque. After all, we 
still do not know whether the Republicans failed to repeal Obamacare during the Trump 
administration^’’was it simply because Senator McCain had decided he had had
enough,                                                                                             
                                                                                                    
           or were there ten senators who did not want it repealed who were happy to let McCain be 
the hero, but who would have stepped up to fill his role had it been necessary?

This is related to the question of the missing middle in American politics. Structurally, the 20 
most centrist senators have the power to drive legislation and governance according to their 
priorities. And there are stories of how it used to be so back in the 1980s and beforea€”how 
centrists of that day like Bentsen of Texas and Danforth of Missouri were setters of national 
agendas whom presidents found themselves lobbying more often than the reverse. But over
the past two generations that pattern has disappeared completely.

Republican centrist senators have turned out, since 1992, to have much more allegiance to whatever 
the current priorities of their party leaders are than to the norms of centrist governance. Now all 
the Democratic centrists senatorsa€”with the partial exceptions of Sinema and Manchina€’’appear to 
have reached the same conclusion: that their job is to support their party leaders to the extent 
they can without risking their reelection, rather than to be a centrist vote
block that drives policy to what it wishes.

This is something that I would like some very smart political scientists to explain to me. I am 
puzzled. And let me close with that puzzlement.
2075 words

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment


That procedural requirements for supermajorities in the U.S. Senate for legislation are called the 
a€oefilibustera€n suggests that there is something wrong with them. We have been seeing such 
procedural requirements erode. It used to be that a statea€™ s senatorsa€™ acquiescence, at least, 
was required for federal judge confirmations. Reconciliation was supposed to be immune from the 
filibuster because it was an unimportant, technical procedure that needed
to be done and that should not be allowed to become a pressure point that groups of senators could 
use to get their way by threatening obstruction. But Reconciliation has now become the way that 
business gets done in the Senate: either by or under threat of Reconciliation.

Erosions of the power of the filibuster have, with the exception of BidenRescue now, ObamaCare in 
2010, and the very successful Clinton federal financial rebalancing in 1993, been overwhelmingly 
used to advance Republican policy priorities: tax cuts for the rich and right-wing judges. Voting 
rights and perhaps minimum wage expansion are equally strong Democratic legislative priorities 
right now. Perhaps a procedural move to carve out some more
exceptions to the general legislation-requires-60-votes will win the acquiescence of Sinema and 
Manchin. I think the prospects for that are good. But only the senators know what the senators are 
thinking. It is often to their political advantage to make their thinking opaque. After all, we 
still do not know whether the Republicans failed to repeal Obamacare during the Trump 
administration^’’was it simply because Senator McCain had decided he had had
enough, or were there ten senators who did not want it repealed who were happy to let McCain be the 
hero, but who would have stepped up to fill his role had it been necessary?

This is related to the question of the missing middle in American politics. Structurally, the 20 
most centrist senators have the power to drive legislation and governance according to their 
priorities. And there are stories of how it used to be so back in the 1980s and beforea€”how 
centrists of that day like Bentsen of Texas and Danforth of Missouri were setters of national 
agendas whom presidents found themselves lobbying more often than the reverse. But over
the past two generations that pattern has disappeared completely.

Republican centrist senators have turned out, since 1992, to have much more allegiance to whatever 
the current priorities of their party leaders are than to the norms of centrist governance. Now all 
the Democratic centrists senatorsa€”with the partial exceptions of Sinema and Manchina€’’appear to 
have reached the same conclusion: that their job is to support their party leaders to the extent 
they can without risking their reelection, rather than to be a centrist vote
block that drives policy to what it wishes.

This is something that I would like some very smart political scientists to explain to me. I am 
puzzled. And let me close with that puzzlement.
2075 words

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

