Subscribe now

Share

Key Insights:

• Cory Doctorow is AWESOME!

•  It is depressing. We once, with the creation of the market economy, got interoperability right. 
But now the political economy blocks us from there being any obvious path to an equivalent lucky 
historical accident in our future.

•  The problems in our society are not diametrically opposed: Addressing the problems of one thing 
doesn't necessarily create equal and opposite problems on the other sidea€”but it does change the 
trade-offs, and so things become very complex and very difficult to solve.

• Always keep a trash bag in your car.

• Hexapodia!

“It was not called the ‘net of a
million lies’ for nothing...”


Crypto: U

As-Received-By: QQB shipboard ad hoc

Language-Path: Arbwyth->Trade 24->Cherguelen->Triskw
From: Twirlip of the Mists

Subject: Blighter Video thread
Keywords: Hexapodia as the key insight
Distribution: Threat of the Blight
Approved:    yes

Date: 8.68 days since Fall of Relay

I haven't had a chance to see the famous video from
Straumli Realm, except as an evocation. (My only
gateway onto the Net is very expensive.) Is it true

evocation. If these humans have three pairs of legs,
then I think there is an easy explanation for


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

References:

Books:

Cory Doctorow: How to Destroy Surveillance Capitalism 
<https://www.google.com/books/edition/How_to_Destroy_Surveillance_Capitalism/W20NzgEACAAJ>

Cory Doctorow: Attack Surface <https ://www.google.com/books/edition/Attack Surface/rFfEDwAAQB AJ>

Cory Doctorow: Walkaway <https://www.google.com/books/edition/Walkaway/MKMsDAAAQBAJ>

Cory Doctorow: Down & Out in the Magic Kingdom <https://www.google.com/books/edition/Down and Out 
in the Magic Kingdom/h8DvDwAAQBA>

Cory Doctorow: Little Brother <https://www.google.com/books/edition/Little Brother/rlzne2mZDW8C>

William F\esch:Comeuppance: Costly Signaling, Altruistic Punishment, and Other Biological 
Components of Fiction <https: //w w w.google .com/books/edition/Comeuppance/ JSRWP Yp 1 nNU C>

Daniel L. Rubinfeld: A Retrospective on U.S. v. Microsoft: Why Does It Resonate Today? 
<https://iournals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0003603X2095Q227>

Louis Galambos & Peter Temin: The Fall of the Bell System: A Study in Prices & Politics 
<https://www.google .com/books/edition/The_Fall_of the Bell_System/CXNPVjdxf AEC>

Websites:

Electronic Frontier Foundation: <http://www.eff.org>

• Adversarial Interop Case Studies: <https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2019/1 
Q/adversarial-interoperability>

• Privacy without Monopoly: <https://www.eff.org/wp/interoperabilitv-and-privacv>

Cory Doctorow: Craphound <http://craphound.net>

Cory Doctorow: Pluralistic <https://pluralistic,net>

&, of course:

Vernor Vinge: A Fire Upon the Deep <https: //books .google .com/books ?id=fCCWWgZ7d6UC>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

Grammatized Transcript:

BLAGOFAIRE

RANDOM    NEXT >


HEY, IT
WORKED!

I   WHAT? VHO

I   ARE YOU?

TA FROM THE I

ARE YOU A BLOWER?
I FLAY ONE OE YOU
AT OUR FESTIVALS1.

I      HUH?

LIKE THE REN FAIRES ।

UE RELIVE THE MS MN THE INTERNET
WAS NEU ANO FREE. THE DAYS OF RISKY
SHARING. SLASHDOT, THE HYSFACE MUSIC
RENAISSANCE, THE GENERATIONS
MINDS MEETING ON COMMENT THREADS,

IS THAT HOU WO­

VE 'RE FUZZY ON SOME DEMS. \

DID BLOGGERS REALLY WAR RED ]

CrmWts5r AND GOGGLES AND BLOG j

FROM HIGKALTIW BALLOONS?/


DISTANT FUTURE /

OF YOUR Tint - I I

BATTLING RCMNG BWS OF I®U$ AND


\ WOW. Hl!

DO REENACTMENTS./

h

HOLDING THE GREAT MALOGUESOriHE AGE!

I         NO!

A WELL. CORY

A A DOCroKM Dots.

A BUT NOBODY ELSE.


< PREV    RANDOM

PERMANENT LINK TO THIS COMIC: HTTPS://XKCD.COM/239/

IMAGE URL (FOR HOTLINKING/EMBEDDING): HTTPS://IMGS.XKCD.COM/COMICS/BLAGOFAIRE.PNG

Brad: Noah! What is the key insight?

Noah: Hexapodia is the key insight! Six feet!

Brad: And what is that supposed to mean?

Noah: That there is some nugget of fact that, if you grasp it correctly and place it in the proper 
context, will transform your view of the situation and allow you to grok it completely.

Brad: And in the context of Vernor Vingea€™ s amazing and mind-Bending science-fiction space-opera 
novel A Fire Upon the De epl

Noah: The importance of a€oehexapodiaa€D is that those sapient bushesa€!

Brad: a€ [riding around on six wheeled scooters have been geneticallya€!

Noah: a€ [programmed to be a fifth column of spies and agents for the Great Evil.

Brad: However, here we seek different key insights than a€cehexapodiaa€D. Today we seek them from 
the genius science-fiction author and social commentator Cory Doctorow. I think of him asa€”it was 
Patrick Nielsen Hayden, I think, who said around 2004: that he felt like he was living in the 
future of Scottish science fiction author, Ken MacLeod. And he wished Ken would just stop. At times 
I feel that way about Cory. But we are very happy to have him
here. His latest book is How to Destroy Surveillance Capitalism IIRC, his latest fiction is Attack 
Surface. My favorite two books of his are Walkaway anda€”I think it was your firsta€”Down & Out in 
the Magic Kingdom.

Cory: That's right. Yes. Thank you. Thank you for that very effusive introduction. I decry all 
claims of genius, though.

Brad: Well, we know this is a problem. When one is dealing with an author whose work one has read a 
lot ofa€”by reading your books.by now I've spent forty hours of my life looking at squiggles on a 
page or on a screen and, through a complicated mental process, downloaded to my wetware and then 
run on it a program that is my image of a sub-Turing instantiation of your mind, who has then told 
me many very entertaining and excellent stories. So I feel like
I                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
         know you very wella€!

Cory: Therea€™ s this infamous and very funny old auto reply that Neal Stephenson used to send to 
people who emailed him. It basically went: a€oeAh, I get it. You feel like you were next to me when 
we were with Hero Protagonist in Alaska fighting off the right-wing militias. But while you were 
there with me, I wasn't there with you. And so I understand why you want to, like, sit around and 
talk about our old military campaigns. But I wasn't on that
campaign with you.

Brad: Yes. It was only my own imago, my created sub-Turing instantiation of your mind that was 
therea€!

Cory: Indeed. We are getting off of interoperability, which is what I think we're mostly going to 
talk about. But this is my cogpsy theory of why fiction works, and where the fanfic dispute comes 
from.

Writers have this very precious thing they say. It is: a€cel'm writing and I'm writing and all of a 
sudden the characters start telling me what they want to do.a€D I think that what they actually 
mean by that is that we all have this completely automatic process by which we try and create 
models of the people we encounter. Sometimes we never encounter those people. We just encounter 
second-hand evidence of them. Sometimes those people don't live at all.
Think about the people who feel great empathy for imaginary people that cruel catfishers have 
invented on the internet to document their imaginary battles with cancer. They then feel deeply 
hurt and betrayed and confused, when this person they've come to empathize with turns out to be a 
figment of someone else's imagination.

I think what happens when you write is that you generate this optical link between two parts of 
your brain that don't normally talk to each other. There are these words that you are explicitly 
thinking up that show up on your screen. And then those words are being processed by your eyeballs 
and being turned into fodder for a model in this very naive way. And then the model gets enough 
flesh on the bonesa€”so it starts telling you what it wants to do. At this
point you are basically breathing your own exhaust fumes here. But it really does take what is at 
first a somewhat embarrassing process of putting on a puppet show for yourself: a€oeLike, 
everybody, leta€™ s go on a quest!a€U a€oeThat sounds great!a€D a€oeHere we go!a€D It just becomes 
something where you don't feel like you're explicitly telling yourself a story.

Now the corollary of this is that it sort of explains the mystery of why we like stories, right? 
Why we have these completely involuntary, emotional responses to the imaginary experiences of 
people who never lived and died and have no consequence. The most tragic death in literature of 
Romeo and Juliet is as nothing next to the death of the yogurt I digested with breakfast this 
morning, because that yogurt was alive and now it's dead and Romeo and Juliet never
lived, never died, nothing that happened to them happened. Yet you hear about the Romeo and 
Julieta€!

Noah: a€ [except that a human reads about Romeo and Juliet and caresa€[

Cory: That is where it matters, yes indeed. But the mechanism by which we care is our build this 
model which is then subjected to the author's torments, and then we feel empathy for the model. 
What that means is that the readers, when they're done, if the book hit its aesthetic marks, if it 
did the thing that literature does to make it aesthetically pleasinga€”then the reader still has a 
persistent model in the same way that if your granny dies, you still have a model
of                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
          your granny, right? You are still there.

That is why fanfic exists. The characters continue to have imagined lives. If the characters don't 
go on having imagined lives, then the book never landed for you.

And thata€™ s why authors get so pissy about fanfic. They too have this model that they didn't set 
out to explicitly create, but it's there. And it's important to their writing process. And if 
someone is putting data in about that modeled person that is not consistent with the author's own 
perception of them, that creates enormous dissonance. I think that if we understood this, we would 
stop arguing about fanfic.

Noah: We argue about fanfic?

Brad: Oh yes, there are people who do. I remembera€”in some sense, the most precious thing I ever 
read was Jo Walton saying that she believed that Ursula K. LeGuin did not understand her own 
dragons at alla€[

Noah: a€[Yep, correcta€[

Cory: Poppy Brighta€”back when Poppy Bright was using that name and had that gender identitya€’’was 
kicked out of a fan group for Poppy Bright fans on LiveJournal for not understanding Poppy 
Brighta€™ s literature. I think that's completely true. Ray Bradbury to his dying day insisted that 
Fahrenheit 451 had nothing to do with censorship but was about the dangers of televisional

Brad: Fanfic is an old and wonderful tradition. It goes back to Virgil, right? What is the Aeneid 
but Iliad fanfic?

Cory: And what is Genesis but Babylonian fanfic? It goes a lot further back than thata€[

Brad: Today, however, we are here to talk not about humans as narrative-loving animals, not about 
the sheer weirdness of all the things that we run on our wetware, but about a€oemandated 
interoperabilitya€d, and similar thingsa€”how we are actually going to try to get a handle on the 
information and attention network economy that we are building out in a more bizarre and irrational 
way than I would have ever thought possible.

Cory: Yes. I don't know if the audience will see this, but the title that you've chosen is: 
a€oeMandated Interoperability Is Not Going to Worka€D. I am more interested in how we make mandated 
interoperability work. I don't think it's a dead letter. I think that to understand what's what's 
happened you have to understand that the main efficiency that large firms bring to the market is 
regulatory capture. In an industry with only four or five major companies, all of
the executives almost by definition must have worked at one or two of the other ones. Think of 
Sheryl Sandberg, moving from Google to Facebook.

They form an emerging consensus. Sometimes they all sit around the same a boardroom table. Remember 
that photo of the tech leaders around the table at the top of Trump Tower? They converge on a set 
of overlapping lobbying priorities. They have a lot of excess rents that they can extract to 
mobilize lobbying in favor of that. One of the things that these firms have done in the forty years 
of the tech industry is to move from a posture where they were all
upstarts and were foursquare for interoperability with the existing platformsa€’’because they 
understood that things like network advantages were mostly important in as much as they conferred a 
penalty for switching, and that if you could switch easily then the network advantage disappeared. 
If you could read Microsoft Office documents on a Mac, then the fact that there's a huge network 
effect of Microsoft Office documents out there is irrelevant. Why?
Because you can just run switch ads, and say every document ever created with Microsoft Office is 
now a reason to own a Mac.

But as they became dominant, and as their industries have become super-concentrated, they have 
swung against interoperability. I think that we need a couple of remedies for that. I think that we 
need some orderly structured remedies in the forms of standards. We need to check whether or not 
those standards are mandated. And wea€™ ve seen how those standards can be subverted. And so I 
think we need something that stops dominant firms from subverting
standardsa€”a penalty that they pay that is market-based, that impacts their bottom line, and that 
doesn't rely on a slow-moving or possibly captured regulator but that, instead, can actually just 
emerge in real time.

That is what I call a€oeadversarial interoperabilitya€D: reverse engineering and scraping and bots. 
Steve Jobs paying some engineers to reverse engineer Microsoft Office file formats and make iWork 
suite, instead of begging Bill Gates to rescue the Maca€[

Brad: a€IBut he did beg Bill Gates to rescue the Maca€[

Cory: He did that as well. But that wasn't the whole story. He had a carrot and a stick. He had: 
let's have a managed, structured market. Right. And then he had: what happens if you don't come up 
to my standards is that we have alternatives, because we can just reverse-engineer your stuff. Look 
at, for example, the way that we standardized the formatting of personal finance information. There 
were standards that no one adopted. Then Mint came along, and they
wrote bots, and you would give the bots your login credentials for your bank, and they would go and 
scrape your account data and put it into a single unified interface.

This was adversarial interoperability. This spurred the banks to actually come into compliance with 
the standard. Rather than having this guerrilla warfare, they wanted a quantifiable business 
process that they could understand from year to year that wouldn't throw a lot of surprises that 
would disrupt their other other plans.


Brad: Let me back up: In the beginning, the spirit of Charles Babbage moved upon the face of the 
waters, and Babbage said: a€oeLet there be electromechanical calculating devicesa€D. And there was 
IBM. And IBM then bred with DARPA in the form of the Sage Air Defense, and begat generation upon 
generation of programmers. And from them was born FORTRAN and System 360.

And FORTRAN and IBM System 360 bestrode the world like the giants of the Nephilim, and Babbage saw 
it, and it was good. And there was nibbling around the edges from Digital Equipment and Data 
General.

Yea, until one day out of Silicon Valley, there emerged crystallized sand doped with germanium 
atoms, and everything was upset as out of CERN and there emerged the http protocol. All the 
companies that had been construct their own walled information gardens, and requiring you to sign 
up with AOL and CompuServe and Genie and four or five others in order to access databases through 
gopher and whatevera€”they found themselves overwhelmed by the
interoperability tide of the internet.

And for fifteen years there was interoperability and openness and http and rss, and everyone 
frantically trying to make their things as interoperable as possible so that they could get their 
share of this absolutely exploding network of human creativity and ideas.
And then it all stopped. People turned on a dime. They began building their own walled gardens 
again.

Noah: I feel like we did just get Neal Stephenson on this podcasta€!

Brad: Sub-Turing! It's a sub-Turing instantiation of a Neal Stephenson imago!

Cory: I think that your point of view or generational outlook or whatever creates a different lens 
than mine. I think about it like this: In 1979 we got an Apple II+. In 1980, we got a modem card 
for it. Right. By 1982, there were a lot of BBSa€™ s and that was great. Even though we were in 
Canada, the BBS software was coming up from the American market. We had local dial-up BBS's running 
software that was being mailed around on floppiesa€!

Brad: Whish whish whinea€! Beep beepa€! Whisha€l I am trying to make modem noisesa€!

Cory: that sounded like V.42bis.

And then by 1984 there were the PC clones. Everyone had a computer. This company that no one had 
ever heard ofa€”Microsofta€’’suddenly grew very big. They created this dynamism in the industry. 
You could have a big old giant, like IBM. You could have two guys in a garage, like Microsoft. The 
one could eclipse the other. IBM couldn't even keep control of its PCs. They were being cloned left 
and right. And then Microsoft became the thing that had
slain. It became a giant. And the DOJ intervened. Even though Microsoft won the suit 
ultimatelya€’’they weren't broken upa€!

Brad: They did back off from destroying Googlea€!

Cory: Whata€™ s missing from that account is the specific mechanisms. We got modems because we got 
cheap, long distance. We got that because 1982 we had the ATT breakup. Leading up to the breakup 
shifted the microeconomics. People ATT were all: dona€™ t do that. It's going to piss off the 
enforcers. We've got this breakup to deal with

Brad: Yes. The enforcers, the enforcers are important. Both the Modification of Final Judgment. And 
ATTa€™ s anticipatory reaction to it. Plus the periodic attempted antitrust kneecappings of IBM. 
They meant that when people in IBM turned around and said: a€oeWait a minute. When we started the 
PC project, John F. Akers told us we needed to find something for Mary Gatesa€™ s boy Bill to do, 
because he sat next to her at United Way board meetings. But
this is turning into a monster. We need to squelch them.a€D And from the C-suite came down: a€oeNo, 
our antitrust position is sufficiently fraught that we can't move to squash Microsoft.a€D

Cory: Yes. IBM spent 12 years in antitrust litigation. Hell, they called it. Antitrust as Vietnam. 
They essentially had been tied by the ankles to the back of DOJa€™ s bumper and dragged up and down 
a gravel road for 12 years. They were outspending the entire DOJ legal department every single year 
for that one case. And one of the things that DOJ really didn't like about IBM was tying software 
to hardware.

And so when Phoenix makes the IBM ROM clone, IBM is like: Yeah, whatever. Any costs we pay because 
of the clone ROM are going to be lower than the costs we will incur if we get back into antitrust 
hella€”and the same goes for Microsoft. They got scared off. What we were seeing, what it felt 
like, the optimism that I think we felt and of which we were aware wasa€”it looked like we'd have 
protocols and not products, and we'd have a pluralistic internet,
not five giant websites filled with screenshots of text from the other.

But our misapprehension was not due to technological factors. It was our failing to understand that 
like Bork and Reagan had shivved antitrust in the guts in 1980, and it was bleeding out. So by the 
time Google was big enough to do to everyone else what Microsoft had not been able to do to them, 
there was no one there to stop Google.

Noah: Cory, let me ask a question here. I'm the designated grump of the podcast. Brad is the 
designated history expounder. I want to know: Why do we care right right now? I've written about 
interoperability with regards to electric cars and other emerging technologies. What things in the 
software world are people hurt by not having interoperability for? What are the big harms in 
software to consumers or to other stakeholders from lack of interoperability?

Cory: Let me frame the question before I answer it.

We have market concentration in lots of different sectors for similar reasons, mergers. We should 
have different remedies for them. We heard about Babbage. I would talk about Turing and the 
universality of the computer. Interoperability represents a pro-competitive remedy to 
anti-competitive practices that is distinct and specific to computers.

I don't know if you folks know about the middle-gauge muddle in Australia. Independent states and 
would-be rail barons laid their own gauge rail across the country. You can't get a piece of rolling 
stock from one edge of the country to the other. For 150 years they have been trying to build 
designs that can drop one set of wheels where the track needs it. And none of them have worked. And 
now their solution is to tear up rails and put down new rails.

If that was a software object, we just write a compatibility layer. Where we have these durable 
anti-competitive effects in the physical world, that sometimes necessitate these very difficult 
remedies, we can actually facilitate decentralized remedies where people can seize the means of 
computation to create digital remedies: self-determination, the right to decide how to talk to 
their friends and under what circumstances, as opposed to being forced to choose
between being a social person and being privatea€!

Brad: For me, at least there are lots and lots of frictions that keep me from seeing things that I 
would like to see, and keep me from cross-referencing things that I would like to cross-references. 
There are bunches of things I've seen on Twitter and Facebook in the past that, because they are 
inside the walled gardens. I definitely am not able to get them out quickly and easily and cheaply 
enough to put them into the wider ideas flow. And I feel stupider as a result.
And then there are all the people who have been trapped by their own kind of cognitive functioning, 
so that they are now a bunch of zombies with eyeballs glued to the screen being fed terror so that 
they can be sold fake diabetes cures and overpriced gold fundsa€!

Noah: Thata€™ s a good angle right here. If we look at the real harms that are coming through the 
internet right nowa€”I worry about Kill Zones, and of course I worry about the next cool thing 
getting swallowed up by predatory acquisitions. That's our legitimate worry for sure. When I look 
at the internet and what bad the internet is causing, I do not see the lack of alternative 
information sources as the biggest problem. I see the people who are the biggest
problem as coming precisely from alternative information sources.

This is not to say we should get rid of those sources. This is not to say we should have mass 
censorship and ban all the anti-vax sites. I'm not saying that.

But if we look at the issuesa€’’there was a mass banning of Trump and many of the Q-Anons from the 
main social media websites, and yet a vast underground network of alternative right wing media has 
sprung up.

Cory: It seems like they were able to. Let me redirect from the harms that Brad raised. I think 
those are perfectly good harms. But I want to go to some broader harms.

In the purely digital online world, we had some people we advised at EFF who were part of a medical 
cancer previvor groupa€’’people who have a gene that indicates a very high likelihood of cancer, 
women. They had been aggressively courted by Facebook at a time when they were trying to grow up 
their medical communities. And one of the members of this group who wasn't a security researcher or 
anything was just noodling around on Facebook, and found
that you could enumerate the membership of every group on Facebook, including hers. She reported 
that to Facebook. That's obviously a really significant potential harm to people in the medical 
communities. She reported it to Facebook. Facebook characterized her report as a feature request 
and won't fix it. She made more of a stink. They said: fine, we're going to do a partial fix 
because it would have interfered with their ad-tech stack to do a full fix. So you
have to be a member of a group to enumerate the group. This was still insufficient.

But they had this big problem with inertiaa€”with the collective action problem of getting everyone 
who's now on Facebook to leave Facebook and go somewhere else. They were all holding each other 
mutually hostage. Now you could imagine that they could have set up a Diaspora instance, and they 
could have either had a mandated- or standards-defined interface that allowed those people to talk 
to their friends on Facebook. And they could have a little
footer at the bottom of each message: today 22% of the traffic in this group originated on our 
diaspora, once that tips to 60% were all leaving, and quitting Facebook. They might do this with a 
bot, without Facebook's cooperation, in the absence of Facebook's legal right to prevent those 
bots.

Facebook has weaponized the computer fraud and abuse act and other laws to prevent people from 
making these bots to allow them to inter-operate with Facebooka€”even though, when Facebook 
started, the way that it dealt with its issues with MySpace was creating MySpace spots, where you 
could input your login and password, and it would get your waiting MySpace messages and put them in 
your Facebook inbox and let you reply to them. Facebook has
since sued Power Ventures for doing the same thing. Theya€™ re engaged in legal activity against 
other bot producers that are doing beneficial pro-user things.

That's one harm.

Another harm that I think is really important here is repair. Independent repairs are about 5% of 
US GDP. The lack of access to repair is of particular harm to people who are already harmed the 
most: it raises the cost of being poor. The ability to control repair is a source of windfall 
profits. Tim Cook advised his investors in 2019, the year after he killed twenty right-to-repair 
bills at these state level, that the biggest threat to Apple's profits was that people were
fixing their devices instead of throwing them away. Ita€™ s an environmental problem, and so on. 
The biggest problem with right-to-repair is not that the companies don't provide their data or the 
diagnostic codes or encrypt diagnostic codes. The problem is that you face felony prosecution under 
the CFAA and DMCA, as well as ancillary stuff like non-compete and non-disclosure, and so on 
through federal trade secrecy law, if you create tools to repairs without
the cooperation of the vendors. This is a real harm that arises out of the rules that have been 
exploited to block interoperability.

Brad: This goes deep, right? This affects not just tech but the world, or, rather, because tech has 
eaten the world, hard-right unsympathetic state representatives from rural Missouri are incredibly 
exercised about right-to-repair, and the fact that John Deere does not have enough internal 
capacity to repair all the tractors that need to be repaired in the three weeks before the most 
critical-need part of the year.

Cory: This is an important fracture line. There are people who have a purely instrumental view: me 
my constituents need tractor repair, so I will do whatever it takes to get them tractor repair. In 
California we got a terrible compromise on this brokered with John Deerea€”it was basically a 
conduct remedy instead of a structural change. Right.

Something I questioned a lot about Klobuchara€™ s antitrust story is that she keeps saying: I 
believe that we need to jettison the 40-year consumer-welfare standard and return to a more 
muscular antitrust that is predicated on social harms that include other stakeholders besides 
consumers paying higher prices, and I have a bipartisan consensus on this because Josh Hawley 
agrees with me, but Josh Hawley does not agree with her. Josh Hawley just wants to get
Alex Jones back on Twitter, right. And that's like, it begins and ends there.

She might be able to get the inertia going where Josh Hawley is put in the bind where he either has 
to brief for a more broad antitrust cause of action that includes social harms, or he has to 
abandon Alex Jones to not being on Twitter. And maybe he'll take Alex Jones if that's the price. 
But I do think that that's a huge fracture line, that there are honest brokers who don't care about 
the underlying principle and the long run effects of bad policy. And there are people
who just want to fix something for a political point or immediate benefit.

Brad: Fixing it to the extent that fixing something scores a political pointa€”that does mean 
actually doing good things for your constituents, who include not just Alex Jones, but the guys in 
rural Missouri who want their John Deere tractors repaired cheaply.

Cory: This is how I feel about de platforming. I was angry about deplatforming for 10 years, when 
it was pipeline activists and sex workers and drag queens who were being forced to use their real 
name, and trans people were forced to use their dead names, and political dissidents in countries 
where they could be rounded up and tortured and murdered if they adhere to Facebooka€™ s real names 
policy, and all of that stuff. First they came for the drag queens,
and I said nothing because I wasn't a drag queen. Then they came for the far right 
conspiratorialists.

But they're fair-weather friends.

It's like the split between open source and free software where, you know, the benefits of 
technological self-determination were subsumed into the instrumental benefits of having access to 
the source so you could improve it. What we have is free software for the tech monopolists, for 
they can see the source and modify the source of everything on their backend. And we have open 
source for the rest of us. We can inspect the source, we can improve their software
for them, but we don't get to choose how their backends run. And since everything loops through 
their backends, we no longer have software freedom. That's the risk if you decouple instrumental 
from ethical propositions. You can end up with a purely instrumental fix that leaves the ethical 
things that worry you untouched, and in fact in a declining spiral.

Noah: I want to argue. I dona€™ t think we don't get enough argument on this podcast. I want to 
inject a little here.


A turning point for my generation in terms of our use of the internet was Gamergate. That happened 
in 2014. Gamergate largely morphed after that into the the Trump movement and the alt-right. 
Gamergate destroyed what I knew as online nerd culture. It was an extinction-level event for the 
idea that nerd culture existed apart from the rest of society. It was a terrible thing. Maybe nerd 
culture couldn't have lasted, but a giant subculture that I enjoyed and partially
defined myself by as a young person was gone. And not only that, not only mea€”Ia€™m centering 
myself and making all about me here, but a lot of people got harassed. Some good friends of mine 
got harassed. It was really terrible as an event in and of itself, irrespective of the long-term 
effects.

Even Moot, a big, huge defender of anonymity and free speech, eventually banned Gamergate topics 
from 4chan. That was the moment when I realized that the idea of free speech as free speech guarded 
by individual forums or platforms separately from the governmenta€”that that idea was dead. When 
Moot banned banned Gamergate from 4chan, I said: okay, we're in a different era. That was the 
Edward R Murrow moment. That was the moment we started
going back toward Dan Rather and Edward R Murrow and the big three television companies in the 
1950sa€”when Moot banned Gamergate.

Maybe this just has to happen. Maybe bad actors are able to always co-opt a fragmented internet. 
There a€™ s no amount of individual Nazi punching that can get the Nazis out. If you have people 
whose speech is entirely focused on destroying other people's right to speak, as Gamergate was, 
then then free speech means nothing because no one feels free to speak. I wonder whether 
fragmentation of platforms makes it harder to police things like Gamergate and
thus causes Nazis to fractally permeate each little space on the internet and every little pool of 
the internet. Wherever we have one big pool, we have economies of scale in guarding that pool.

Brad: That is: what you are saying is that an information world of just four monopolistic, highly 
oligopolistic, walled gardens is bad, but an internet in which you cannot build any wall around 
your garden is bad as well. Then what we really need is a hundred walled gardens blooming, perhaps. 
But I want to hear what Cory has to say about this and interoperability.

Cory: I found that so interesting. I had to get out some, no paper and take notes.

First of all, I would trace back before the Gamergate issue. Before it was the Sad Puppies, the 
disruption of the Hugo awards by far-right authors was before Gamergate. It was the same 
ringleaders. Gamergate was the second act of sad puppies. So I'm there with you.

I was raised by Trotskyists. I want to say that, listening to you describe how you feel about nerd 
culture after you discovered that half of your colleagues and friends were violent misogynistsa€”it 
sounds a lot like how Trotskyists talk about Stalinists, right. You have just recounted the the 
internet nerd version of Homage to Catalonia. Orwell goes to Spain to fight the fascist and a 
Stalinist shoots him through the throat.

We in outsider or insurgent or subcultural movements often have within our conception of a group 
people who share some characteristics and diverge on others. We paper over those divergences until 
they fracture. Think about the punk Nazi-punk split. This anti-authoritarian movement is united 
around a common aesthetic and music and a shared cultural identity. And there's this political 
authoritarian anti-authoritarian things sitting in the middle. And they just
don't talk about it until they start talking about ita€”Dead Kennedys record: Nazi punks f-a€”- 
off. And here we are, still in the midst of that reckoning. That's where Stormfront comes from and 
all the rest of it.

This is not distinct to the internet. It is probably unrealistic, it's definitely unrealistic for 
there to be a regime in which conduct that is lawful can find no home. Not that not that it won't 
happen in your home, but that it won't happen in anyone's home. The normative remedy where we just 
make some conduct that is lawful so far beyond the pale that everyone ceases to engage in ita€”that 
has never really existed. Right. You can see that with conduct that we might
welcome today, as you know, socially fine and conduct that we dislikea€’’whether that's, you know, 
polyamory. You go back to the future house, where Judy Merrill and, and Fred Pohl and C.M. 
Kornbluth lived in the thirties, and they had this big, weird polyamorous household of leftist 
science fiction writers write at a time when it was unmentionably weird to do it. And today it's 
pretty mainstreama€”at least in some parts of California.

In the absence of an actual law against it, it's probably going to happen. The first question is: 
is our response to people who have odious ideas that we want there to be nowhere where they can 
talk about it? If that's the case, we'll probably have to make a law against them.

Noah: Right. But hold on. Is it ideas, or is it actions? If you harass someone you're not 
expressing an idea, you're stopping them from expressing theirs.

Cory: Absolutely. So, so the issue is: that there are Nazis talking to other Nazis is okay. It's 
just that when Nazis talked to other Nazis and figured out how to go harass someone. Let me give 
you an example of someone I know who is in the midst of one of these harassment campaigns.

Now there's a brilliant writer, a librettist, novelist, and comics author named Cecile Castellucci. 
She also used to be like a pioneering Riot Girl and toured with Sloan. So she's just this great 
polymath person. And because she's a woman who writes comics, men on the internet hate her. And 
there's a small and dedicated cadre of these men who figured out a way to mess with women on 
Twitter. They send you a DM that is really violent and disgusting. They wait
until they see the read receipt, and then they delete it. Twitter, to its credit, will not accept 
screenshotted DMs as evidence of harassment, because it would be very easy for those same men to 
forge DMs from their targets and get those people kicked off Twitter. Then what they do is they 
revictimize their targets by making public timeline mentions that comport with Twitter's rules 
unless you've seen the private message. And they make references to the private
message that trigger the emotions from the private message over and over again.

It is a really effective harassment technique.

The women they use it against are stuck on Twitter, because their professional lives require them 
to be on Twitter, right. Their careers would end to some important degree if they weren't part of 
this conversation on Twitter.

Now, imagine if you had Gotham Clock Tower, Barbara Gordon's secret home, which was a Mastodon 
instance that was federated with Twitter, either through a standard or through a mandate or through 
adversarial interoperability. There could be a dozen women there who could agree that among 
themselves that they're willing to treat screenshotted DMs as evidence of harassment, so that they 
could block and silence and erase the all presence of these horrible
men. We'd still want Twitter to do something about them, but if some of those men slipped through 
Twittera€™ s defenses as they will, not just because they can't catch everyone when they're at the 
scale, but because the range of normal activities at scale is so broad: a hundred million people 
have a hundred and one million use cases every day. Then those people are that, that those people 
could still be on Twitter, but not subject to the harassment of Twitter. It's a
way for them.

Maybe, in the way that we talk about states being democracy's laboratories, maybe these satellite 
communities could pioneer moderation techniques that range beyond takedowns or account terminations 
or warning labels. There are so many different ways we could deal with this. You could render some 
comments automatically in Comic Sans. They could try them and see if they work. And they could be 
adopted back into main Twitter. That's what self-
determination gets you: it gets you the right to set the rules of your discourse, and it gets you 
the right to decide who you trust to be within the group of people who make those rules.

Brad: So if we had the real interoperable world, we would have lots that would screen things 
according to someone's preferences. And you could sign up to have that bot included in your 
particular bot list to pre-process and filter, so that you don't have to wade through the garbage.

Cory: Sure. And there might be some conduct that we consider so far beyond the pale that we 
actually criminalize it. Then we can take the platforms where that conduct routinely takes place 
and things like reforms to 230 would cease to be nearly so important. We would be saying that if 
you are abetting unlawful conduct, when wesee a remedy for preventing this unlawful conduct, and 
you refusing to implement that remedy, we might defenestrateyou. We
might do something worse.

Think of how the phone network works.lt is standardized. There are these standard interchanges. 
There's lots of ways it can be abused. Every now and and then, from some Caribbean Island, we get a 
call that fakes a number from a Caribbean Island, and if you call it back, you're billed at $20 a 
minute for a long distance to have someone go: no, it was a wrong number. When thathappens, the 
telco either cleans up its act orall the other telcos break their
connection to it. There's certain conduct that's unlawful on the phone network, not unlawful 
because it cheats the phone companya€”not toll frauda€”but unlawful because it's bad for the rest 
of the world, like calling bomb threats in. Either the customer gets terminated or the operator is 
disciplined by law.

All of those things can work without having to be in this in this regime where you have 
paternalistic control, where you vest all of your hope in a God-King who faces no penalty if he 
makes a bad call. They say: wea€™ 11 defend your privacy when the FBI wants to break the iPhone. 
But when they threaten to shut down our manufacturing, we'll let them spy on you even as they're 
opening up concentration camps and putting a million people in them.

Brad: Was that the real serpent in all of these walled gardens? Was the advertising-supported model 
the thing that turns your eyeballs into the commodity to be enserfed. If we had the heaven of 
micropayments, would we manage to avoid all of this?

Cory: We've had advertising for a long time. The toxicity of advertising is pretty new. Mostly 
what's toxic about advertising is surveillance, and not because I think the surveillance allows 
them to do feats of mind control. I think everyone who's ever claimed to have mind control turned 
out to be lying to themselves or everyone else. Certainly there is not a lot of evidence for it. 
You have these Facebook large-scale experiments: 60 million people subjected to a
nonconsensual, psychological intervention to see if they can be convinced to vote. And you get 
0.38% effect size. Facebook should be disqualified from running a lemonade stand if we catch them 
performing nonconsensual experiments on 60 million people. But, at the same time, 0.38% effect 
sizes are not mind control.

They do engage in a lot of surveillance. Ita€™ s super-harmful because it leaks, because it allows 
them to do digital redlining, because it allows them to reliably target fascists with messages that 
if they were uttered in public, where everyone could see them, might cause the advertiser to be in 
bad odor. They can take these dog whistles and they can whisper them to the people who wona€™ t 
spread them around.
Those are real harms.

You have to ask yourself: why don't we have a privacy law that prohibits the nonconsensual 
gathering of data and imposes meaningful penalties on people who breach data? I was working in the 
EU. GDPR was passed. The commissioners I spoke to there said: no one has ever lobbied me as hard as 
I've been lobbied now. Right now we have more concentration in ad tech than in any other industry, 
I think, except for maybe eyeglasses, glass bottles, and
professional wrestling.

Brad: Are we then reduced to: a€oeHelp us, Tim Cook! You are our only hope!a€D?

Cory: I think that that's wrong, because Tim Cook doesn't want to give you self-determination. Tim 
wants you to be subject to his determinations. Among those determinations are some good ones. He 
doesn't want Facebook to own your eyeballs. You go, Tim. But he also wants you to drop your iPhone 
in a shredder every 18 months, rather than getting it fixed.

Brad: Although I must say, looking at the Ml chip, I'm very tempted to take my laptop and throw it 
in the shredder today to force me to buy a new one.

Noah: It's interesting how iPhone conquered. And yet very few people still use Macs. Steve Jobsa€™ 
s dream was never actualized.

Cory: Firms that are highly concentrated distort policy outcomes, and ad tech is highly 
concentrated. And we have some obviously distorted policy outcomes. We don't have a federal privacy 
law with a private right of action. There are no meaningful penalties for breaches. We understand 
that breaches have compounding effects. A breach that doesn't contain any data that is harmful to 
the user can be merged with another breach and together they can be
harmfula€”and that's cumulative. And data has a long half-life.

Just this week, Ed Felton's old lab published a paper on how old phone numbers can be used to 
defeat two-factor authentication. You go through a breach, find all the phone numbers that are 
associated with the two-factor authentication. Then you can go to Verizon and ask: which of these 
phone numbers is available? Which of these people has changed their phone number? Then you can 
request that phone number on a new signupa€”and then you can break into
their bank account and steal all their money. Old breaches are cumulative. Yet we still have this 
actual-damages regime for breaches instead of statutory damages that take account of the downstream 
effects and these unquantifiable risks that are imposed on the general public through the 
nonconsensual collection and retention of data under conditions that inevitably lead to breaches.

Brad: Okay. Well, I'm very down. So are we ready to end? I think we should end on this downer note.

Noah: My favorite Cory Doctorow books also end on a downer note.

Brad: Yes. Basically that the political economy does not allow us to move out of this particular 
fresh semi-hell in which we're embedded. But you had something to say?

Cory: Everybody hates monopolies now. So we'll just team up with the people angry about 
professional wrestling monopolies and eyeglass monopolies and beer monopolies, and we'll form a 
Prairie Fire United Front of people who will break the monopoly because we're all on the same 
sidea€”even though we're fighting our different corners of ita€”the same way that ecology took 
people who cared about owls and put them on the side of people who care about
ozone layers, even though charismatic, nocturnal birds are not the gaseous composition of the upper 
atmosphere.

Brad: Hey, if you have the charismatic megafauna on your side, youa€™re golden.

Noah: How did the original Prairie Fire work out? Let's let's wrap it up there. This is really 
great episode. Cory, you're awesome. Thanks so much for coming on and feel free to come back in 
time.

Cory: Ia€™ d love to. I've just turned in a book about money laundering and cryptocurrencya€”a noir 
cyberthreat thriller. Maybe when that comes out, I can come on and we can talk about that. That 
feels like it's up your guys' alley.

Brad: That would be great. Okay. So, as we end this: Noah, what is the key insight?


First of all, I would trace back before the Gamergate issue. Before it was the Sad Puppies, the 
disruption of the Hugo awards by far-right authors was before Gamergate. It was the same 
ringleaders. Gamergate was the second act of sad puppies. So I'm there with you.

I was raised by Trotskyists. I want to say that, listening to you describe how you feel about nerd 
culture after you discovered that half of your colleagues and friends were violent misogynistsa€”it 
sounds a lot like how Trotskyists talk about Stalinists, right. You have just recounted the the 
internet nerd version of Homage to Catalonia. Orwell goes to Spain to fight the fascist and a 
Stalinist shoots him through the throat.

We in outsider or insurgent or subcultural movements often have within our conception of a group 
people who share some characteristics and diverge on others. We paper over those divergences until 
they fracture. Think about the punk Nazi-punk split. This anti-authoritarian movement is united 
around a common aesthetic and music and a shared cultural identity. And there's this political 
authoritarian anti-authoritarian things sitting in the middle. And they just
don't talk about it until they start talking about ita€”Dead Kennedys record: Nazi punks f-a€”- 
off. And here we are, still in the midst of that reckoning. That's where Stormfront comes from and 
all the rest of it.

This is not distinct to the internet. It is probably unrealistic, it's definitely unrealistic for 
there to be a regime in which conduct that is lawful can find no home. Not that not that it won't 
happen in your home, but that it won't happen in anyone's home. The normative remedy where we just 
make some conduct that is lawful so far beyond the pale that everyone ceases to engage in ita€”that 
has never really existed. Right. You can see that with conduct that we might
welcome today, as you know, socially fine and conduct that we dislikea€’’whether that's, you know, 
polyamory. You go back to the future house, where Judy Merrill and, and Fred Pohl and C.M. 
Kornbluth lived in the thirties, and they had this big, weird polyamorous household of leftist 
science fiction writers write at a time when it was unmentionably weird to do it. And today it's 
pretty mainstreama€”at least in some parts of California.

In the absence of an actual law against it, it's probably going to happen. The first question is: 
is our response to people who have odious ideas that we want there to be nowhere where they can 
talk about it? If that's the case, we'll probably have to make a law against them.

Noah: Right. But hold on. Is it ideas, or is it actions? If you harass someone you're not 
expressing an idea, you're stopping them from expressing theirs.

Cory: Absolutely. So, so the issue is: that there are Nazis talking to other Nazis is okay. It's 
just that when Nazis talked to other Nazis and figured out how to go harass someone. Let me give 
you an example of someone I know who is in the midst of one of these harassment campaigns.

Now there's a brilliant writer, a librettist, novelist, and comics author named Cecile Castellucci. 
She also used to be like a pioneering Riot Girl and toured with Sloan. So she's just this great 
polymath person. And because she's a woman who writes comics, men on the internet hate her. And 
there's a small and dedicated cadre of these men who figured out a way to mess with women on 
Twitter. They send you a DM that is really violent and disgusting. They wait
until they see the read receipt, and then they delete it. Twitter, to its credit, will not accept 
screenshotted DMs as evidence of harassment, because it would be very easy for those same men to 
forge DMs from their targets and get those people kicked off Twitter. Then what they do is they 
revictimize their targets by making public timeline mentions that comport with Twitter's rules 
unless you've seen the private message. And they make references to the private
message that trigger the emotions from the private message over and over again.

It is a really effective harassment technique.

The women they use it against are stuck on Twitter, because their professional lives require them 
to be on Twitter, right. Their careers would end to some important degree if they weren't part of 
this conversation on Twitter.

Now, imagine if you had Gotham Clock Tower, Barbara Gordon's secret home, which was a Mastodon 
instance that was federated with Twitter, either through a standard or through a mandate or through 
adversarial interoperability. There could be a dozen women there who could agree that among 
themselves that they're willing to treat screenshotted DMs as evidence of harassment, so that they 
could block and silence and erase the all presence of these horrible
men. We'd still want Twitter to do something about them, but if some of those men slipped through 
Twittera€™ s defenses as they will, not just because they can't catch everyone when they're at the 
scale, but because the range of normal activities at scale is so broad: a hundred million people 
have a hundred and one million use cases every day. Then those people are that, that those people 
could still be on Twitter, but not subject to the harassment of Twitter. It's a
way for them.

Maybe, in the way that we talk about states being democracy's laboratories, maybe these satellite 
communities could pioneer moderation techniques that range beyond takedowns or account terminations 
or warning labels. There are so many different ways we could deal with this. You could render some 
comments automatically in Comic Sans. They could try them and see if they work. And they could be 
adopted back into main Twitter. That's what self-
determination gets you: it gets you the right to set the rules of your discourse, and it gets you 
the right to decide who you trust to be within the group of people who make those rules.

Brad: So if we had the real interoperable world, we would have lots that would screen things 
according to someone's preferences. And you could sign up to have that bot included in your 
particular bot list to pre-process and filter, so that you don't have to wade through the garbage.

Cory: Sure. And there might be some conduct that we consider so far beyond the pale that we 
actually criminalize it. Then we can take the platforms where that conduct routinely takes place 
and things like reforms to 230 would cease to be nearly so important. We would be saying that if 
you are abetting unlawful conduct, when we see a remedy for preventing this unlawful conduct, and 
you refusing to implement that remedy, we might defenestrate you. We
might do something worse.

Think of how the phone network works.lt is standardized. There are these standard interchanges. 
There's lots of ways it can be abused. Every now and and then, from some Caribbean Island, we get a 
call that fakes a number from a Caribbean Island, and if you call it back, you're billed at $20 a 
minute for a long distance to have someone go:no, it was a wrong number. When that happens, the 
telco either cleans up its act orall the other telcos break their
connection to it. There's certain conduct that's unlawful on the phone network, not unlawful 
because it cheats the phone companya€”not toll frauda€”but unlawful because it's bad for the rest 
of the world, like calling bomb threats in. Either the customer gets terminated or the operator is 
disciplined by law.

All of those things can work without having to be in this in this regime where you have 
paternalistic control, where you vest all of your hope in a God-King who faces no penalty if he 
makes a bad call. They say: wea€™ 11 defend your privacy when the FBI wants to break the iPhone. 
But when they threaten to shut down our manufacturing, we'll let them spy on you even as they're 
opening up concentration camps and putting a million people in them.

Brad: Was that the real serpent in all of these walled gardens? Was the advertising-supported model 
the thing that turns your eyeballs into the commodity to be enserfed. If we had the heaven of 
micropayments, would we manage to avoid all of this?

Cory: We've had advertising for a long time. The toxicity of advertising is pretty new. Mostly 
what's toxic about advertising is surveillance, and not because I think the surveillance allows 
them to do feats of mind control. I think everyone who's ever claimed to have mind control turned 
out to be lying to themselves or everyone else. Certainly there is not a lot of evidence for it. 
You have these Facebook large-scale experiments: 60 million people subjected to a
nonconsensual, psychological intervention to see if they can be convinced to vote. And you get 
0.38% effect size. Facebook should be disqualified from running a lemonade stand if we catch them 
performing nonconsensual experiments on 60 million people. But, at the same time, 0.38% effect 
sizes are not mind control.

They do engage in a lot of surveillance. Ita€™ s super-harmful because it leaks, because it allows 
them to do digital redlining, because it allows them to reliably target fascists with messages that 
if they were uttered in public, where everyone could see them, might cause the advertiser to be in 
bad odor. They can take these dog whistles and they can whisper them to the people who wona€™ t 
spread them around.
Those are real harms.

You have to ask yourself: why don't we have a privacy law that prohibits the nonconsensual 
gathering of data and imposes meaningful penalties on people who breach data? I was working in the 
EU. GDPR was passed. The commissioners I spoke to there said: no one has ever lobbied me as hard as 
I've been lobbied now. Right now we have more concentration in ad tech than in any other industry, 
I think, except for maybe eyeglasses, glass bottles, and
professional wrestling.

Brad: Are we then reduced to: a€oeHelp us, Tim Cook! You are our only hope!a€D?

Cory: I think that that's wrong, because Tim Cook doesn't want to give you self-determination. Tim 
wants you to be subject to his determinations. Among those determinations are some good ones. He 
doesn't want Facebook to own your eyeballs. You go, Tim. But he also wants you to drop your iPhone 
in a shredder every 18 months, rather than getting it fixed.

Brad: Although I must say, looking at the Ml chip, I'm very tempted to take my laptop and throw it 
in the shredder today to force me to buy a new one.

Noah: It's interesting how iPhone conquered. And yet very few people still use Macs. Steve Jobsa€™ 
s dream was never actualized.

Cory: Firms that are highly concentrated distort policy outcomes, and ad tech is highly 
concentrated. And we have some obviously distorted policy outcomes. We don't have a federal privacy 
law with a private right of action. There are no meaningful penalties for breaches. We understand 
that breaches have compounding effects. A breach that doesn't contain any data that is harmful to 
the user can be merged with another breach and together they can be
harmfula€”and that's cumulative. And data has a long half-life.

Just this week, Ed Felton's old lab published a paper on how old phone numbers can be used to 
defeat two-factor authentication. You go through a breach, find all the phone numbers that are 
associated with the two-factor authentication. Then you can go to Verizon and ask: which of these 
phone numbers is available? Which of these people has changed their phone number? Then you can 
request that phone number on a new signupa€”and then you can break into
their bank account and steal all their money. Old breaches are cumulative. Yet we still have this 
actual-damages regime for breaches instead of statutory damages that take account of the downstream 
effects and these unquantifiable risks that are imposed on the general public through the 
nonconsensual collection and retention of data under conditions that inevitably lead to breaches.

Brad: Okay. Well, I'm very down. So are we ready to end? I think we should end on this downer note.

Noah: My favorite Cory Doctorow books also end on a downer note.

Brad: Yes. Basically that the political economy does not allow us to move out of this particular 
fresh semi-hell in which we're embedded. But you had something to say?

Cory: Everybody hates monopolies now. So we'll just team up with the people angry about 
professional wrestling monopolies and eyeglass monopolies and beer monopolies, and we'll form a 
Prairie Fire United Front of people who will break the monopoly because we're all on the same 
sidea€”even though we're fighting our different corners of ita€”the same way that ecology took 
people who cared about owls and put them on the side of people who care about
ozone layers, even though charismatic, nocturnal birds are not the gaseous composition of the upper 
atmosphere.

Brad: Hey, if you have the charismatic megafauna on your side, youa€™re golden.

Noah: How did the original Prairie Fire work out? Let's let's wrap it up there. This is really 
great episode. Cory, you're awesome. Thanks so much for coming on and feel free to come back in 
time.

Cory: Ia€™ d love to. I've just turned in a book about money laundering and cryptocurrencya€”a noir 
cyberthreat thriller. Maybe when that comes out, I can come on and we can talk about that. That 
feels like it's up your guys' alley.

Brad: That would be great. Okay. So, as we end this: Noah, what is the key insight?

Noah: Hexapodia is the key insight. And what are the other key insights that we got from this day?

Brad: DeLong: I'm just depressed. I had a riff about how we got interoperability right with the 
creation of the market economy and the end of feudalisma€”and how that was a very lucky historical 
accident. But I don't see possibilities for an equivalent lucky historical accident in our future.

Noah: I have a key insight. It is a little vague, but hopefully it will be good fodder for future 
episodes. The problems in our society are not diametrically opposed. We have to find optimal 
interior-solution trade-offs between things that have a non-zero dot product. Sometimes solving the 
problem with one thing doesn't necessarily create exactly equal and opposite problems on the other 
side. Instead, it changes the trade-offs that you face with regard to other
problems. These things become very complex. You have things like the antitrust problem and things 
like the Nazi problem. In your society addressing one doesn't necessarily worsen the other. More 
action against Nazis doesn't necessarily mean less action in antitrust. It's simply means you have 
to think about antitrust in a slightly different way, and vice versa. That does make these 
institutional problems very difficult to solve.

Brad: Cory, do you wish to add a key insight,

Cory: A key insight is: always keep a trash bag in your car.

Brad: This has been Brad DeLong and Noah Smith's podcast this week with the amazing Cory Doctorow. 
Thank you all very much for listening.


Cory: Sure. And there might be some conduct that we consider so far beyond the pale that we 
actually criminalize it. Then we can take the platforms where that conduct routinely takes place 
and things like reforms to 230 would cease to be nearly so important. We would be saying that if 
you are abetting unlawful conduct, when we see a remedy for preventing this unlawful conduct, and 
you refusing to implement that remedy, we might defenestrate you. We
might do something worse.

Think of how the phone network works.lt is standardized. There are these standard interchanges. 
There's lots of ways it can be abused. Every now and and then, from some Caribbean Island, we get a 
call that fakes a number from a Caribbean Island, and if you call it back, you're billed at $20 a 
minute for a long distance to have someone go: no, it was awrong number. When that happens, the 
telco either cleans up its act or all theother telcos break their
connection to it. There's certain conduct that's unlawful on the phone network, not unlawful 
because it cheats the phone companya€”not toll frauda€”but unlawful because it's bad for the rest 
of the world, like calling bomb threats in. Either the customer gets terminated or the operator is 
disciplined by law.

All of those things can work without having to be in this in this regime where you have 
paternalistic control, where you vest all of your hope in a God-King who faces no penalty if he 
makes a bad call. They say: wea€™ 11 defend your privacy when the FBI wants to break the iPhone. 
But when they threaten to shut down our manufacturing, we'll let them spy on youeven as they're 
opening up concentration camps and putting a million people inthem.

Brad: Was that the real serpent in all of these walled gardens? Was the advertising-supported model 
the thing that turns your eyeballs into the commodity to be enserfed. If we had the heaven of 
micropayments, would we manage to avoid all of this?

Cory: We've had advertising for a long time. The toxicity of advertising is pretty new. Mostly 
what's toxic about advertising is surveillance, and not because I think the surveillance allows 
them to do feats of mind control. I think everyone who's ever claimed to have mind control turned 
out to be lying to themselves or everyone else. Certainly there is not a lot of evidence for it. 
You have these Facebook large-scale experiments: 60 million people subjected to a
nonconsensual, psychological intervention to see if they can be convinced to vote. And you get 
0.38% effect size. Facebook should be disqualified from running a lemonade stand if we catch them 
performing nonconsensual experiments on 60 million people. But, at the same time, 0.38% effect 
sizes are not mind control.

They do engage in a lot of surveillance. Ita€™ s super-harmful because it leaks, because it allows 
them to do digital redlining, because it allows them to reliably target fascists with messages that 
if they were uttered in public, where everyone could see them, might cause the advertiser to be in 
bad odor. They can take these dog whistles and they can whisper them to the people who wona€™ t 
spread them around.
Those are real harms.

You have to ask yourself: why don't we have a privacy law that prohibits the nonconsensual 
gathering of data and imposes meaningful penalties on people who breach data? I was working in the 
EU. GDPR was passed. The commissioners I spoke to there said: no one has ever lobbied me as hard as 
I've been lobbied now. Right now we have more concentration in ad tech than in any other industry, 
I think, except for maybe eyeglasses, glass bottles, and
professional wrestling.

Brad: Are we then reduced to: a€oeHelp us, Tim Cook! You are our only hope!a€D?

Cory: I think that that's wrong, because Tim Cook doesn't want to give you self-determination. Tim 
wants you to be subject to his determinations. Among those determinations are some good ones. He 
doesn't want Facebook to own your eyeballs. You go, Tim. But he also wants you to drop your iPhone 
in a shredder every 18 months, rather than getting it fixed.

Brad: Although I must say, looking at the Ml chip, I'm very tempted to take my laptop and throw it 
in the shredder today to force me to buy a new one.

Noah: It's interesting how iPhone conquered. And yet very few people still use Macs. Steve Jobsa€™ 
s dream was never actualized.

Cory: Firms that are highly concentrated distort policy outcomes, and ad tech is highly 
concentrated. And we have some obviously distorted policy outcomes. We don't have a federal privacy 
law with a private right of action. There are no meaningful penalties for breaches. We understand 
that breaches have compounding effects. A breach that doesn't contain any data that is harmful to 
the user can be merged with another breach and together they can be
harmfula€”and that's cumulative. And data has a long half-life.

Just this week, Ed Felton's old lab published a paper on how old phone numbers can be used to 
defeat two-factor authentication. You go through a breach, find all the phone numbers that are 
associated with the two-factor authentication. Then you can go to Verizon and ask: which of these 
phone numbers is available? Which of these people has changed their phone number? Then you can 
request that phone number on a new signupa€”and then you can break into
their bank account and steal all their money. Old breaches are cumulative. Yet we still have this 
actual-damages regime for breaches instead of statutory damages that take account of the downstream 
effects and these unquantifiable risks that are imposed on the general public through the 
nonconsensual collection and retention of data under conditions that inevitably lead to breaches.

Brad: Okay. Well, I'm very down. So are we ready to end? I think we should end on this downer note.

Noah: My favorite Cory Doctorow books also end on a downer note.

Brad: Yes. Basically that the political economy does not allow us to move out of this particular 
fresh semi-hell in which we're embedded. But you had something to say?

Cory: Everybody hates monopolies now. So we'll just team up with the people angry about 
professional wrestling monopolies and eyeglass monopolies and beer monopolies, and we'll form a 
Prairie Fire United Front of people who will break the monopoly because we're all on the same 
sidea€”even though we're fighting our different corners of ita€”the same way that ecology took 
people who cared about owls and put them on the side of people who care about
ozone layers, even though charismatic, nocturnal birds are not the gaseous composition of the upper 
atmosphere.

Brad: Hey, if you have the charismatic megafauna on your side, youa€™re golden.

Noah: How did the original Prairie Fire work out? Let's let's wrap it up there. This is really 
great episode. Cory, you're awesome. Thanks so much for coming on and feel free to come back in 
time.

Cory: Ia€™ d love to. I've just turned in a book about money laundering and cryptocurrencya€”a noir 
cyberthreat thriller. Maybe when that comes out, I can come on and we can talk about that. That 
feels like it's up your guys' alley.

Brad: That would be great. Okay. So, as we end this: Noah, what is the key insight?

Noah: Hexapodia is the key insight. And what are the other key insights that we got from this day?

Brad: DeLong: I'm just depressed. I had a riff about how we got interoperability right with the 
creation of the market economy and the end of feudalisma€”and how that was a very lucky historical 
accident. But I don't see possibilities for an equivalent lucky historical accident in our future.

Noah: I have a key insight. It is a little vague, but hopefully it will be good fodder for future 
episodes. The problems in our society are not diametrically opposed. We have to find optimal 
interior-solution trade-offs between things that have a non-zero dot product. Sometimes solving the 
problem with one thing doesn't necessarily create exactly equal and opposite problems on the other 
side. Instead, it changes the trade-offs that you face with regard to other
problems. These things become very complex. You have things like the antitrust problem and things 
like the Nazi problem. In your society addressing one doesn't necessarily worsen the other. More 
action against Nazis doesn't necessarily mean less action in antitrust. It's simply means you have 
to think about antitrust in a slightly different way, and vice versa. That does make these 
institutional problems very difficult to solve.

Brad: Cory, do you wish to add a key insight,

Cory: A key insight is: always keep a trash bag in your car.

Brad: This has been Brad DeLong and Noah Smith's podcast this week with the amazing Cory Doctorow. 
Thank you all very much for listening.

