Introduction to: After Piketty: The Research Program Starting from Thomas Pikettya€™s Capital in 
the Twenty-First Century:

Capital in the Twenty-First Century, Three Years Later Thomas Pikettya€™ s Capital in the 
Twenty-First Century is an astonishing, surprise
bestseller.

Its enormous mass audience speaks to the urgency with which so many wish to hear about and 
participate in the political-economic conversation regarding this Second Gilded Age in which we
in the Global North now find ourselves enmeshed. 1 C2/a€™ s English-language translator Art 
Goldhammer reports (this volume) that there are now 2.2 million copies of the book scattered
around the globe in 30 different languages. Those 2.2 million copies cannot and should not but have 
an impact. They ought to shift the spirit of the age into another, different channel: post­
Piketty, the public-intellectual debate over inequality, economic policy, and equitable growth 
ought to focus differently. We have assembled our authors and edited their papers to highlight what
we,  at least, believe economists should study After Piketty as they use the book to trigger more 
of a focus on what is relevant and important.

Outside of Economics

In social-science discussions outside of economics, we see Pikettya€™ s book as making a definite 
splash. Thomas Pikettya€™ s C21 has achieved a major intellectual victory. It is shaping
sociological, political-science, and political-economic debate, as outside-economics social-science 
discussions definitely feel the impact of Pikettya€™ s arguments about the likelihood and
effects                                                                                  of rising 
inequality.

What is that impact on historians, sociologists, political scientists, and others? We believe that 
the best summary sketch of the impact of C21 on the social sciences outside of economics is,
somewhat paradoxically, written by an economist: Paul Krugman wrote in his NYRB review of C27, 
included herein.2 The last historical period of great inequalitya€’’the First Gilded Agea€”
showed that such great inequality was perfectly compatible with what was then seen as radical 
(white,

1

male) democracy, for a€oethen, as now, great wealth purchased great influenced’’not just over 
policies, but over public discourse.a€D It was not just that wealth provided a megaphone with
which to amplify the voices of the wealthy both in the corridors of power and in the public sphere. 
In addition, wealth induced sociological patterns of emulation. Wealth shaped images of
worthwhile styles of life.

Krugman sees, we believe accurately, the same links from economic inequality to politics and 
sociology operating today, and if anything he sees them as operating more strongly today. It is as 
if
political and sociological currents are responding not to what inequality is today but to what 
people perceive it likely to be a generation hence:

a curious aspect of the American scene is that the politics of inequality seem if anything to be 
running ahead of the reality.  At this point the US economic elite owes its status mainly to wages

rather than capital income. Nonetheless, conservative economic rhetoric already emphasizes and 
celebrates capital. as if a substantial part of our political class is actively working to restore

Pikettya€™ s patrimonial capitalism (this volume, p. XX TK XX).

Sociologists, historians, political scientists, and others now seem to us to be healthily and 
productively wrestling with these questions. That part of the splash made by C21 seems, to us at 
least,
to be on track.

Inside of Economics

However, inside of economics the reaction seems to us to be less healthy. Piketty a€™ s appearances 
in economics seminars draw standing-room-only crowds. But the flow of scholarship within
economics on the full panoply of issues he raises in C21 has, to date at least, has not been large. 
C21 has not or has not yet had the impact that we, at leasta€’’definite fans that we area€”think it
ought to have had. C21 ought, we think, to have done more and to be doing more to shape research 
agendas than it has.

We believe that it ought to because we believe that C21 is, as Robert Solow writes in his 
contribution here, a very serious book. There is a great deal for economists to engage with. The 
Kaldor
fact was that inequality a€”at least as driven by shifts in factor income sharesa€”was by the 
mid-20th century no longer and would never again be an important changing economic factor. The
Kaldor fact turns out not to

2

be a facta€”or, rather, to have been a transitory emergent historical pattern that has now 
dissolved. The Kuznets fact was that all or nearly all economies had or would go through an 
industrial
age in which inequality rose and then a social-democratic mass-consumption age in which inequality 
fell and then stabilized. It, too, turns out not to be a facta€”once again merely transient
historical contingency. Given that these two facts are not facts, Solow calls for economistsa€”and 
economicsa€”to take the serious C21 book as seriously as Piketty deserves. His call is a major
part                                                                                       of our 
motivation for this book. The fact that economists as a discipline do not, as best as we can tell, 
appear to be responding optimally is the rest of our motivation.

Pikettya€™s Claims

Therefore our questions are: How has Piketty moved the ball forward with respect to our 
understanding of the economy? What are the next steps for economic research to take, in light of 
what
Piketty has done? In order to answer them, we need to first be clear on what the argument of C21 
is. As we see it, Pikettya€™ s best- seller makes five central claims about:

1.The post-World War II Social Democratic Age in the Global Northa€”1945- 1980, saya€”saw the 
industrial economies of the Global North as relatively egalitarian places (for native-
born white men, at least). In them, relative income differences were moderated; long-standing 
racial wealth, income, and employment gaps were narrowed; and political voice was widely
distributed throughout the population. In them, the claims of wealth to drive political directions 
and shape economic structures were kept within boundsa€”although not neutralized.

2. That Social Democratic Age pattern was an unstable historical anomaly. Unlike many scholars, 
Piketty sees the rise of the social welfare state as the consequence of declining power of

the plutocratic elite. He traces declining post- tax inequality to the wars and the introduction of 
progressive taxation, but not the social insurance, labor standards, and welfare infrastructures set
up in the late 19th and early 20th century. Because capital-destroying wars are an anomaly, the 
period of low inequality was as well.

3. That Social Democratic Age was preceded by the Belle A%cpoquea€”so-called in Europe, and called 
the First Gilded Age in America. In that preceding epoch the claims of wealth,
especially inherited wealth, to drive political directions and shape economic structures were 
dominant. In that age relative income and even more relative wealth differentials were at extreme
values.

3

4. We are enmeshed in what appears to be an era of transition. While wealth concentration has just 
now returned to its early 20th century peak, Piketty shows that it remains the case that for
the top 1 percent, earnings from labor, not capital still comprises the majority of income.3 It has 
not yet transpired that the a€oeThe past devours the future.a€D4

5. It is most likely that we will seea€”the underlying dynamics of wealth generate powerful forces 
driving us toa€”a Second Gilded Age, another Belle A%cpoque, in which once again

the claims of wealth, especially inherited wealth, to drive political directions and shape economic 
structures will be dominant, and in which relative income and even more relative wealth
differentials will once again be at extreme values, and in which the benefit of access to modern 
advances in health and education ceases to be universal, stalling if not reversing relative
convergence in wellbeing across groups and individuals.

The Structure of Pikettya€™s Argument

The central argument for these claims that Piketty makes can itself be hastily sketched in seven 
analytical steps:

1. A societya€™ s wealth-to-annual-income ratio will grow (or shrink) to a level equal to its net 
savings and accumulation rate divided by its growth rate.

2. Time and chance inevitably lead to the concentration of wealth in the hands of a relatively 
small group: call them a€oethe richa€O: a society with a high wealth-to-annual- income ratio will
be a society with an extreme unequal distribution of wealth.

3. A society with an extremely unequal distribution of wealth will also have an extremely unequal 
distribution of income, for the wealthy will manipulate political economy or other factors in
such a way as to keep rates of profit at substantial levels and so avoid what John Maynard Keynes 
called a€oethe euthanasia of the rentier^Cl.5

4. A society with an extreme unequal wealth and income distribution will be one in which, over 
time, control over wealth falls to heirs and heiressesa€”an a€ceheiristocracya€D.


4

5. And a society in which wealth, especially inherited wealth, is economically salient will be one 
in which the rich will have a very high degree of economic, political, and sociocultural
influenced’’and will be an unpleasant society in many ways.

6. The twentieth century: (a) saw a uniquely high rate of economic growth due to the growth forces 
of the Second Industrial Revolution outlined by Robert Gordon and due to successful
convergence of the Global North to the economic prosperity frontier marked by the United States; 
(b) saw wars, revolutions, general chaos, and socializing and progressive tax-imposing
political movements generate uniquely strong forces pushing down the rate of accumulation; but (c) 
all of these forces are now ebbing if they have not already completely ebbed away.6

7. Hencea€’’although we are far from the limit yeta€”the logic of (1) through (5) is now at work. 
It is substantially more likely than not to work itself to completion. It will deliver a society
unpleasant in a number of ways in a half-century or so.

In Piketty's view, we are now more than a full generation into this process of the passing away of 
North Atlantic social democracy. This process, however, has not yet come to an end. It will, he
thinks, take another two generations or more for the logic he sees driving us on our current 
trajectory to work itself through to its completion. We havena€™t, in Pikettya€™ s view, seen
anything yet, at least as far as the Global Northa€™ s return to its default pattern of plutocracy 
is concerned.

The Poverty of (Much) Piketty Criticism

Now, even in this oversimplified thumbnail form, this argument of Pikettya€™ s is not a simple 
argument. One would therefore expect that it would attract a large volume of substantive
criticism. And, indeed, it has: there are a substantial number of effective and thoughtful 
critiques of Piketty. To note a few examples:

• Matt Rognlie seeks to cast doubt on step (3), and has taken John Maynard Keynesa€™ s side of the 
debate over whether accumulation that leads to a rising wealth-to-annual-income
ratio leads in fact to a rate of profit that falls faster than the wealth-to-annual-income ratio 
grows, thus creating a society with a high degree of wealth but a low degree of income
inequality.7

• Tyler Cowen casts doubt on (2), (4), and (5): He argues that creative destruction will break up 
or at least limit the salience of cross-generational dynastic accumulations. He further
argues, echoing Friedrich von Hayek,

5

that the a€oeidle richa€D are a valuable cultural resource precisely because they are not bound to 
the karmic wheel of earning, getting, and spending on necessities and conveniences, and so
can take the long and/or heterodox view of things.8

a€0 Acemoglu and Robinson point out that while Piketty a€oementions policies and institutions ... 
their role is ad hoc.a€D9

a€0 Still others hope for a new industrial revolution to create more low-hanging fruit and faster 
growth, accompanied by another wave of creative destruction, that will short-circuit (2), (4), (6),
and (7).

a€0 And there is the question of Pikettya€™ s neglect of human capital as an important form of 
property and a leveling factor in the modern age.

All in all, however, what has impressed us has been the limited substantive meat in the critiques 
of Pikettya€™ s overall chain of argument. The argument is complex and multi-stepped. All
such arguments are vulnerable. Our coverage and reading of the critiques is far from complete: we 
try to survey the critiques of Piketty, but find ourselves reduced by the volume to simply
surveying the surveys. And in our view we see a remarkable number of arguments that same to us to 
be largely substance- free. They come in the forms of amateur psychological diagnosis, red­
baiting, misconstructions of Pikettya€™ s argument, miscalibrations of economic growth models, data 
errors, and more.

The nadir, perhaps, comes from the pen of Allan Meltzer of Carnegie-Mellon and of Stanford 
Universitya€™ s Hoover Institution. It accuses Thomas Piketty of being a Frenchmen, a former
MIT Professor, and a co-author of Emmanuel Saez at MIT, where... the IMFa€™ s Olivier Blanchard, 
was a professor. He is also French. France has, for many years, implemented destructive

policies of income redistribution. 10

On the one hand, it is disappointing to see critiques that do not look much like academic analyses, 
but more like things designed to reassure standard billionaires hoping to establish a dynasty.

On the other hand, it is clear that the urge to set forth even low-substance critiques plus the 
booka€™ s 2.2 million copies is powerful evidence that C21 has struck a very louda€”if not
resonanta€’’chord. Many, many find that it is worth engaging. The question is: how?

6

We want to help to drive a constructive engagement with Pikettya€™ s Capital in the Twenty-First 
Century. We want critiquea€’’sharp critique. But we want effective, useful critique that
contributes to the advance of knowledge. We do not want things like:

that misrepresent Pikettya€™ s argument and in so doing subtract from rather than adding to global 
knowledge. And we want to encourage work that will build on Piketty, and carry his data
collection and his theoretical arguments further.

We believe that the contributors we have assembled have accomplished this task. And so we have 
written this introduction to set the stage for them. Here in this introduction we ask:

1. Is ita€”the argument of Thomas Pikettya€™ s C27a€”right? 2. Do we care?

3. What are the implications?

4. And what do we economists do next?

(1) Is Piketty Right?

The first question is: Is Piketty right? Or, at least, if Piketty is not definitely right, is he 
presenting a plausible and disturbing scenario: something to worry about, and perhaps something to 
take
action about in the hopes of turning the forecasts of C21 into a self-denying prophecy?

Here the answer strongly appears to us to be: yes.


James Pethokoukis

©JimPethokoukis

Follow

Karl Marx wasn’t wrong, just early. Pretty much.
Sorry, capitalism. #inequalityforevah
natl.re/1eD21dL via @NRO


Piketty is right in maintaining that here in the Global North, as far back as we can look, 
ownership of private wealtha€”with its power to command resources, dictate where and how people
would work, and shape politicsa€”was always highly concentrated. Piketty is right in maintaining 
that 150 yearsa€”six generationsa€”ago, in the Belle A%opoque-First Gilded Age, the ratio of
a typical Global North countrya€™ s total private wealth to its total annual income was about six. 
Piketty is right in maintaining that in the Age of Social Democracy some 50 yearsa€”two
generationsa€”ago, that capital-income ratio was about three. And Piketty is right to note that 
over the past two generations that wealth-to-annual-income ratio has been rising rapidly.

More debatable is whether the rise in wealth-to-annual-income ratios is driven by the forces 
Piketty highlights. And much more debatable is whether the rise in income inequality is being driven
by a rise in wealth inequality that is itself a consequence of the rise in economy-wide 
wealth-to-annual-income ratios. These points are contestable, and are contested. But we would 
expect them
to be contestable. There are lots of other influences on the distribution of income besides the 
forces Piketty places at center stagea€”some of which he writes about himself. Those forces have
not yet had time since the end of the Age of Social Democracy to work themselves out. Pikettya€™ s 
main argument is not about the causes of how things are now, but about what things will be
like in 50 years and more. Notwithstanding that, there are plenty of indications available to us in 
the world today that substantial features of the last Gilded Age have recurred: a rising capital
income share, a rising coincidence of labor with capital incomes, rising persistence of 
inter-generational fortunes impregnable from assault by the tax authorities.

Of further debate is the bandwidth for institutions, politics, or social movements to move beyond 
his fairly deterministic theory of the future. While Piketty often gives lip-service the role of
non-economic forces and encourages the reader to consider what the other social sciences might have 
to tell us, in the end, his argument is based on a simple economic inequality. The
institutional changes required to propel this vision forward are baked in. There are a variety of 
ways that institutions as they actually are may hamper his vision, however. As Heather Boushey
points out in this volume, an a€oeheiristocracya€n will almost certainly require a move away from 
gender equitya€”a trend that women and their allies may be prepared to fight against.

Moreover, both David Grewal and Marshall Steinbaum argue for a history of inequality as arising 
from the rise (in Grewal's case) and fall (in Steinbaum's) of
8

what be termed an a€oeideology of capitalisma€D and an associated body of law and policy. A 
a€oefree marketaGD independent of mercantilist or monarchical authority developed alongside
the bourgeoisie of the 18th century and entered into a political alliance with the ancien regime in 
the 19th. Piketty argues that capitalism itself, rather than its ideology, is responsible for ever­
widening inequality, and as such it was the exogenous world wars of the 20th century that briefly 
derailed it. But they also derailed its ideology, and that was not so exogenous.

Pikettya€™ s argument is contestable and contested right now because the signal he focuses on is 
not yet emerging or has barely emerged from the noise. But that is what we would expect to
see if his argument were in fact correct.

However, that is also what we might well see if his argument were in fact badly off-base.

More secure is Pikettya€™ s claim that the pattern of the aGoeeuthanasia of the rentieraGD expected 
by authors like Keynes, Rognlie, and others who assume the identity of wealth with
productive capital in some neoclassical production function of income might have substantial 
empirical problems. Those authors expect large swings in societal wealth-to-annual-income ratios
to   be associated with large swings in society-wide rates of profit, with profit rates high when 
capital is scarce relative to annual income and low when capital is abundant.

Thomas Piketty's response to this is, roughly: RognlieaG™ s argument sounds very good in 
neoclassical economic theory, but fails in historical practice. Supply-and- demand tells us that 
when
the economy's wealth-to-annual income ratio varies, the rate of profit should vary in the opposite 
direction. But history tells us, to the contrary, that the annual rate of profit has plodded along 
at
some 4% or 5%, largely independent of the relative scarcity or abundance of wealth. So much the 
worse for the logic supply-and-demand.

Here we have an apparent historical fact: the relative invariance of the rate of profit to what 
aggregate neoclassical production functions tell us should be its principal source of variation. But
here Piketty does not put forward a theory. He might argue that physical capital, total wealth, 
rent-seeking political-economy, and government-enforced monopoly rents work in an iron
quadrilateral to maintain the rate of profit willy-nilly no matter what the logic of production and 
the marginal- product theory of distribution say. He might argue that technology is such that
physical capital does not face sharply decreasing marginal returns and so that the capital-income 
ratio and capital share move together and not inversely. He might argue that in the past what he
calls aGoecapitalaGD was overwhelmingly agricultural

9

capital in the form of land and in the future aGcecapitalaGD will overwhelmingly be information 
capital and that the neoclassical growth model was a valid first-order approximation only for
the short interval that was the Age of Social Democracy. He might follow Suresh Naidu, in this 
volume, who argues that capital's share of national income, far from obeying the rules of
marginal productivity pricing, is in fact determined by power, and the total stock of what Piketty 
and the neo-classicals call both wealth and capital is actually financialized claims on a
forthcoming stream of revenuea€”not the result of lengthy accumulation, so to speak, but of 
political control of the future. But Piketty does not take a stand. This seems to be a substantial 
hole
in    the book. It points out what is perhaps the most important and urgent research task opened up 
by Piketty. Is the apparent constancy of the rate of profit a robust reality? And if it is, what
forces and factors maintain the constancy of the rate of profit.

In this book, Devesh Raval tries to advance the ball here. He reinforces the Rognlie-Keynes 
aGoeeuthanasia of the rentieraGD point that capital and labor are not substitutable enough to 
sustain
PikettyaG™ s argument. If the story behind the constancy of the rate of profit isnaG™ t that 
marginal capital continues to be productive as it is accumulated, what is it? Is there a story? One
possible  story is provided by Michael Spence and Laura Tyson, who see Piketty as very much barking 
up the wrong tree. Inequality is growing and will continue to grow. But its growth will not
be driven by the factors in PikettyaG™ s growth models. It will be driven by the coming of the 
information age, and the shape of information-age technology which for the first time does make
human labor a substitute for rather than a complement to capital by greatly reducing the necessity 
of using human brains as routine cybernetic control mechanisms for basic matter manipulation
and basic information processing.

Branko Milano vic has a different critique here: that PikettyaG™ s arguments are appropriate only 
for the institutional setup that Milano vic calls aGoenew capitalisma€D. In what we would tend
to call advanced social democracy a€”in which the state and society powerfully put their thumbs on 
the scales to equalize the distribution of claims to income that flow from aGoeold
propertyaGD and also to create aGoenew propertyaGD in the form of citizen entitlementsaG’’there is 
no connection between the capital share and inequality in the distribution of income. And in
what Milanovic calls aGoeclassic capitalismaGD (and Karl Marx would call aGoepetit bourgeois 
societyaGD) the distribution is driven by the Ricardian triad of labor, capital, and landaG”and
the dynamics are substantially different. Milano vicaG™ s contribution is that the correspondence 
between fractional and personal distribution is a peculiar, and contingent, historical
phenomenonaG”one that could easily be reversed.

10

Is PikettyaG™ s argument right?

At the moment the answer is aGoeperhapsaGD. Not only does a great deal turn on the robustness of 
each of the links in his argument, but his argument is also conditional on the Global
NorthaG™ s remaining on its current political-economic trajectory. So a lot turns on what we take 
that phrase aGoecurrent political-economic trajectoryaGD to mean. Under some interpretations
of   that phrase Piketty will surely be right. Under others he will surely be wrong. And we do need 
to distinguish which is which.

(2) Do We Care?

The second question is: Do we care?

SomeaG”perhaps manyaG”say that we do not care. There is one often-made thread of argument that we 
simply should not care about inequality. In fact, according to this thread, inequality is
good: It is an engine of faster economic growth, by incentivizing human capital acquisition and 
engendering social mobility. It is not a problem for an economy, a society, or a country at all.

What is a problem, this thread of argument maintains, is povertyaG’’especially dire poverty.

And, this thread continues, we are now much richer than our predecessors of six generations ago 
were. Back then Gilded Age or Belle A%opoque levels of inequality caused not just poverty but
dire poverty. Hence back then inequality was a serious problem. Now, however, because the Global 
North is so much richer, the amount of inequality that back then caused dire poverty does not
cause dire poverty today. In fact, it does not cause anything that we should call aGoepovertyaGD at 
allaG”at least not if we take a historical perspective.

In the United States, policy-oriented organizations like Third Way argue that AmericaaG™ s middle 
class is doing just fine. They point to the rise in real incomesaG” in no small part due to the
added hours and earnings of womenaG”as an indicator that PikettyaG™ s measures of the top 1 percent 
are just getting the story wrong. In the academy, many point to the great advances of
medical care, sanitation, public education, literacy, disease eradication, and proliferation of 
leisure activities, to

11

mention only a few, and claim that there is no prospect for reversing these gains in absolute 
wellbeing regardless of what happens to the top 1%.


This is an old argumenta€”250 years old, in fact. It was Adam Smith who argued in his Wealth of 
Nations that your average working-class Briton lived in greater material comfort than an
African king. It was Adam Smith who argued in his Theory of Moral Sentiments that the consumption 
of the rich was limited by the size of their stomachs, and thus that most of what they spent
even on themselves was in fact a contribution to the leisure and the comfort of their underlings.

However, this argument is probably wrong. Granting that economic growth above bare Malthusian 
subsistence up to Britaina€™ s eighteenth-century Augustan Age was impressive, and
granting that economic growth since then has been magnificent, there are still powerful and 
important reasons to care not just about what by historical standards is dire poverty and poverty, 
but
about inequality and about what we call a€cepovertya€D todaya€”even if the poor do have 
dishwashers, smartphones, and televisions:

First, anyone who has looked at the distribution of medical care in the United States and our 
abysmal health outcome statistics relative to other rich countries cannot help but see that 
inequality
is a factor that leads enormous investments of resources to deliver little of ultimate value in the 
sense of human well-being and human satisfaction. The point generalizes beyond the health
sector: an unequal economy is one that is lousy at turning productive potential into societal well- 
being. We could be doing bettera€”and with a more equal income and wealth distribution
would  be.

Ita€™ s hard to prove causality from inequality to health or other social welfare indicators, but a 
data point that illustrates the struggles facing parts of the United States left out of the new
gilded age is found in the research of Anne Case and Angus Deaton. They show that the rise in 
mortality among middle-aged Americans from suicides and drug overdosesa€”both conditions
that are associated with economic malaisea€’’between 1999 and 2013 has been so large that it is 
similar to the rise in mortality caused by the AIDS crisis through 2015.11 Similar findings
document that once-narrowing gaps in employment, health, and overall wellbeing have stopped 
closing, and in some cases, re-opened.12

Second, as noted above, established wealth, especially inherited wealth, is by its nature hostile 
to the creative destruction that accompanies rapid economic growth, for it is established wealth
that is creatively destroyed. Plutocrats and their

12

ideologues like to claim that too equal an income distribution destroys incentives to work and 
turns us into a a€~nation of takers.a€™ But a return to the inequality levels of the 1960s would
not turn us into Maoist China. In the relevant range of levels of inequality, it is much more 
likely that higher inequality will slow growth by depriving the non-rich of the resources to invest 
in
themselves, their children, and their enterprises; It will further slow growth by focusing effort 
on helping the rich keep what they have at the cost of squelching the development of the new.

There is ample evidence across the United States that elites are engaged in what some call 
a€oeopportunity hoarding .a€D 13 We hear a lot about how the rich are able to garner human-sized
airplane seats and now their own haven within a cruise ship, but there are areas where their 
consumption limits the potential for others. 14 Elites are increasingly opting out of public 
schools,
which deprives those schools of valuable parental engagement as well as income to the extent these 
elites then fail to support levies for school financing. In the limit, such elite withdrawal
leaves public schools open to political assault from forces hostile to the whole idea of universal 
free and equal high-quality public education.

Third, a society in which plutocrats deploy their resources to have not just a loud but an 
overwhelming voice will be a society in which government sets about to solve problems of concern the
plutocrats and not the people. And that is unlikely to be a good society.

This too, pushes against a high growth society. The extent to which plutocrats are given the option 
of rent-seeking or trying to win in the competitive marketplace, they are likely to seek to close
the door behind them. Case in point: as policymakers struggle to rein in the anti-competitive bent 
of newly-powerful platform-based firms, we are seeing a win for those who arrive firsta€”and
peanuts for the rest. This kind of economy keeps prices high and stifles innovation, neither of 
which bode well for economic dynamism.

Fourth, the predominance of wealth in the exercise of power extends far beyond the sphere of formal 
politics, well into the workplace, the home (even into the bedroom), and to civil society.
Reliance on private wealth to finance higher education has already made that sector far more 
unequal, with very expensive mediocrity the lot of anyone unlucky enough not to gain access to its
most restricted precincts (which explicitly favor the children of their alumni and implicitly those 
applicants similar to them), and with a greater degree of restriction on the curriculum and on the
views of the personnel who teach it than obtain under a system that owes its existence to the 
continued support of the public.

13

Fifth, an unequal society in one in which employers can and do exploit their ability to pick 
winners and losersa€”and are driven to indignant outrage by the idea of a collective worker voice.

Labor Economist David Weil sees increasing inequality both driving in part and being driven in part 
by a a€~fissuring of the workplacea€D. In the past large corporations would in a relatively-
efficient Coasian way serve as islands of central planning in the sea that was the market economy, 
with workers at all levels: skilled professionals, mid-level administrators, and manual workers.
Such a workplace is inevitably subject to strong egalitarian pressures: the presence of high-wage 
professionals pulls up everyonea€™ s calculus of what the firm can afford to pay its manual
workers and what its manual workers deserve. But with increasing inequality it becomes potentially 
profitable to break the coordination efficiencies if so doing can relax egalitarian sociological
pressures. We need to find out how strong the forces Weil identifies are, and whether they are a 
peculiar case or suggest that high inequality is likely to interfere with efficiency along a broad
front.

Sixth, an unequal society is one in which who you know matters more to your ultimate wellbeing than 
what you know, and one thing we can tell by observing the behavior of the rich and their
acolytes is that native ability to suck up to the rich is not equally distributed throughout the 
population. The rich prefer people who are like themselves, and a society in which a€oewho the rich
likea€D determines the distribution of wellbeing is unlikely to preserve the gains of racial and 
gender equality made during the Social Democratic era.

Moreover, Arthur Okuna€™ s argument in Equality and Efficiency: The Big Trade-Off that a good 
society was one that made a proper choice of a point on the equality- efficiency frontier
appears, in retrospect, to be in all likelihood substantially wrong if we try to apply it to our 
day. 15 More equality may well go along with greater efficiency.

So: Yes, we should care. We do care.

(3) What Are the Implications?

14

Suppose that Piketty has established that the Global North a century hence is highly likely to have 
a much higher wealth-to-annual-income ratio than todaya€” and even that inherited wealth
will be a much greater proportion of total wealth than it is today. Does this necessarily entail an 
unfavorable distribution of economic power and resources, an economy that falls short of its
potential according to some utilitarian benchmark that takes account of declining marginal utility 
of wealth? Is it in fact that case that a high wealth-to-income ratio even mean that society must
be grossly unequal?

Piketty says a€ceyesa€D. On these issues he follows Marx, and Marxa€™ s insight that in a market 
economy with transferable wealth an egalitarian property distribution is unstable. From a
starting point of equal division time and chance will inevitably produce a large and extended upper 
tail with the size and a length heavily and positively dependent on the magnitude of r - g,
where                                                                                       r is 
not the safe interest rate but the average economy-wide rate of profit, and on the magnitude of the 
risk associated with capital returns. Thus an economy with a high wealth to income
ratio and a high capital and other forms of wealth share in national income will be an unequal 
economy.

Pikettya€™ s argument is thus:

Many shocks... contribute to making the wealth distribution highly... demographic shocks... shocks 
to rates of return... to labor market outcomes... differences in taste parameters that affect the
level of saving.... A central property of this large class of models is that... the long-run 
magnitude of wealth inequality will tend to be magnified if the gap r a"’ g is higher. A higher gap

between r and g allows an economy to sustain a level of wealth inequality that is higher and more 
persistent over time... a distribution that has a Pareto shape for top wealth holders. [with] the

inverted Pareto coefficient (an indicator of top-end inequality) is a steeply rising function of 
the gap r a"’ g... see in particular Champernowne 1953; Stiglitz 1969. Piketty and Zucman (2015,

section 5.4)...

In this class of models, relatively small changes in r a"’ g can generate very large changes in 
steady-state wealth inequality. It is really the interaction between the r a"’ g effect and the

institutional and public policy responsesa€’’including progressive taxation of income, wealth, and 
inheritance; inflation; nationalizations, physical destruction, and expropriations; estate
division rules; and so ona€”which in my view, determines the dynamics and the magnitude of wealth 
inequality...

15

And, in Pikettya€™ s view, at least as expressed in the book, the interaction is likely to be an 
unhelpful one: greater wealth inequality will raise the demand for egalitarian policy responses, but
it will also raise the ability of those with wealth to block such policy responses. The book 
portrays the forces favoring the formation of a dominant plutocracy as being so strong that they 
can be
countered only by world wars and global revolutions a€“ and even then, the correction is only 
temporary.


rjote mat we said: afeoeat least as expressed in me hooKafeU. Since me publication ot me book, 
inomas PiKetty nas not played me role ot a doomsayer, bringing me message ot inescapable

rising inequality and encouraging a passive response. Instead, he has embraced the role of a 
celebrity public intellectual. And the message he has carried to all corners of the world is not the
message expected from a passive chronicler of unavoidable destiny. If we look at what Piketty does 
a€“ rather than what he writes a€“ it is clear that he believes we can collectively make our
own destiny, even if the circumstances are not what he, or we, would choose.

Branko Milano vic has a relevant critique here, not of Piketty-as-public-intellectual but of 
Piketty-as-author. In his view, these arguments of Pikettya€™ s (and before him of Marx) are
appropriate only for the institutional setup that Milanovic calls a€oenew capitalisma€D. There are 
other institutional setups possible in the future. Indeed, we have seen others in the past In
what    we would tend to call advanced social democracy a€’’for example, the post-World War II 
institutional order in which the state and society powerfully put their thumbs on the scales to
equalize the distribution of claims to income that flow from a€oeold propertya€n and also to create 
a€oenew propertya€D in the form of citizen entitlementsa€’’there is no connection between
the capital share and inequality in the distribution of income. And in what Milanovic calls 
a€oeclassic capitalisma€D (and Karl Marx would call a€oepetit bourgeois societya€D) the
distribution is driven by the Ricardian triad of labor, capital, and landa€”and the dynamics are 
substantially different.

More than one and two-thirds centuries ago Karl Marx dismissed Brankoa€™ s critique as reflecting 
an irrational and unattainable longing for a a€oepetty-bourgeois socialisma€D that could
never be attained and that if it did develop by accident could never be maintained.

But that casual dismissal does not mean that Milanovic is wrong.

Pikettya€™ s world is particularly grim because ita€™ s predetermined. So long as the rate of 
profit is above the rate of growth, wea€™re destined to move towards ever-
16

increasing inequality. The only thing we can do is figure out how to tally up the massive wealth 
and tax ita€”if we can overcome the ability of wealth to protect itself by constraining political
options.

As Gareth Jones points out in his chapter, this is a tall order in no small part because capital 
has stepped outside the purview of the nation state. The rise of wealth from industrialization
occurred alongside the coalescence of the nation state in Europe and elsewhere. The state was a 
means of promoting the accumulation of capital. Capital today aims often to avoid the confines
of place or citizenship, choosing instead to wander the globe in pursuit of not only profits, but 
unfettered access to those profitsa€”as we've seen with Gabriel Zucman's pioneering research on
tax havens and with such other improvements in our ability to survey the global wealth landscape as 
the release of the Panama Papers.

(4) What Do We Need to Understand?

For all these reasons, we judge that C21 is a serious book warning us of likelya€” but not 
inevitablea€’’distressing consequences of certain aspects of the future historical path that the 
world
economy appears to have embarked on roughly thirty years ago or so. That raises the natural 
questions of: Do we need to buy insurance? And what kinds of insurance ought we to buy?

However, as Abraham Lincoln said in his a€oeHouse Divideda€D speech in Springfield, IL on June 
16,1858, such questions are in a sense premature: We need a€oefirst [to] know where we
are, and whither we are tending...a€U, for only after after knowing that a€oecould [we] then better 
judge what to do, and how to do it...a€D The next move must be, as John Maynard Keynes
liked to say, a€oewith the heada€D. And we have organized this book to set out our view of the 
agenda with respect to what we need to better understand.

When readers face a book as sprawling as this one is, they badly need help orienting ourselves. We 
have tried to help. This introduction leads off a first, orienting, section of the book. In it, we
editors, Art Goldhammer, Bob Solow, and Paul Krugman set out our different perspectives on 
C27-as-phenomenon and on C27-as argument-with-implications.

What is this thing a€cecapitala€D that C21 is about? Piketty offers definitions. But as is so often 
the case when a single concept is at the core of a striking and contestable argument, whether
the concept can bear the argumentative load attached to it, and indeed what the concept really 
means, become contestable, uncertain, and worth

17

examination. The second section of the book thus examines the concept of a€cecapitala€D from five 
different viewpoints. Deresh Raval points out that Piketty presents his argument in
economic-theoretic terms as a derivation from the historical fact that at the aggregate level 
capital and labor are highly elastic in substitution. Yet there is a great deal of research, much 
of it by
Raval   himself, strongly suggesting that at the micro level that is simply not the casea€”and here 
the aggregate should indeed be the simple average of the micro. He highlights a puzzle at the
center of any reading of C21: Is it at its core an argument that at the margin capital continues to 
be productive as it is accumulated? And if that is not the case, what is left of the argument?

Suresh Naidu provides a possible response to Ravala€™ s puzzle, contrasting a a€cedomesticateda€D 
Piketty, working within the machinery of an aggregate neoclassical economic production
function, and a a€cewilda€D Piketty who breaks free. Naidua€™ s answer is that what remains is a 
political-economic argument about how the wealthy in a Gilded Age structure property in
such  a way as to protect and increase the salience of the rents they extract.

The other three papers in this second section find flaws in Pikettya€™ s deployment of and use of 
the concept a€cecapitala€D:

First, a great deal of the argument of C21 is that the 20th century was exceptionala€” that as far 
as the dynamics of wealth inequality are concerned, the 21st century is much more likely to be
like the 19th and the 18th centuries. Daina Ramey Berry critiques the image of those earlier 
centuries that Piketty draws in C21. In her reading of history, slavery was a much more salient
institution in the a€oeprimitive accumulation^ □ and extraction of wealth than Piketty allows for, 
both in terms of the depth and breadth of direct exploitation that it allowed and in how
potential competition from slavemasters and their lash-driven shackled workers eroded the 
bargaining power of even free labor. If the factors she adduces are salient, that suggests that a 
free-
labor  21st century may see it much harder to sustain a Second than the 18th and 19th centuries 
found it to create a First Gilded Age. Or does it? As Branko Milanovic might point out, barriers to
international migration are a form of labor unfreedom, and one that becomes more salient the wider 
the gulf between the Global North and the Global South.

Second, a great deal of the argument of C21 assumes that the only truly real forms of wealth are 
government-created rent and debt amortization flows, physical assetsa€”land, buildings,
machinesa€”and control of the organizations that deploy such physical and financial assets. High 
wages are, in Pikettya€™ s view, more a chance and transitory outcome of favorable supply
and  demand conditions than a true, durable source of wealth and thus a factor in driving the 
evolution of

18

inequality. Eric Nielsen says: no. And he sketches out the immense potential damage that would be 
done to Pikettya€™ s argument should human capital be a 21st century form of wealth on
equal footing with other forms.

And, third, Mike Spence and Laura Tyson argue that while land and industrial capital were salient 
factors in the dynamics of the evolution of wealth and its distribution in the past, that will not
be true in the future and is not even true now. Rather, they argue, one needs to hybridize C21 with 
an argument like that of The Second Machine Age by Brynnjolfsson and MacAfee to create a
framework for the inequality debate that we should be having to understand our likely future.

In an intellectual bridge between the examination of a€oecapitala€D and our survey of dimensions of 
inequality, David Weila€”former Administrator of the Wages and Hours Division of the
US Department of Labora€’’points out the importance the a€oeFissured Workplacea€D. Rather than one 
large corporation employing workers of all skill levels and all job types, as was the
case in the past, increasingly jobs are outsourced to other corporation and other locations. 
Workers who would once have been employees, and thus entitled to de jure and de facto privileges
associated with membership in a corporate business enterprise considered as a sociological 
community, are now excluded. The result is a race to the bottoma€”and a force that was not
operating   in the 19th century tending to raise inequality in the 21st no matter what the other 
economic factors affecting the capital-labor split.

After examining the concept of a€cecapitala€D and the functions it needs to perform in the argument 
of C21, we then turn in the booka€™ s third section to authors who examine various
dimensions of the inequality that an unequal distribution of capital can create. Mariacristina De 
Nardi, Giulio Fella, and Fang Yang point out that a high capital-to-annual-income ratio and a
large  capital share in income do not directly translate one-for-one into a determinant degree of 
higher inequality. And they examine the links and the slippage there is there. Branko Milanovic
notes that the links between property ownership and control on the one hand and real on-the- ground 
inequality on the other depend critically on how the political system manages its political-
economic institutions. Christoph Lakner criticizes Pikettya€™ s C21 for telling the story of 
inequality as a comparative story of inequality within nation states, thus missing the elephant 
which
is   that the evolution of equality across nation states has been more decisive since the start of 
the Industrial revolution as a determinant of global inequality. Gareth Jones further critiques the
absence of 'space' from C21, in which geography serves only as a a€oecontainer for dataa€D rather 
than a context for inequality and exploitation to play out. How geography enables and
propagates inequality in a globalized world is, in his view,

19

a salient factor completely omitted from C21. And Heather Boushey examines the potential 
feminist-economics effects of the creation of a a€ceheiresstocracya€D: historically, gender 
relations
become especially fraught and difficult even for women one would adjudge as having considerable 
social power when onea€™ s status and standing seriously depends on who onea€™ s
parents  and in-laws are.


in iwu papcis, ivicuis. Zutuiui cuiu oaivaiuic iviuicin mail IUKC us 111 a uuiddit UHCULIUU. nicy 
ucgiu me vciy iiiipuiiani tasis. wi uyiug iu assess now cvuiiuiniv smuiuiy at me icvci ui managing 
me

business cycle and encouraging growth changes in an environment of rising inequality. Their 
conclusion is not quite the old academic standard a€oemore research is neededa€D. They both see
serious risksa€”but risks that can, perhaps, be managed or compensated for.

Finally in this section, Emmanuel Saez points out how very much we do not know about inequality 
a€’’and how badly, if we are to understand where we are and whither we are tending, we need
to:

• disaggregate our systems of National Income Accounts to include distributional measures.

• devote more resources to measuring wealth inequality.

• understand the effects of regulation and taxation on inequality.

The fourth section of the book contains a different set of challenges to Piketty a€™ s argument. 
Four papers take big-institutional-intellectual-history perspectives. Ellora
Derenoncourt wishes that Piketty had done more to address the deep institutional-historical origins 
of high degress of wealth inequality, and fills in the gap by deploying Daron
Acemoglu, James Robinson, and Simon Johnsona€™ s dichotomy between a€ceextractivea€D and 
a€ceinclusivea€D institutions with a twist, for institutions that are
a€ceinclusivea€D and a€cedevelopmentala€D for a€cecitizensa€D may well be a€ceextractivea€D and 
a€ceexclusivea€D for a€oesubjectsa€n. David Grewal sees the coming

of the Firsta€”and the Seconda€’’Gilded Age as largely baked in the cake with the legal- political 
philosophical shift in the 17th and 18th centuries that turned absolute dominion
over property from an edge case to the canonical way that western societies thought about the 
control of concrete and abstract things and the responsibilities of a€ceownersa€D.

Marshall Steinbaum makes a convincing case that the post-World War II social democratic era of 
relatively low inequality was itself the result of the genocidal political and military
catastrophes of the first half of the twentieth century and of the role played by those 
catastrophes in discrediting the pre-World War I First

20

Gilded Age unequal capitalist political-economic order. And Elisabeth Jacobs tries to puzzle 
through how politics can be both everywhere and nowhere in PikettyaC™ s story C21 contains an
argument that asserts both that there are fundamental laws of economics and that there are 
historically-contingent and institutionally-prescribed processes that shape growth and 
distribution.

We want to highlight this last, for it points to a contradiction that seems to us to be at the 
heart of C27a€™ s dual nature as work of scholarship and as global intellectual phenomenon. On the
one hand, Pikettya€™ s central thesis is that our reversion to the economic and political patterns 
of the Gilded Age is to be expected as normal for a capitalist society. On the other hand, Piketty
himself as a celebrity public intellectual is not behaving like a passive chronicler of unavoidable 
destiny. He is acting as if he believes that the forces he describes in his book can be resisteda€”
that we collectively make our own destiny, even if the circumstances under which we make it are not 
those of our choosing.

And then Thomas Piketty tells us what he thinks of our arguments, critiques, extensions, and 
explorations.
8208 words

Endnotes

1

(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2014).
23

Paul Krugman, this volume XXXX

On wealth, see: Thomas Piketty and Gabriel Zucman, a€oeCapital Is Back: Wealth-Income
6

See: Robert J. Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of

Thomas Piketty, Capital in the Twenty-First Century, trans. Arthur Goldhammer

Ratios in Rich Countries 1700-2010,a€D The Quarterly Journal of Economics 129, no. 3 (August 
1,2014): 1255a€“1310, doi:10.1093/qje/qju018.
4

10107). Harvard University Press. Kindle Edition.

Piketty, Thomas (2014-03-10). Capital in the Twenty-First Century (Kindle Location
5

York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, Inc., 1953), XX TK XX.

John Maynard Keynes, The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money (New

Living since the Civil War, The Princeton Economic History of the Western World (Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press, 2016),
http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0691147728/ref=as_li_qf_sp_asin_il_tl?ie=UTF8&camp= 1
789&creative=9325&creativeASIN=0691147728&linkCode=as2&tag=freakonomic08-
20&linkId=PNZJ3C2PH3Y2KCTT.

7

Paper, (2014).

Matthew Rognlie, a€oeA Note on Piketty and Diminishing Returns to Capital ,a€D Working
21

8 https://www.foreignaffairs .com/reviews/review-essay/capital-punishment.
Tyler Cowen, a€oeCapital Punishment,a€D Foreign Affairs, June 2014,

Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson, a€oeThe Rise and Decline of General Laws of

9

Capitalism, a€D Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, no. 1 (Winter 2015): 9.

10

Journal, April 17,2014, http://www.hoover.org/research/united-states-envy.
11

Anne Case and Angus Deaton, a€oeRising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White
Allan Meltzer, aCceThe United States of Envy,a€D Defining Ideas: A Hoover Institution


Paper, (zu 14).

Matthew Rognlie, a€oeA Note on Piketty and Diminishing Returns to Capital ,a€D Working
21

8 https ://www.foreignaffairs .com/reviews/review-essay/capital-punishment.
Tyler Cowen, a€oeCapital Punishment,a€D Foreign Affairs, June 2014,

Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson, a€oeThe Rise and Decline of General Laws of

9

Capitalism, a€D Journal of Economic Perspectives 29, no. 1 (Winter 2015): 9.

10

Journal, April 17,2014, http://www.hoover.org/research/united-states-envy.
11

Anne Case and Angus Deaton, a€oeRising Morbidity and Mortality in Midlife among White
Allan Meltzer, a€oeThe United States of Envy,a€D Defining Ideas: A Hoover Institution

Non-Hispanic Americans in the 21st Century ,a€D Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences

112, no. 49 (December 8,2015): 15078a€“83, doi:10.1073/pnas.1518393112.

12 Neal, Derek and Armin Rick (2014) a€oeThe Prison Boom and the Lack of Black Progress
After Smith and Welch.aCD NBER Working Paper # 20283.

13

Richard V. Reeves and Kimberly Howard, a€oeThe Glass Floor: Education, Downward
Mobility, and Opportunity Hoardinga€C (Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, November
2013), http://www.brookings .edu/~/media/research/files/papers/2013/11/glass-floor-downward-
mobility-equality-opportunity-hoarding-reeves-howard/glass-floor-downward-mobility-equality-
opportunity-hoarding-reeves-howard.pdf.

14

economy .html?em_pos=large&emc=edit_nn_20160426&nl=morning-briefing&nlid=74144564.

Nelson Schwartz, a€oeln an Age of Privilege, Not Everyone Is in the Same Boat,a€D The New York 
Times, April 23,2016, http://www.nytimes.com/2016/04/24/business/economy/velvet-rope-
15

Institution Press, 2015).

Arthur M. Okun, Equality and Efficiency: The Big Tradeoff, Second (Brookings
22

