Subscribe now
Very nice to see:

Steve Donoghue: a€~Historical asides are so winningly conversational that they very much help to 
make the booka€™ s 600 pages surprisingly easy
readinga€! [DeLong] has written the most entertaining End Times narrative since The Late Great 
Planet Eartha€\a€™

Although Steve does seem to have less of the optimism-of-the-will than I do. Slouching Towards 
Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Steve Donoghue: Slouching Towards Utopia: Clinton gurua€™ s sweeping story of an economic dream 
that died: a€~DeLong clarifies at the start ofa€!
Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> [that] hea€™ s pegging the beginning of the a€celonga€D 
20th century around 1870, marked by a€oethe
triple emergence of globalization, the industrial research lab, and the modern corporation,a€D and 
the ending in 2010, a€oewith the worlda€™ s leading
economic edge, the countries of the North Atlantic, still reeling from the Great Recession that had 
begun in 2008, and thereafter unable to resume
economic growth at anything near the average pace that had been the rule since 1870.a€C

This timespan is the setting for what DeLong refers to as his a€oegrand narrative ,a€D and at first 
glance, the end results of that long 20th century look
pretty good, as DeLong is the first to describe: a€oeThe consequences of the long twentieth century 
have been enormous: Today, less than 9 percent of
humanity lives at or below the roughly $2-a-day living standard we think of as a€~extreme 
poverty,a€™ down from approximately 70 percent in 1870.
And even among that 9 percent, many have access to public health and mobile phone communication 
technologies of vast worth and power. Today, the
luckier economies of the world have achieved levels of per capita prosperity at least twenty times 
those of 1870, and at least twenty-five times those of
1770 a€“ and there is every reason to believe prosperity will continue to grow at an exponential 
rate in centuries to come.a€D

And yet, according to DeLong, a€oethe history of the long twentieth century cannot be told as a 
triumphal gallop, or a march, or even a walk of progress
along the road that brings us closer to utopia.a€D The true situation, a€oeis, rather, a slouch. At 
best.a€D He sets about recounting the history of the long
century, checking in on every major economic depression in the years since the American Civil War 
and of course citing every major economist from
Friedrich von Hayek to Joseph Schumpeter to John Maynard Keynes. And he broadens the scope of his 
narrative to include commentary on larger
historical eventsa€”as, for instance, when he can hardly contain his astonishment over Adolf 
Hitlera€™ s mania for re-arming Germany once he took
control                                                                    of the country. 
a€oePolitical effectiveness we understand ,a€D DeLong writes. a€oeBut weapons? Armies? Hadna€™t 
World War I taught the
Germans, and even the Nazis, and even Hitler, not to do that again? No, it had nota€!a€D

These historical asides are so winningly conversational that they very much help to make the 
booka€™ s 600 pages surprisingly easy reading. Part of this is
likewise attributable to DeLonga€™ s semi-ironic adoption of a a€oegrand narrativea€D (even though 
Ludwig Wittgenstein considered such grand
narratives a€oenonsensea€D), which he doesna€™ t exactly hide under a bushel. One of the main 
reasons why humanitya€™ s progress towards utopia

has been more of a slouch than a march, you might ask? DeLong cites many factors (this is not a 
simple book, much though you at times get the impression
its author would have liked it to be), but his central villain is gently indicated when he refers 
to the market economy as a€oethat Mammon of
Unrigtheousness .a€D

The free-market economy pops up repeatedly in these pages, always wearing a dark, oily mustache 
like Daniel Day-Lewis deep in character as a homicidal
maniac. People are no sooner starting to feel some free-range autonomy, able to smile and play with 
their children and lay away a little nest egg for the
future, when suddenly up pops the market economy to ruin everything with the ravages of prosperity. 
And DeLong is always on hand when that happens,
ready with choice sarcasm: a€oeWe again hear echoes of our whispering chorus,a€D goes one such 
passage. a€oeThe impersonal market had taken from
some, given to others, and greatly increased the total; blessed be the market.a€D One senses a bit 
of disaffection.

With all due respect to the Great Depression, the crucial economic watershed in DeLonga€™ s long 
century was the enactment of one of the single worst
acts of public pillaging since Alaric sacked Rome: the neoliberalist fantasy-religion of 
supply-side economics, particularly as embodied in the economic
policies of Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher, which a€oebegan the process of destabilizing the 
distribution of income in a way that has led to our
Second Gilded Age.a€D On this point DeLonga€™ s carefully-modulated scorn encompasses both the 
imposters of this religion and those afflicted by it:
a€oeThe neoliberal turn was very successful in restoring the growth rate a€“ and more than 
restoring the growth rate a€“ of the incomes and wealth of
those   at the top. The rich had the largest megaphones, and they trumpeted the fact that their 
incomes were growing rapidly. And those lower down, who
voted for candidates and politicians who had turned the wheel and made the neoliberal turn? They 
were told that if only they were sufficiently worthy, the
unleashed market would give to them too, and they more than half believed ita€!a€D

And in the end, are we any closer to Utopia? Or has all this slouching been in vain, except for 
hideously enriching 60 people out of a world population of 8
billion? DeLong recalls that the future seemed bright during some hazy Clintonian heyday, but then, 
he notes, post-2010 America elected Donald Trump,
and every kind of Utopia suddenly seemed not only further away but permanently out of reach. 
Whether that betokens the end of the quest or what he refers
to as a whole new narrative, DeLong doesna€™ t say. But either way, hea€™ s written the most 
entertaining End Times narrative since The Late Great
Planet Earth.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


