I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

J. Bradford DeLong: Bidena€™ s Summer of Legislative Love: a€~If all goes well, US President Joe 
Biden could soon sign major legislation to reinforce Americaa€™ s technological edge and accelerate 
its transition to a carbon-neutral economy. Suddenly, the administration^™ s legislative 
achievements will have gone from a€cedisappointinga€D to a€oeexceeding expectations .a€D


BERKELEY a€“ When it comes to the United States Congress, nothing is ever over until ita€™ s over. 
But as of late July, it looks as though two major pieces of legislation will soon be on President 
Joe Bidena€™ s desk, awaiting his signature. The first is the Creating Helpful Incentives to 
Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) Act, which will provide tens of billions of dollars to support 
domestic semiconductor production and research. The second is the Inflation
Reduction Act, a slimmed-down version of the failed Build Back Better Act that nonetheless contains 
hundreds of billions of dollars to support clean energy and incentivize decarbonization across the 
economy.

Together, these bills are more than enough to flip the narrative about Bidena€™ s first two years 
in office. Suddenly, the administrationa€™ s legislative achievements have gone from 
a€cedisappointinga€D to a€oeexceeding expectations.a€D By now, many voters have forgotten about the 
March 2021 American Rescue Plan, which cemented a strong post-pandemic recovery and prevented a 
repeat of the long, grinding semi-depression that marked the Obama
years. Though many commentators have blamed the American Rescue Plan for todaya€™ s higher rate of 
inflation, the truth is that its contribution to that problem was small. Pandemic-related supply 
issues and Russiaa€™ s war in Ukraine have driven up prices globally. But even more to the point, 
it is better to have a temporary increase in inflation than another lost decade of tepid growth.

Get 50% off for 1 year

No one can deny that it is in Americaa€™ s interest to have $50 billion in semiconductor 
manufacturing credits, $200 billion for high-tech research, $370 billion in climate-related 
funding, $288 billion in drug-price savings, and $450 billion of additional revenues. The country 
will produce some $325 trillion of goods and services over the next decade. Of that, the US is 
committing only an extra 0.7 percentage points to strategically critical semiconductor-related
investments, 1.3 points to increasing tax revenues and enforcement, 0.9 points to drug-price 
savings, and 1.1 points to combating climate change and decarbonizing the economy.

Viewed in this context, the biggest complaint that one can muster against CHIPS and the IRA is that 
they are too small. They represent only a minor redirection of resources toward critically 
important strategic and economic objectives. A rational government faced with the current problems 
facing America and the world would have allocated ten times more. But, to their credit, the Biden 
administration and congressional Democrats have done what they can,
given the resistance from Republicans and rogue members of their own caucus (namely Senators Joe 
Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona).

One is reminded of the story that John F. Kennedy once told about French Marshal Hubert Lyautey. 
Asked to plant a new tree, Lyauteya€™ s gardener a€oeobjected that the tree was slow-growing and 
would not reach maturity for a hundred years ,a€D to which Lyautey replied, a€oeln that case, there 
is no time to lose, plant it this afternoon.a€D

All the core features of CHIPS and the IRA are no-brainers. The semiconductor industry will be much 
healthier if it is pushed away from monopoly and oligopoly, and America will be more secure if it 
becomes a site for advanced chip manufacturing. To stay competitive in the twenty-first century, 
the US must remain at the cutting edge of research and development.

Similarly, no one can seriously argue against slightly more progressive taxation to offset a small 
part of the income inequality caused by years of regressive tax policies. Moreover, slimming down 
the rents that pharmaceutical companies have obtained by lobbying past congresses is long overdue, 
as is action to address climate change and accelerate the energy transition. We are now three 
decades late in doing what we should have done when then-Vice President
Al Gore pushed Congress to enact a carbon tax in 1993. That effort was blocked by a lone senator 
from West Virginia, Robert Byrd, consigning it to a similar fate as the Build Back Better Act.

a€oeWhy cana€™ t America make good decisions or good policies anymore?a€D When one of my 
foreign-born friends asked me that question a few weeks ago, I had no answer. But now I wona€™ t 
need one. If CHIPS and IRA become law, Americans will be able to retain at least some hope in their 
elected representatives.

It would be nice to be able to say that the political culture of a€ceowninga€D the other side is on 
its way out. Unfortunately, it is not. The Republican leadership in the House of Representatives 
did what it could to prevent CHIPS from garnering Republican support, and all but 24 Republicans 
ultimately did vote against the bill. Republicans oppose legislation that is designed to protect US 
national and economic security simply because they dona€™ t want to
give Biden any more legislative accomplishments. For the party that tried desperately to make 
Barack Obama a one-term president, partisanship still trumps all else.

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/biden-chips-ira-climate-legislation-bv-i-bradford-delo
ng-2022-07>
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

J

