a€!hings that whizzed by, and follow with some long-paragraph chunks that I think are very worth 
reading, and that I noted this morning.
But first:

Subscribe now

Very Briefly Noted:

• Jen Sorensen: For January 26, 2021: GoComics: Freedom LINK

•  William H. Shrank, Nancy-Ann DeParle, Scott Gottlieb, Sachin H. Jain, Peter Orszag, Brian W. 
Powers, and Gail R. Wilensky: Health Costs & Financing:
Challenges & Strategies For A New Administration I Health Affairs'. a€~The HHS secretary shoulda€! 
worka€! with Congress to decrease the age of Medicare
eligibility  to fifty-fivea€! LINK

• Wikipedia: Equestrian Statue of Marcus Aurelius LINK

• Hannah Kuchler: Moderna develops new vaccine to tackle mutant Covid strain LINK

• STEG: Virtual Course on a€oeKey Concepts in Macro Developmenta€mNK

• Erik Brynjolfsson, Daniel Rock, & Chad Syverson: The Productivity J-Curve: How Intangibles 
Complement General Purpose Technologies LINK

•  Wikipedia: AndrA© Gide: a€The Immoralista€™: a€~Published in France in 1902a€!. Important points 
of Michela€™ s story are his recovery from tuberculosis;

his attraction to a series of Arab boys and to his estate c are taker a€™ s son; and the evolution 
of a new perspective on life and society. Through his journey, Michel finds
a kindred spirit in the rebellious MA©nalquea€! LINK

Seven Paragraphs for Lunchtime:

Rich Miller: Powell, With Year to Run at Fed, Aims to Avoid Past QE Mistake'. a€~Fed chair likely 
to signal hea€™ s in no rush to taper bond buysa€!. Federal Reserve Chair
Jerome Powell heads into what could be his last year atop the central bank determined not to repeat 
the mistake he made when he was a neophyte monetary policy maker seven
years ago. Then a Fed governor, Powell was among those leading the charge to scale back the central 
banka€™ s quantitative-easing program a€“ a stance that led to the
economically debilitating and market-wrenching taper tantrum of 2013a€! LINK: https://www.bloomberg 
.com/news/articles/2021-01-26/powell-with-year-to-run-at-fed-aims-to-
avoid-past-qe-mistake?sref=wOrDP8KX

Economist: Covida€“19 vaccinesaC”How fast can vaccination against covida€“19 make a difference?: 
a€~Israel is the place to watch for the first evidence about how mass
vaccination may change things, for it has vaccinated its citizens faster than anywhere else. By 
January 19th, a month after the campaign had begun, Israel had given 26% of its 9m
people  at least one dosea€!. For the studyaC™ s first 12 days, positive test rates remained 
identical between groups. On the 13th, the vaccinated groupaC™ s rate fell slightly. Then,
on day 14, it dropped by a thirda€!. A sign that vaccination is starting to give Israeli hospitals 
some breathing space emerged a fortnight after January 2nd, the day when the
proportion of those over 60 who had been vaccinated reached 40%.a€! LINK: 
https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2021/01/23/how-fast-can-vaccination-against-
covid-19-make-a-difference

Michael Greshko: C0VIDa€“19 will likely be with us forever. Herea€™ s how wea€™ ll live with it: 
a€~The world could be facing several years of a halting post-pandemic
transitiona€”one marked by continued viral evolution, localized outbreaks, and possibly multiple 
rounds of updated vaccinationsa€!. The long road to another common cold. One
of      the essential factors governing the future of COVIDa€“19 is our immunity to the illnessa€!. 
Past studies make clear that partial immunity can keep people from getting seriously
ill, even as coronaviruses successfully enter their systems. Long-term, the same is likely to be 
true for the new coronavirusa€!

LINK: 
https://www.nationalgeographic.com/science/2021/01/covid-19-will-likelv-be-with-us-forever-heres-how
-well-live-with-it/

Eric Boehlert: Biden, the press, and the a€ceunitya€dcharade: a€~Just days into Joe Bidena€™ s 
first week as president, the Beltway press a€” reading off GOP talking points
a€” was buzzing about a€oeunity.a€D Specifically, reporters wanted to know when the new president 
was going to make a grand gesture, or even a policy concession, to
Republicans as an expression of his goodwill. The overeager New York Times noted that in the first 
a€oehoursa€D (!) of Bidena€™ s presidency, there hadna€™ t yet been any
a€oetangible actionsa€D towards bipartisanship, such as adopting a€oeRepublican priorities ,a€D 
Instead, the Democrata€™ s outreach had been a€oemore about words.a€D Days
later    at a White House press briefing, it was a Times reporter again who pressed the issue, 
demanding to know, a€oeWhen are we going to see one of those substantial outreaches
that says , a€~This is something the Republicans want to do, tooa€™ ?a€da€! To date, therea€™ s 
been virtual no news coverage on which a€oeDemocratic prioritiesa€D the
GOP  is willing to adopt in the name of unitya€! LINK: 
https://pressrun.media/p/biden-the-press-and-the-unitv-charade

John Ganz: The Third Republic & Today: a€~There is a spookily close parallel with an event that 
occurred in the late French Third Republica€”the attempt by right-wing militants
to march on the Chambre des dA©putA©s in the night of February 6,1934. In the street fighting 
between police and marchers on the bridge that links the Place de la Concorde to
the Chambre sixteen people were killed. That demonstration and the polarization that it reflected 
and deepened are often considered to mark the beginning of the process that led to
the fall of the Republic and arrival of the Vichy regime. I couldna€™ t help but think of that last 
evening as we watched the unbelievable images on TVa€!.. To kick off my
Substack,  I am going to take a look in a multi-part series at two crises of the Third Republic: 
first, the Dreyfus affair around the turn of the century, which gave birth to an insane
form    of conspiratorialism and a reactionary nationalism with racial underpinnings, according to 
some scholars the first hints of what would become fascism, and then the February 6
crisis of 1934, which still generates a controversy whether it was a failed fascist coup or the 
somewhat farcical demonstration of a disorganized radical righta€!

LINK: https://iohnganz.substack.eom/p/the-third-republic-and-today

Noah Smith: Can knowledge industries escape superstar cities?: a€~Herea€™ s what would be required. 
Ita€™ s a tall ordera€!. So far, clustering has just conquered everything.
Insane rents and house prices, crazy numbers of car break-ins, massive homelessness, dysfunctional 
social services, deep social tensions between transplants and nativesa€! nothing
could knock SF off its perch. NYC, Seattle, Los Angeles, and other Superstar Cities were less 
dysfunctional, but theya€™ ve all had their own affordability crises over the past
decade, and yet their positions have also seemed unassailable. Essentially, this has made knowledge 
industry workers, and the companies that employ them, prisoners of superstar
citiesa€!. The question is whether Zoom and Slack are game-changersa€!. This is a hard question to 
answera€!. But ita€™ s also important to remember that companies dona€™ t
have   to go fully distributed in order to mostly escape the pull of the superstar cities. They 
just have to shrink their main offices, and manage the rest of their workers either remotely
or  at branch offices in cheaper placesa€!.. In order to escape the cluster cities, both businesses 
and workers will have to learn to do job search and hiring mostly remotely (except for
flyouts for a few very high-value workers)a€!. Knowledge spilloversa€! is going to be hardera€!. 
City lifestylea€! is the final hurdle, anda€”I predicta€”the hardest one to solve.
That doesna€™t mean ita€™ s impossible, though. Cities are not awesome for everyonea€! LINK: 
https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/can-knowledge-industries-escape-superstar

Economist: How to defuse a bomba€”Can Chinaa€™ s long property boom hold?: a€~LOTTERY WINNERS 
normally win money. In China the big prize is being allowed to
spend it. Demand for new homes in good locations is so high, and supply so limited, that several 
cities use lotteries to allocate them, some with odds as low as 1 in 60a€!. Similar
splits are common around the world, with prices high in large cities and low in small towns. But 
the degree of the divergence in China, multiplied by the sheer size and growth of its
market, means that understanding property is essential if you want to get to grips with what is 
happening in the economy. Every year China starts building about 15m new homes,
more than quintuple the amount in America and Europe combined. The property sectora€”both the 
direct impact of all the construction and its indirect effect on everything from
concrete to curtainsa€’’accounts for a quarter of ChinaaC™ s GDPa€! LINK: 
https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2021/01/25/can-chinas-long-property-boom-hold

Leave a comment
Share

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong


