Recent Writings on the Macro Outlook:


Macroeconomic Outlook Slides


First: Six Episodes of U.S. Inflation Above 5%/Year in the 1900s, &

Get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. Become a paid subscriber support my hiring an RA for this, & 
to get the Directora€™ s Cuta€! First: Six Episodes of U.S. Inflation Above 5%/Year in the 1900s 
The top graph is the CPI inflation rate; the bottom graphs are overlapping graphs of the Federal 
Reservea€™ s discount ratea€”the rate at which it lends to banks on reasonable collateral^!

Read more

a vear ago A- 2 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong



>rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

No, the Fed Is Not (Far) Behind the Curve!, &

Subscribe to get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. Become a paid subscriber to get the Directora€™ 
s Cut versions, anda€”if you think this is usefula€”to support me spending my time doing this 
rather than something else. First: No, the Fed Is Not (Far) Behind the Curvea€!


Real Stagflation? My Odds Now More than 50-50, &
CONDITION: Omicron Recedes in the United Statesa€l
Read more



Monetary & Fiscal Policy in a Low-Interest Rate Economy, &

CONDITION: HELP! Charlie Stress: a€™2016: Brexit, Trump, voted in. My reactions: 2017: We need to 
be invaded by the Culture. 2018: Ia€™ 11 settle for the Daleks. 2019: Moon Nazis? Anyonea€!
Read more


Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this... First: A 
Great Labor Report! I still do not understand why the Federal Reserve is not extraordinarily 
gleeful about the recovery that it (plus the Biden administration, plus the Democratic 
congressional caucuses) have manageda€!

Read more

a vear ago A- 1 like A- 6 comments A- Brad DeLong



Aze Federal Reserve Continues to Look Like It Has It..,

CONDITION: Great-Power War & Proxy War Return to the European Continent And here we are: Adam 
Tooze: a€™ Truly dangerous spiral: Brave Ukrainian resistance frustrates Russian attack -> Kiev 
refuses humiliating negotiations. Russia about to ramp up destructiveness of attack -> NATO members 
rushing weapons to Ukraine, EU/US announce major sanctions. What is Russiaa€™ s next movea€l
Read more

a vear ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong


Aze Fed Has Done an Amazing Job!

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”I really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 4 comments A- Brad DeLong



Aze 1970s Are a Very Bad Analogy for Today

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publicationa€’T really would like to collect enough from it to 
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong


>rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Why Isna€™ t Azere an Inflation Non-Panic?

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publicationa€”I really would like to collect enough from it to 
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 comments A- Brad DeLong

First: Six Episodes of U.S. Inflation Above 5%/Year in the 1900s

The top graph is the CPI inflation rate; the bottom graphs are overlapping graphs of the Federal 
Reservea€™ s discount ratea€”the rate at which it lends to banks on reasonable collateral.

FRED — -Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Purchasing Power of the Consumer Dollar in 
U.S. City
Average

20

15

10

M - AMM fl . A


Counting 1974 and 1979 as two episodes, there were six times in the twentieth century during which 
the annual inflation rate got above 5%. One was the World War II inflationa€”cut off by price 
controls. Then came the post-WWII structural-rebalancing-and-pent up demand inflation, and then the 
Korean War structural-rebalancing inflation as the U.S. government wheeled its economy to fight the 
Cold War. During both the Fed sat bya€”it was then still focused on keeping
the prices of Treasury bonds high. The inflations soon passed away.

Before those came the World War I episode. That episode of inflation was cut off by an increase in 
the discount rate from 3.75%/year to 7%/year, which not only ended the inflation but enforced 
deflation: a 20% decline in the price level from its peak. (This decline, I should ask, made the 
task of restoring the gold standard at anything like pre-World War I nominal parities much more 
difficult, hence much more pointless.) Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz judged that
the rise was a€oenot only too late but also too mucha€D 
chttps://archive.org/details/monetarvhistorvo0000frie/page/230/>: the Fed should have moved earlier 
to prevent excessive bank discounts from inappropriately boosting high-powered money, and at the 
moment the Fed did move the structure of credit was sufficiently based on a continuation of Fed 
policy that the Feda€™ s move generated a€oeone of the most rapid declines [in economic activity] 
on recorda€D.

If the Federal Reserve had not moved to raise discount rates after World War I, what would have 
happened? Friedman and Schwartza€™ s judgment is that an earlier increase of, say, 125 basis points 
to remove the incentive for banks to engage in excessive discounts would have brought the excessive 
growth of the high-powered money stock to an end, and stopped the inflation.

Then came the 1970s: The Fed raised interest rates after the Yom Kippur War oil shock to control 
inflation; then, after inflation peaked, it lowered them to try to restore full employment; then 
came the year when, as the late Charlie Schultze said, a€oeour forecasts of nominal income growth 
were dead on, but inflation came in 2%-points high and real growth 2%-points lowa€D; and then came 
the Volcker disinflation, reversed in September 1982 when they realized that they
had bankrupted Mexico, and not resumed as the Fed decided to declare a fall in inflation to the 
4-5%/year range as complete victory. That 4-5% target lasted for a decade, followed by the 
opportunistic disinflation down to and Alan Greenspana€™ s declaration of the 2%/year inflation 
targeta€”a declaration that it is very hard today to argue was appropriate, given the extraordinary 
amount of time global north economies have spent with interest rates at their zero lower bound
since.

What does macroeconomic theory tell us that the Federal Reserve should do now, in the spring of 
2022?
Olivier Blanchard writes:

In early 1975, core inflation was running at 12 percent and the real policy rate was equal to about 
a"’6 percent, a gap of about 17 percent. Today, core inflation is running at 6 percent and the real 
policy rate is equal to a"’6 percent, a gap of 12 percenta€”smaller than in 1975, but still 
strikingly largea€!. It then took 8 years, from 1975 to 1983, to reduce inflation to 4 percent, 
with an increase in the real rate from bottom to peak
of close to 1,300 basis points, and a peak increase in the unemployment rate of 600 basis points 
from the early 1970s. Today is obviously different in many waysa€!. [But even so,] it reasonable to 
think that a 200-basis-point increase in the policy rate, so only 1/6 of the rate increase from 
1975 to 1981, will do the job this time when the gap between core inflation and the policy rate is 
2/3 of what it was in 1975? And that
unemployment will barely budge? I wish I could believe ita€! 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/whv-i-worrv-about-inflation-interest-rate
s-and-unemployment>


The suggestion seems to be that we have today 2/3 of the problem we had in 1975, and so the 
solution would be to do 2/3 as mucha€”to raise interest rates by 800 basis points, 8% pointsa€”but 
then to apply some haircut to that 800 basis-point interest-rate rise because a€oetoday is 
obviously different in many waysa€D.
But why does he pick 1975-1983, rather than 1951 or 1948 or 1920? Does economic theory tell him to 
do so?

Truth be told, there is no economic theory. There is only history, and its events, and analogies we 
make based on judgments concerning complicated emergent processes we do not understand very well 
that come out of the millions of interactions that are the economy. Sometimes, it is true, we 
distill and crystallize the history into something we call theory where little squiggles that look 
like E£, F, I2, If, and so on; we then mainline the crystallized product. After mainlining
it we can think we know something. But after mainlining crystal meth we experience increased 
energy, elevated mood, extraordinary confidence, racing thoughts, muscle twitches, and rapid 
breathing, among other things.

Move cautiously. Be data-dependent. Wait for it to become clearer which, if any, historical 
analogies are relevant to our situation. And always, always, always remember that in an economy 
that is near and that we have a good reason to fear will long remain in danger of hitting the zero 
lower bound on nominal interest rates, premature and excessively aggressive moves that raise 
interest rates cannot easily be corrected.

First: No, the Fed Is Not (Far) Behind the Curve!

Here is a reason I do not think that the Fed is (far) behind the curve:

Goldman Sachs US Financial Conditions Index YoY% vs. ISM Manufacturing Index

70

40


4

35

---------- 1--------- 1--------- 1--------- 1--------- I--------- 1--------- 1--------- 1--------- 
1--------- 1--------- 1--------- r- 30

98     00     02     04     06     08     10     12     14     16     18     20     22

- US I'inancial Conditions Index (inv)           ISM Mfg Index (rhs)         Recession

It seems highly likely that at least the manufacturing part of the economy will slow markedly over 
the next 1 1/2 years, no?

And that is with what the Fed has already done (and is expected to do). Would one want more slowing 
than the FC index tells us is already baking in the cake? If you think so, why?
Yes, bottlenecks, oil shocks, wheat shocks, and China-lockdowns will do what they will do to 
inflation in the short run.

But over the medium and the long run, the bond market is still quite happy with the outlook as far 
as inflation is concerned, at least if you believe the information in TIPS:

FRED   — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate


1.0

0.5

0.0

2006      2008      2010      2012      2014      2016      2018      2020     2022

So then why now do we have the extremely sharp Olivier Blanchard, commenting on Reifschneider and 
Wilcox 
<https://www.piie.com/publications/policv-briefs/case-cautiouslv-optimistic-outlook-us-inflation>, 
writing 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/whv-i-worrv-about-inflation-interest-rate
s-and-unemployment>:

Figure 1

The last time the Fed fell this far behind the curve on inflation
was in 1975 and it took 9 years to bring under control

Core inflation and the real policy interest rate, percent


17% gap 1

Feb 1975 I

1

12% gap 1

Jan 2022 |


Note: Core inflation is consumer price index inflation excluding food and energy. The real policy
interest rate is the federal funds interest rate minus core inflation over the previous 12 months.

Sources: US Bureau of Labor Statistics and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
retrieved from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED).

?

Moreover, he is far from alone:

• Neil Irwin: a€oeWhen did the Fed start getting behind the curve? I think it was one year ago this 
week. Between December '20 and March '21 meetingsa€!a€n <


Neil Irwin @Neil Irwin

When did the Fed start getting behind the curve? I think it was one year ago this week. Between 
December '20 and March '21 meetings, $2.8t in pandemic stimulus passed, vaccine rollout got 
underwaya€”yet fed funds rate forecast didn't budge,

axios.comFederal Reserve likely to raise interest rates this weekWith inflation nearing 8%, and 
unemployment below 4%, the Fed is far behind the curve in raising rates.
1:37 PMr™ Mar 14,2022

3 8Likes 12Re tweets


• Irving Swisher: a€oeConsensus is that the Fed has fallen behind the curvea€!a€D <

Skanda Amarnath (Neoliberal Sellout) @IrvingSwisher

Consensus is that the Fed is behind the curve, while the Fed itself seems to have fallen short of 
laying out what they really meant by "broad and inclusive" with respect to maximum employment. But 
we should take stock of what has been a historic labor market recovery.

This Recovery Will Likely Not Be Generational ly Disastrous...

-Unlike Previous Recoveries

Prime-Age 25-54 Employment Rate (%) vs Pre-Recession Peak

—1990 Peak     2000 Peak --------- 2007 Peak    2020 Peak

4

aS
2

■

«*
&

fi

E

4:46 PM r™ Mar 15,2022

17Likes2Retweets

Squawk Box: a€oea€~We are behind the curve. We have to movea€™ , says Former Dallas Fed President 
Richard Fishera€!a€D <

SQUAWK
BOX

Squawk Box @SquawkCNBC

"We are behind the curve. We have to move," says Former Dallas Fed President Richard Fisher. "So, 
yes I'd be advocating to begin the process. Reverse the gears."


12:02 PM r™ Mar 14,2022

45Likes 17Re tweets

• > (never mind that Fisher made precisely zero correct calls his entire time at the Fed);

•  Mohamed El-Erian: a€oeThe US Federal Reserve, the worlda€™ s most powerful central bank, is 
already dealing with self-inflicted damage to its inflation-fighting credibility. With that comes 
the likelihood of de-anchored inflationary expectationsa€!a€D 
<https://www.ft.com/content/db9e3706-84dd-47bc-a943-90d7dfef6abe>;

•  Eric Rosenbaum: a€oeFed 'behind the curve' on inflation, says former Obama economist Jason 
Furmana€!a€D 
<https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/markets/fed-behind-the-curve-on-inflation-says-former-obama-economi
st-jason-furman/ar-AAQybLT>.
a€oeSelf-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™s] inflation-fighting credibility a€ I a€D:

FRED^   5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

2.6


1.0

0.8

2016        2017        2018        2019        2020        2021        2022

a€oeSelf-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™s] inflation-fighting credibility a€ I a€D:

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

2.5


I simply do not see this a€oeself-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™ s] inflation-fighting credibility 
a€la€D

Now maybe there is an argument did the people treating in the bond market are weirdos, disconnected 
from the inflation expectations embedded in the actors in the economya€’’those whose beliefs and 
expectations really matter because they drive decisions. Maybe there is an argument that we need to 
fear not bond-market vigilantes, but rather other actors and agents. Maybe it is their expectations 
of inflation have become substantially de-anchored already. Maybe they are
already taking steps that will produce a persistent inertial inflationary spiral.

But who are they?

What are their expectations?

How are their expectations now being translated into actions?
And how are those actions not easily reversible?

I have not seen any of those arguments made.

Blanchard writes, apropos of the 200 basis-point increase in the Federal Funds rate we expect to 
see over the next two years:

Is it reasonable to think that a 200-basis-point increase in the policy rate, so only 1/6 of the 
rate increase from 1975 to 1981, will do the job this time when the gap between core inflation and 
the policy rate is 2/3 of what it was in 1975? And that unemployment will barely budge? I wish I 
could believe ita€!

But why is the rate increase from 1975-1981 relevant? We have a target: inflation from five to ten 
years out. We have an instrument: the current level and planned forward path for the Fed Funds 
rate. We have a reading on whether we are on a glide path to the targeta€”the bond marketa€™ s 
5-year, 5-year forward expected inflation rate. That reading says we are.

FRED   — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

MA       /VM/


Is there a better reading available as to whether we are on the glide path?
If so, what is it?

I believe that there is not. So why is the conclusion not: a€oePolicy is appropriate. The Fed is 
not behind the curvea€U? This is, to me, a very genuine mystery.
Blanchard writes:

There are good reasons, however, to think that the Phillips curve will, as it has done many times 
in the past, shift, and that the landing will be harder than Reifschneider and Wilcox conclude. 
Part of the inflation will indeed go away on its own, but the Fed may have to increase interest 
rates by more than 200 basis points to get back to its targeta€!

Indeed. The Fed may have to raise interest rates by more than 200 basis points. The Phillips Curve 
may well shift. And when there is evidence that the Fed is indeed behind the curve and not on an 
appropriate glide path, it will be time for the Fed to use forward guidance that it has changed its 
policy plans to shape expectations.
But why is today that day?

Especially since errors in not raising interest rates quickly enough are errors from which we can 
recover, but at and near the zero lower bounda€’’which we area€’’errors in raising rates too 
quickly are errors from which we cannot reasonably recover.

First: Real Stagflation? My Odds Now More than 50-50


I believe that Noah Smith and Neil Irwin have this right. There is now a better than even chance 
that the US economy faces something like stagflation over the next two years. I think the odds are 
that the economy could have ridden out Xi Jinping's attempts to deal with omicron while maintaining 
his "Covid zero" policy, but add onto this the war in Ukraine and its effect on world energy and 
food prices, and the feds ability to thread the needle looks much much weaker:

Noah Smith: China, Russia, & the Inflation Situation: a€~Neil Irwin tweeteda€! a€oeWea€™re 
currently living in the brief moment between when Finance/Econ Twitter has realized that the new 
Covid lockdowns in Shenzhen are going to have hugely bad consequences for US inflation, but that 
has not yet become a widely-reported conventional wisdom.aCD Hea€™ s righta€!. We thought we had 
inflation basically
contained. The Fed had announced a series of rate hikesa€!. Covid relief spendinga€! has dried up. 
As a result, inflation expectations moderated. But thena€! Vladimir Putina€™ s unprovoked invasion 
of UkraineaCI the resulting sanctionsa€! raising the prices of oil, gas, and wheata€!. [And] now we 
have the return of Covid in ChinaaCI very intolerant of any cases at all. So the government just 
put Shenzhena€! into
lockdowna€!

LINK:


n.-------      ■ n

Noahpinion


So, I noticed that Neil Irwin tweeted the followinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 22 Ekes A- 10 comments A- Noah Smith

Does this mean that, had the Fed known then what we know now about omicron-in-China and Putin's 
attack on Ukraine, it would have been wise for the Fed to have taken its feet off the gas a year or 
so ago? I think not. Facing these two new supply shocks from a position of a lower current 
inflation rate would have a small advantage. But the big difference between the impact of supply 
shocks hinges on whether they hit the economy when the economy has well-anchored
inflation expectations vis-A -vis when the economy that has lost its nominal anchors. Thanks to 
Brainard and Powell, inflation expectations still look well-anchored to me. And whatever narrow 
advantage going forward would have been gained by having inflation at 4% rather than at 7% over the 
past year is vastly outweighed by the costs of having some 3 million people additional without jobs 
now and without jobs over the past year.

The joker in the deck is that we do not know how far the Chinese government will go in continuing 
to pursue a€oezero Covida€D, or how effective totalitarians-vs-viruses are going to be. My hunch is 
that it is likely to get quite bad: people will falsify output statistics rather than tell Xi 
Jinping that the cost of containing omicron is very high, and omicron looks uncontainable. A 
recession in China seems likely. The Fed thus needs to be data dependent, to prepare people for
an extra year or so of higher inflation, and to repeat over and over again that it has no tolerance 
for medium-term inflation above 2%/year on average.

And hope things break favorably.

First: Monetary & Fiscal Policy in a Low-Interest Rate Economy

Paul Krugman has some interesting musings on these issues: Paul Krugman: Credible Irresponsibility 
Revisited <https://stonecenter.gc.cuny.edu/credible-irresponsibility-revisited/>. And Olivier 
Blanchard: Fiscal Policy Under Low Interest Rates <

https ://fiscal-policy-under-low-interest-rates .pubpub .org/

>a€!

Leta€™ s rewind the tape:

Ever since the late 1820s, When John Stuart Mill was writing Essays on Some Unsettled Questions in 
Political Economy, it has been at least moderately clear that the task of a central bank in normal 
times is to adjust the money supply to money demand, so as to make Saya€™ s Law true in the 
practice even though it is false in theorya€”to avoid either the general glut that is the flipside 
of an excess demand for or the inflationary inability to purchase at expected prices that is
the flipside of an excess supply of money.

In the neo-Wicksellian language that was re-introduced to economic-policy debates in the mid-1990s 
by Alan Greenspan, this requires the central bank to match the market real interest rate r to the 
a€oeneutrala€oe real interest rate r*. But what if the market nominal rate is at the zero lower 
bound, yet the real rate is still above the neutral rate? As Paul Krugman wrote last week:

An economy that remains depressed even at zero interest rates a€~wantsa€™ expected inflation. With 
flexible prices it will get there by deflating now so that it can inflate later. But why put [a 
sticky-price economy] through that wringer? Far bettera€! to givea€! the inflation without the 
deflation, by promising that the central bank will do whatever it takes to assurea€! inflationa€! 
high enough to get r down to r*.a€D
That is what a central bank will do if it is following the rule of trying to make Saya€™ s Law true 
in practice. That is how it can get prices and incentives as close as possible to those in a 
flex-price well-functioning macroeconomy, given the stickinesses of wages, prices, and debt 
contracts that we have. And so that inflation is not a disturbance of the optimal macroeconomic 
market allocation, but rather an instantiation of it.

Yet, Krugman notes, nobody has listened to him. Instead of talking about how when the central bank 
hits the zero lower bound it should then generate the inflation that an optimal flex-price economy 
would deliver, a€oeinsteada€! the discussion is abouta€! deficit spendinga€!. Why? One reason is 
a€oethe dead hand of conventional wisdom.a€D But, Paul Krugman says, there are a€oereal arguments 
for keeping the inflation target low if you can still achieve full
employment.a€D (I would stress that if}

What are those real arguments? I see two: (1) a stable unit-of-account yardstick is genuinely 
useful for contracting purposes, and (2) conserving on cognitive resources is helpful for 
behavioral reasons.

But does this mean one should definitely resort to fiscal policy instead? It is not obvious. The 
way the argument usually goes, using expansionary fiscal policy instead of expected inflation to 
unwedge an economy with high unemployment stuck at the zero lower bound has huge dangers and 
drawbacks on its own. It leads to excessive debt accumulation which requires high 
entrepreneurship-destroying taxes to amortize. It crowds out productive private investment as well. 
It is
thus a two-fold drag on long-run economic growth. Plus there is the risk of cracking the 
governments™ s status as a provider of safe assets, with resulting risks of financial crisis and 
national bankruptcy.

But, Larry Summers and I argued back in 2012, this argument via appeal to excessive fear of public 
debt is simply incoherent when the economy is at its zero lower bound, for in a low interest-rate 
economy the difficulties of financing the national debta€”and thus whatever drag on growth is 
generated by debt accumulations’’are not increased but rather decreased by successful expansionary 
debt-financed fiscal policy. And how about the drag from the crowding-out of
private investment? As Paul wrote:

When interest ratesS! are below the economyS™ s growth rateS! the economy shouldna€™ t accumulate 
[more] capitals!. [With] a distinction between the interest rate onS! a safe asset, andS! higher 
rates of return on private investments! the appropriate r in the r-g comparison is somewhere 
between [safe and risky]S!. What matters isS! the rate of return on those forms of investment that 
would be stimulated by
negative real interest ratesS!. Cho[osing] to pursue higher public spending at the expense of lower 
private investments! mainlyS! substituting government expenditure for residential investments!

And, I would add, substituting government expenditure for dissipative griftsS”for low interest 
rates induce organizations that are not well-setup to judge risks to take risks in reaching for 
yield, and one of the oldest tricks in the financial book is to make money by inducing your 
counterparty to take on risks that they do not understand.

As I see it, the question of which rS”a risk-free safe asset or a risky one, and, if risky, how 
riskya€’’should be compared to the economya€™ s growth rate g is a subtle one, and it hinges on 
where in the economy the risk premium comes from. In our economies, the financial-asset risk 
premium does not come from risk aversion induced by a declining marginal utility of wealth: it is 
simply ludicrous to pretend that it is so or, if it is so, it is because of an astonishing failure 
to
mobilize societya€™ s true risk-bearing capacity that must be due to other, major financial market 
failures. What are they?

It has always seemed to me that the presumption is that risk-bearing and investment-judging 
capacity does not combine with capital in fixed proportions, and that a world with less investment 
is one in which investment projects use more of risk-bearing and investment-judging resources. Thus 
my belief is that the right r to use in the g>r comparison has to be very very close to the 
risk-free rate.
What about when things change, and when you exit the g>r rA©gime? It has always seemed to me that 
the costs and risks of such are lowa€’’governments, after all, have enormous powers of financial 
regulation to ultimately boost demand for their debt, if they wish, providing that the government 
can tax enough to keep the debt position fundamentally sound in the long run.

But these are a€oeactive research issuesa€D.

References:

Paul Krugman: Credible Irresponsibility 
Revz5z^J<https7/stonecenter.gc₂cimy;edu/credible4iTesponsibility2revisited/>

Olivier Blanchard: Fiscal Policy Under Low Interest Rates <

https ://fiscal-policy-under-low-interest-rates .pubpub .org/

Olivier Blanchard: Public Debt and Low Interest 
7tates<https://www.piie.com/system/files/documents/wp 19-4.pdf>

Paul Krugman: Ita€™ s Baaack: Japan's Slump & the Return of the Liquidity Trap <https: //w w 
w.brookings .edu/wp-content/uploads/1998/06/1998b bpea krugman_ dominquez rogoff ,pdf>

Paul Krugman: Ita€™ s Baaack: 20 Years 
Lafer<https://m.gc.cuny.edu/sites/default/files/2021-07/Its-baaack.pdf>

Peter Temin & Barry Wigmore: The Gold Standard & the Great 
Deprg55ion<https://www.istor.org/stable/20081742>

Barry Eichengreen: Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard & the Great 
Depression<https://oxford.universitypressscholarship.com/view/10.1093/0195101138.001.0001/acprof-978
0195101133>

David Reifschneider & John C. Williams: Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era 
<https ://www.federalreserve .gov/pubs/feds/1999/199944/199944pap ,pdf>

Peter A. Diamond: National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth 
AtoJeZ<https://www.jstor.org/stable/l809231>

Philippe Weil: Overlapping Generations: the First Jubilee <https://hal-sciencespo.archives-ouvertes 
.fr/hal-01022015/document>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

First: A Great Labor Report!

FRED • Total Nonfarm Private Payroll Employment


900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

Jan 2021 Mar 2021 May 2021                       Jul 2021         Sep 2021        Nov 2021        
Jan 2022

I still do not understand why the Federal Reserve is not extraordinarily gleeful about the recovery 
that it (plus the Biden administration, plus the Democratic congressional caucuses) have managed.

When have we ever seen such rapid recoveries in the labor-force? No, we are not back to pre-plague 
levels. But we are certainly getting there. And a full recovery is certainly attainable: we could 
have another 7 million jobs over the next two years, if we are lucky and skillful:

Ellen loanes: Understand the News'. a€~The labor market added 678,000 jobs in February, driving the 
unemployment rate down to 3.8 percent from 4 percent in January, the lowest level since the start 
of the pandemica€!. The strong employment numbers are a good sign for the labor market and reflect 
a rebound from the latest wave of Covida€“19 infections due to the omicron variant a€” and 
post-pandemic recovery
overall. But employment is not yet back to pre-pandemic levels, and many people need to negotiate 
child care and health concerns. The employment boom isna€™t hitting everyone equally; the 
unemployment rate for Black women rose from 5.8 percent to 6.1 percent in February from the 
previous month. Their participation in the workforce also decreased by .2 percentage points last 
month. Nevertheless, the positive jobs
numbers are part of the calculus that goes into the Federal Reservea€™ s decision to raise interest 
rates in an effort to combat inflationa€!. Fed Chair Jerome Powell said Thursday that a€oehindsight 
says we should have moved earliera€D on rate increasesa€!

LINK: <

https: //www.vox .com/


And let me disagree with Powell: I see no reason why the Fed should have a€oemoved earliera€Q on 
rate increases. Bond-market expectations of medium- and long-term inflation are still 
extraordinarily well-anchored. And one of the major benefits of maintaining the anchor is that then 
it gives you policy flexibility to do whatever is optimal in the short run to attain maximum 
feasible employment and productivity growth.

That means that the Federal Reservea€™ s task is to craft a path for interest rates and for the 
short-term inflation rate that gets the economy to the place where a well-functioning frictionless 
flex-price macroeconomy would go if it could. We cannot have a frictionless flex-price 
macroeconomy. We have sticky prices. We have, for very powerful human psychological reasons, 
downward-sticky wages. We have sticky debts. (In the context of sticky debts, the standard 20th-
century austerian belief that a business-cycle free macroeconomy could be attained in a 
straightforward way by a war to destroy labor unions appears more than usually silly.) The fact 
that we are repeatedly kissing up to and sticking to the zero-lower bound means that the nominal 
interest-rate degree-of=freedom is simply not enough to do the job.

Plus we do need for relative prices to move to provide the incentives for the structural sectoral 
adjustment that we need to undertake.

So why, again, should the Fed have moved earlier to hike interest rates? If medium- and long-term 
inflation expectations were on the move, I would get the point. But where is the evidence that they 
are?

First: The Federal Reserve Continues to Look Like It Has Ita€!

David Beckworth @David Beckworth • Feb 23

Market forecast: credible macro policy over the long horizon.

5-Year Average Expected PCE Inflation Rate (CPI minus 20 bps)
5 Years in the Future

- 2.25

- 2.00

- 1.75

- 1.50

- 1.25

- 1.00

0.75


I     >          |       •        I     I          I     •          I        •       |     ■       
V         •       |       •      •          •

Jul  Oct  Jan   Apr   Jul   Oct  Jan   Apr   Jul   Oct   Jan   Apr   Jul   Oct   Jan  Apr   Jul   
Oct Jan
2017            2018               2019               2020               2021         2022

Yield Curve, D’Amico, Kim & Wei (DKW) No-Arbitrage Term Structure Model, Federal Reserve, Expected 
lnflation-.2, Expect...
“"Government Benchmarks, Macrobond, 2*10 Year-5 Year-.2, Break-Even Inflation Rate

0.50


tl 7

V 16                 T

A week ago I was saying that the Federal Reserve has launched itself into its triple jump, and the 
question is whether it will manage to stick the landing. A week ago I was very confident that the 
bond market, at least, believed in the Federal ReserveS”the inflation expectations were still very 
well anchored and thus let the Federal Reserve had enormous policy flexibility to react month by 
month, and adjust the pace at which it tried to cool down aggregate demand so as to
keep the recovery going at a strong pace. This looked to me like a big victory.

Now we face the prospect of a rather large supply shock, because if sanctions against Putin's 
Muscovy are to be truly effective they will have to bite in the energy sector. Yes, NATO could 
attempt to restrict itself to SoecheapSD sanctionsS’’attempting to confiscate the wealth of 
oligarchs, and providing unlimited personal weapons to Ukrainian guerrillas and urban-warfare 
semi-guerrillas via Lend-Lease. And that might be enough: as the low-morale Muscovite army
begins to bleed out via urban warfare, the power-brokers in Moscow really ought to see that the 
only rational thing is to call off the whole affairS”the only question is whether Putin gets ahead 
of the parade and declares victory via an annexation of Luhansk and Donetsk (and some or all of 
Sumy, Kharkiv, Zaporizhzhia, and Kherson?) followed by withdrawal, or whether PutinS™ s close 
contacts turn out to be unusually brave and willing to make this a 1964 Scewe
donS™t need this leader and his hare-brained schemes SD moment.

In my view, the right policy for the Federal Reserve would be to continue to prioritize recovery as 
long as 5 year/5 year inflation expectations continue to remain well-anchored, but to accept the 
employment-reduction costs needed to keep the anchor if the bond market begins to move. WhatS™ s 
that, you say, you are surrendering monetary policy to a potential bunch of vigilantes? Yes. But 
push the envelope a bit: require that the vigilantes actually show up, instead of
letting fear that they might drive you into policies that your successors will greatly regret as 
much as Powell and Brainard now regret the missteps of late-Greenspan and Bernanke.

Why do I think that we should engage in this form of forward bond-market-expectations-of-inflation 
targeting? One reason is that bond-market expectations are the best read we have of inflation 
expectations, and that the near-consensus is now that persistent moderate inflation is 
overwhelmingly an expectational phenomenon. To look at anything else is to look in the wrong 
direction:

Emi Nakamura: Is the Phillips Curve Getting Flatter?

(Yes: these are both my Berkeley colleagues. There is a reason the Berkeley Economics Department 
punches massively, massively, far above the weight that its financial endowment fundamentals would 
justify. All those thinking about giving to an economics departments’’consider that our incremental 
funding-to-results ratio is easily 5 times that of the overendowed privates.)

A second reason is that the demand-side component of the shortfall between current employment and 
the pre-plague employment trend is now small: the rise in employment from 142 million at BidenS™ s 
inauguration to 149 million nowS”7 million in one yearS ”is an extraordinary economic-policy 
victory that Biden, Yellen, Powell, and Brainard should be very proud of, and that we should not 
ignore going forward:

Alex Domash & Lawrence Summers: How Tight Are U.S. Labor Markets?'. S~(i) Unemployment is a better 
predictor of wage inflation than non-employment and (ii) vacancy rates and quit rates have 
substantial predictive power for wage inflations!. Vacancy and quit rates currently experienced in 
the United States correspond to a degree of labor market tightness previously associated with 
subS“2 percent
unemployment ratesS!. Labor market tightness is likely to contribute significantly to inflationary 
pressure in the United States for some time to comeS!

Figure 5: Employment shortfall relative to pre-pandemic trend

Employment
shortfall of

7.3 million


145-

Employment level

140-

130-

Dec2018             Dec2019             Dec2020             Dec2021

Notes'. Employment is nonfarm payroll employment, which excludes proprietors, self-employed,

unpaid family or volunteer workers, farm workers, and cosmetic workers. Counterfactual
emnlovment level assumes emnlovment continued to prow at the 201 9 rate. Results are similar if a


3- or 5-year pre-pandemic trend is used instead.

Source'. Authors calculations using data from Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey,
(CPS).

Figure 6: Estimated shortfall in labor facing employers in 2022, relative to Feb 2020

8.0

2.0

1.3


1.0


0.0

Population Covid-19 health Immigration Excess
aging not concerns Restrictions Retirements
related to

pandemic

Reduced
incentives to
work

Mandated
employee
vaccinations

Total

Source'. Authors’ calculations.

LINK: <https ://www .nber.org/sy stem/files/working papers/w29739/w29739 ,pdf>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

First: The Fed Has Done an Amazing Job!

Pause for a second, and just look at what the Powell-Brainard Fed (with a major assist from the 
Biden administration, and earlier from the Pelosi caucus in the House driving income support) has 
accomplished:

How this recession compares with previous ones

Percent change in employment since the most recent peak.


Months since last employment peak

Note: Because employment is a lagging indicator, the dates for these payroll employment trends
are not exactly synchronized with the National Bureau of Economic Research’s official business
cycle dates.

Worlds, worlds, worlds better than the Bernanke Fed and the Obama Administration. Worlds better.

And has this come at a cost? Leta€™ s see. What are forecasters thinking about the likely 
trajectory of inflation? Here is Mark Zandi:


Inflation Will Moderate As Pandemic Fades

Consumer price inflation, annualized % change

2019               2020               2021               2022

Sources: BLS. Moodv’sAnalvtics


Mark Zandi: a€™ Inflation has peaked&€\ despite tomorrowa€™s blaring headlinesa€l. Inflation peaked 
in October when the Delta wave of the pandemic was doing its maximum damage to global supply chains 
and keeping millions of sick workers off the joba€l

Inflation has peaked. This, despite tomorrowa€™ s blaring headlines on January consumer price 
inflation. Inflation peaked in October when the Delta wave of the pandemic was doing its maximum 
damage to global supply chains and keeping millions of sick workers off the job.

Inflation Will Moderate As Pandemic Fades

Consumer price inflation, annualized % change

Sources: BLS, Moody'sAnalytics

1:43 PMr™ Feb 9,2022

741Likes358Retweets

And what does the bond market think about the future outlook:

FRED — 5-Year Breakeven Inflation Rate

3.5


3.0

2012               2014               2016               2018               2020              2022

Since 2010 the bond market has, always, doubted that the Federal Reserve will achieve its inflation 
target over the next five years. Now, for the first time, it expects inflation over the next five 
years to be a cumulative 1.5%-points above the target. That implies a little above-target inflation 
in the next few months, and then over the following four years inflation at or below target.
The bond market is strrrrrooonnngggly on team a€oeinflation is transitory'a€oe and team a€oethe Fed 
has got thisa€D.

This is a huge, tremendous policy victory on so many fronts.
So why does Paul Krugman avoid taking a victory lap here?

Paul Krugman: Can the Fed Let Us Down Easy?'. a€~American workers are quitting at record rates, 
suggesting that theya€™ re confident they can easily find new jobs. Wages are rising rapidly, 
suggesting that labor currently has a lot of bargaining powera€!. Inflation is running 
uncomfortably higha€L Ita€™ s time for the Federal Reserve to cool things downa€!. Can the Fed pull 
this off without sending us into a
recession? It will be trickya€!. Hitting desired economic targets is hard, even when the 
fundamentals are on your sidea€!.Therea€™ s a pretty good chance that the Fed can let us down 
easya€!

LINK: <https7/me^gmg₂custom₂newslettei^yjimes₂com/template/oakv2?CCI^^

I confess I do not know. If I were writing his column, I would be much more extravagant in my 
praise of what the Powell-Brainard Fed hath wroughta€!

UPDATE: And:

Robert B. Hubbell: The Biden Economic Boom'. a€~Here is the biggest story you didna€™ t hear about 
over the weekend: The January jobs report was good. Very good. It was so good that it exceeded 
everyonea€™ s expectationsa€”including those of the White House. Given the (apparent) weak jobs 
reports for November and December, pundits were expecting more of the same in January. Sean Spicer, 
the truth-challenged press secretary and Dancing with the Stars
washout, was practicing the chaa€‘cha in anticipation of a bleak jobs report. CNN ran a commentary 
that led with, a€oeThe January jobs report is likely to be ugly.a€D Not only was the January jobs 
report good, but the Labor Department revised upward the employment statistics for November and 
December 2021, which had previously suggested a slowing economya€!

First: The 1970s Are a Very Bad Analogy for Today:



Philipp Hildebrand is talking his book. And it is a very good book to talk.

Philipp Hildebrand: The Old Inflation Playbook No Longer Applies: a€~The debate about how 
a€cetransitorya€D inflation would end up being missed the point. The root cause of this rise is 
more importanta€!. Post-pandemic inflation surge is not principally being driven by excessive 
demand but by limits on supply capacitya€!. First, there are economy-wide constraints. In the 
restart of activity after lockdowns it proved
harder to bring supply capacity on stream than for demand to restart. Even more important has been 
a second sort of misfiring: supply capacity was in the wrong placea€!. We therefore find ourselves 
in a fundamentally different situation from the one Paul Volcker faced when he became chair of the 
US Federal Reserve in 1979. Then, the economy was running hot and the aim was to drive inflation 
that had become embedded
out                                                                                                 
                                                                                                of 
the system. But this is not a Volcker momenta€!. When inflation is driven by demand, judicious 
policy can in principle stabilise both inflation and growth. This is not possible in a world where 
inflation is the result of supply constraints. Heightened macro volatility becomes inevitable. 
Central banks have either to accept higher inflation or be prepared literally to destroy demand 
across the whole economy to ease supply
constraints in one part of ita€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/le59e952-c5cf-4c8e-983a-560170c87cda>

Back in the 1970s we knew what the structural-adjustment problem was. The two triplings of oil 
prices, in 1973 and 1979, meant that everything energy intensive had the relative price structure 
strongly tilted against it. There was not a great deal of price discovery to be done: simply take 
the energy intensity of an activity and multiply it by nine, and you get with the new equilibrium 
real price of it was going to be.

The problem in that 1970s was that an expectation that wage inflation next year would be about what 
wage inflation had been this year, perhaps a percentage point per year or so more, also got 
embedded in the economy. But that embedding came with no countervailing information flow in terms 
of price discovery about the true real costs of energy intensive activities. We already knew what 
OPEC had done, and what its consequences were going to be.

Our problem today is considerably different. We are wheeling the structure of our economy in a 
number of different directions with remarkable speed. And there is no sufficient statistic for what 
the new real equilibrium prices are going to be in the same way that black gold delivered in 
Cushing, Oklahoma was a sufficient statistic back in The Day. Thus we need to see where the 
bottlenecks are, and those bottlenecks need to move prices in order to incentivize people to
correct them. What we do not want to do is squeeze down on economic production in general so that 
the bottlenecks go away. That would produce low inflation, true. That would also produce low 
production. And that would keep us from undertaking the von Hayekian price discovery that the 
economy needs to learn as fast as possible.

And, with good luck, and with a Federal Reserve able to manage expectations of its own future 
actions, we can do this with just a one time step-up of the price level, and not get expectations 
of continual year-after-year wage inflation in bedded in the expectational and contracting 
structures of the economy.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

First: Why Isna€™t There an Inflation Non-Panic?


I read:

And:

Mohamed El-Erian: The Key to 2022 Will Be How Inflation Is Brought Down: a€~For more than a decade, 
large-scale central bank purchases of assets boosted not just those being bought in markets but 
also virtually all other assets, be they financial or physical (such as housing, art and other 
collectibles). This was particularly the case in 202la€!. As the new year unfolds, both the Fed and 
markets have a huge stake in
inflation coming down in an orderly way. But the window of opportunity for policy to achieve this 
is rapidly closing. The alternative is a disorderly drop, which would involve the even bigger Fed 
policy error of having to be too abrupt in tightening monetary policy after being way too slow 
previouslya€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.eom/content/20e0857b-99cb-4495-8677-8746d97db836#myft:my-news:page>

Robert Armstrong: How to Panic About Inflation: a€~High levels of panic will be appropriate if we 
see sharp acceleration in services prices, especially outside healthcare and transports^!. This 
would indicate that the strong wage gains we have seen recently are spreading pervasively though 
the economy, in ways that could (in theory) scare everyone into thinking inflation is here to say, 
and trigger the dreaded wage-price
spirala€!. If the Fed gets to its target two per cent rate in 2023a€”that still means negative 
short-term ratesa€!. a€oeThat is not going to constrain the cost of financing anythinga€Da€!. The 
Fed might have to get much more hawkish than it is now, with heavy consequences for markets. 
Unhedged is not there yet, because wea€™re just not convinced demand will be strong for long, and 
the bond market supports our doubts.
But Michelea€™ s argument frightens us all the samea€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.eom/content/04892blb-d977-473d-8b54-d34e33a29703>

And my immediate first response is to ask the question: In what sense is the Fed supposed to have 
been "way too slow" in tightening monetary policy? We still are way short of full employment. Some 
of that is due to childcare and virus-fear bottlenecks. But some of it isna€™ t. And to the extent 
that there are important jobs not being done because people cana€™ t afford to make alternative 
childcare arrangements or fear the virusa€”well, the inflation that comes from
paying people more to see if they will take those jobs is to be welcomed, not fought:

FRED — Employment-Population Ratio

65.0


Plus the economy has undergone a great wheel: 6% less relative to trend in personal consumption 
expenditures on services, and 20% more relative to trend in personal consumption expenditures on 
goods. Not all of that is going to stick into the post-plague economy, but a good deal of it will. 
We have an economy in which nominal wages and some nominal prices are really sticky downward. That 
means that if market prices are to do their job signals of where the value is,
prices and wages in industries that need to expand must rise relative to prices and wages in 
industries that need the contract. With prices and wages in industries that need to contract sticky 
downward, that means: inflation:

130

120                                            Personal Consumption Expenditures: Goods

100


110

100

90

80

70

60                                        Personal Consumption Expenditures: Services

50

40

2002       2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       
2020

Now it is certainly true that we do not want the inflation now, which we want, and which is an 
essential part of a rapid restoration of general prosperity, to stick around once we arrive at 
whatever our new normal is going to be. But I look outside my window now, and I see no new normal.

Thus my immediate second response is to ask the question: Why is it not obvious to nearly everybody 
questions of inflation control should be postponed until their proper datea€”which will be when the 
plague has fallen to an endemic flu-like illness, and when the economy is back to full employment?

Perhaps I should not be surprised at our world of public discourse about finance and economics that 
does not seem to have thought much, if at all, about the relationship between macroeconomics and 
rapid structural change. This is, after all, the same world of public discourse about finance and 
economics that never managed to absorb Paul Krugman's very important 1998 point call if you find 
yourself at the zero lower bound on interest rates, that means that your inflation
target is too low: <https ://ww w.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/1998b_bpea krugman 
dominquez rogoff.pdf>


110

100

90

80

70

60                                        Personal Consumption Expenditures: Services

50

40

2002       2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       
2020

Now it is certainly true that we do not want the inflation now, which we want, and which is an 
essential part of a rapid restoration of general prosperity, to stick around once we arrive at 
whatever our new normal is going to be. But I look outside my window now, and I see no new normal.

Thus my immediate second response is to ask the question: Why is it not obvious to nearly everybody 
questions of inflation control should be postponed until their proper datea€”which will be when the 
plague has fallen to an endemic flu-like illness, and when the economy is back to full employment?

Perhaps I should not be surprised at our world of public discourse about finance and economics that 
does not seem to have thought much, if at all, about the relationship between macroeconomics and 
rapid structural change. This is, after all, the same world of public discourse about finance and 
economics that never managed to absorb Paul Krugman's very important 1998 point call if you find 
yourself at the zero lower bound on interest rates, that means that your inflation
target is too low: <https ://ww w.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/1998b_bpea krugman 
dominquez rogoff.pdf>


2002       2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       
2020

Now it is certainly true that we do not want the inflation now, which we want, and which is an 
essential part of a rapid restoration of general prosperity, to stick around once we arrive at 
whatever our new normal is going to be. But I look outside my window now, and I see no new normal.

Thus my immediate second response is to ask the question: Why is it not obvious to nearly everybody 
questions of inflation control should be postponed until their proper datea€”which will be when the 
plague has fallen to an endemic flu-like illness, and when the economy is back to full employment?

Perhaps I should not be surprised at our world of public discourse about finance and economics that 
does not seem to have thought much, if at all, about the relationship between macroeconomics and 
rapid structural change. This is, after all, the same world of public discourse about finance and 
economics that never managed to absorb Paul Krugman's very important 1998 point call if you find 
yourself at the zero lower bound on interest rates, that means that your inflation
target is too low: 
<https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/1998b_bpea_krugman_dominquez_rogoff ,pdf>

