Subscribe now

FIRST: The Coup Plan for January 6,2021:

I confess that I think that Chris Hayes and Dan Froomkin have it right here:

Dan Froomkin: Cassidy Hutchinsona€™ s Testimony Was Even More Terrifying than Theya€™ re Telling 
You: a€~Chris Hayesa€!. Whata€! [others] are still missing is that [Trump] didna€™t just plan to 
make an appearance and a speecha€! [but rather] storm into the House chamber at the head of the mob 
and demand that Congress declare him the winnera€!.

[Hayes:] a€oeTrump wanted to lead the armed mob into the Capitol as, essentially, the fascist point 
of the spear, with his security detail and the armed mob around him, and the Proud Boys and the 
Oath Keepers, to part the seas and breeze past the Metropolitan Police, who are getting their 
brains basheda€!. This is what we are left to understand the president of the United States wanted 
to do a€” not some lawsuit, not some lies through
some cut out, not getting some lawyer to run an errand. This is Trump himself.a€Da€!

Jan 2a€! Giuliani anda€! Meadowsa€! discussing the possibility of Trump going directly into the 
House chambera€! Meadows was resigned to ita€! Giuliani was counting on ita€!.

[Hutchinson] a€oel remember looking at him saying, a€~Rudy, could you explain whata€™ s happening 
on the 6th?a€™ He had responded something to the effect of, a€~Wea€™re going to the Capitol. Ita€™ 
s going to be great. The PresidentaC™ s going to be there. Hea€™ s going to look powerful. Hea€™ 
sa€”hea€™ s going to be with the members. Hea€™ s going to be with the Senators. Talk to the chief 
about it, talk to the chief
about it. He knows about it.a€™a€Da€! Hutchinson testified that she also knew of another 
conversation a€oeabout him going into the House Chamber.a€Da€l

[Trump] told everyone listening to him at the Ellipse:. a€oeWea€™re going to walk down to the 
Capitol, and wea€™re going to cheer on our brave senators and congressmen and women, and wea€™re 
probably not going to be cheering so much for some of thema€!. Wea€™re going to try and givea€! our 
Republicans., the kind of pride and boldness that they need to take back our country. So leta€™ s 
walk down Pennsylvania
Avenue ,a€C

When Trumpa€™ s Secret Service detail wouldna€™t take him there, he exploded with fury. Then he 
went home and pouted. a€oeHe wants to be alone right now;a€D Meadows told Hutchinson. a€oeHe 
doesna€™t want to do anything,a€D Meadows told White House counsel Pat Cippolone. After the two man 
talked to Trump, Hutchinson heard Meadows tell Cippolone: a€oeHe thinks Mike deserves it. He 
doesna€™t think
they a€™ re doing anything wrong .a€Da€!



vyuv ■ ■ ■ ■■■^w--

U.S. COVID Deaths/IOOK: County-Level Reddest 10% vs. Bluest 10% (14-Day Avg. Since Start of 
Pandemic)

data via Johns Hopkins University, NY Times & WH COVID Response Team • Graph via Charles Gaba 
@charles_gaba / ACASignups.net

1.60


Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

