Subscribe now

The Core CPIa€’’consumer prices with the volatile food and energy sectors taken outa€”rose by only 
0.2% in America in November. That would be a 2.4% annual rate. Food and
energy inflation came out lower. The Headline CPIa€”the entire indexa€”rose by only 0.1% in 
November. That makes two months of very surprisingly lower-than-expected
inflation rates. The reduction in inflation has been powered by good prices: goods prices have now 
fallen over the past two months by a total of 0.9%.

The only piece of inflation news that does not show a clear and significant declining trend is 
services inflation. But even in that there appears to be signs of good news: services
inflation averaged 0.6% per montha€”7.1% per yeara€”over the six months before November. It was 
0.4%a€”4.8% per yeara€”in November. We can guess that the decline in
services inflation will continue for the next six months. Rent increases have moderated and may be 
disappearing, but the change in the housing-cost trajectory, although baked in the
cake, is not yet in the November numbers at all.

And it is not as though wage pressure is pulling services inflation up: nominal wage inflation has 
been less than services price inflation for pretty much all of 2022. While the labor
market is "overheated" in the sense that nominal wage increases are still running above 5% per 
year, this appears more a response to price inflation than a driver of it. Even at
today's low unemployment rate, workers in aggregate do not appear to have the market power to 
demand a larger share of the income pie.

The inflation we have had over the past two years has been, largely, a good thinga€”or, rather, a 
necessary consequence of a very good thing. Not to have had an inflation surge as
we reopened the economy after the plaguea€”that would have been to run unacceptably high risks of a 
repeat of the disastrously slow recovery of the Obama years. Moreover, we
needed wage inflation in the goods-producing, logistics, and information sectors in order to pull 
workers returning to work into the sectors that needed to expand to get the economy
to full employment given the altered post-plague shape of demand. And we needed inflation at the 
bottleneck breaks in supply chains to incentivize their repair.

The Team Transitory narrative of 2021 was that we needed to re-join the highway at speed, that when 
you accelerate you leave rubber on the road, and that it is silly to be surprised
by and then complain about the skidmarks. A central with credibility should not obsess about 
hitting its inflation target every single year, but rather let inflation vary from year to
year in whatever pattern, maximizes, employment, purchasing power, and growth. The Team Transitory 
narrative of 2021 was that the pattern looked like what we had seen in the
late 1940s when we wheeled the economy away from war and into civilian production, and then again 
what we had seen in the early 1950s when we wheeled the economy into the
configuration necessary to fight the permanent Cold War: in both those cases inflation spiked and 
quickly receded.

The fear in 2021 was that the inflationary spike would get incorporated into expectations of future 
price changes, and lead to its entrenchment in worker demands for continual wage
increases, and so return us to the stagflation of the 1970s.

This fear gained great urgency in 2022, when Vladimir Putin's attack on Ukraine produced 
substantial energy and food price shocks. The double whammy of commodity supply­
shock and after plague-reopening shocks greatly raised the risks that expectations of inflation 
would become entrenched, generate a repeat of the 1970s, and require a 1982-
magnitude recession to restore the economy to balance.

But now it seems that the supply shock and the reopening shock may have passed their peaks. And, so 
far, there is no sign anywhere in the economy of inflation expectations
becoming entrenched.

Thus over the past two months the balance of risks has shifted. There still remain grave risks on 
both sides. But as of now the principal risk is not that the Fed will do too little in the
way of interest-rate increases to generate an economic soft landing, but that it has already done 
too much.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


