The extremely sharp Timothy Burke writes, on his a€~stack:

Timothy Burke: a€~The program, he says, does have to focus on 'core texts', it does have to be 
chronological (which means that authors besides white men can only enter into the Core at the end 
of the sequence...a€™

Eight by Seven

Academia: Straight to the Core

I feel some attraction to the curricular ideal of a a€oecore curriculuma€D, some set of classes 
that all students at an institution all must take, as at Columbia University. Roosevelt Montas, the 
director of Columbiaa€™ s Core program, offers a lucid
defense of the ideaa€l

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 4 comments A- Timothy Burke
I have a rather substantial problem with this.

If you watch the excellent Miss Fisher's Murder Mysteries 
<https:Z/en.wikipedia.orgZwikiZMiss_Fisher%27s_Murder_M ysteries>, you learn fairly early on that 
her classically educated father, not fully himself on the morning of her christening, had come up 
with "Phryne" rather
than "Psyche" as her name. Psyche was a mythical nymph. Phryne was a real person. Phryne... 
equivalences are difficult, but "artists' favorite model for Aphrodite and the Kim Kardashian of 
her time" is not far from the mark. She offered to pay for the rebuilding of the defensive
walls of the city of Thebes if they would inscribe on it: a€oe Alexander of Macedon pulled this 
down; Phryne made it stand up again" and, yes, the sexual pun is deliberate.



Phryne came to Athens as a refugee after the destruction of her native city of Thespis (yes, 
Foundation stole that name). Her name was not Phryne, however, but rather Mnesarete, the 
"remembrance of excellence". "Phryne" means "toad". She was called "Phryne" because her skin
tone reminded the Athenians of the skin of a toada€”not that it was warty (see statue), but rather 
that was the yellowish-brown that Athenians thought was the absolute height of beauty. That Polish 
artists of the 1800s painted her as though she had the skin tone of northern Poland
does not make her so.

In America in the past she would not have been coded as "white", but rather as."oriental", "Latin", 
or "Mediterranean". Indeed, today I strongly suspect that the good people of the Proud Boys of 
Charlottesville, VA would reject her as one of them, and classify her as some sort of
mystery ethnic.

But there is more. If you had told Marcus Tullius Cicero, Marcus filius, Marcus filius, that he 
shared an ethnic identity with the rude inhabitants of the Thames Valley who lived at the 
furthest-east ox crossing, he would have laughed at you: he thought the Britons were too stupid
and uneducated to even make good slaves.

To call classical Greeks and Romans "white guys" just because British intellectuals of the Augustan 
and Victorian Ages were desperate to appropriate them and their high civilizational accomplishments 
as their own is to fall victim to a now-300 year-old grift. And to let... 9/

...the Victorian Britons' cultural appropriation of them block you from making your own cultural 
appropriation, and from learning from them the great deal that you can, is simply stupid.

(Yes, this is what I regard as the true core of the argument that is vastly overstated in the very 
interesting Black Athena. The classical Greeks and Romans were not us, and were not like us as 
well. They were profoundly alien to us, no matter how much the civilizations that had
their roots in a 300-mile radius circle centered on Dover wish that they were us.

