Subscribe now

First:

Yes, Virginia, there is something in the air and water in Trump-voting areasa€”some exudation from 
Trump voters, or some exudation that makes people into the easily-grifted morons who vote for 
Donald Trumpa€”that also makes you join the Death Cult:
According to Charles Gaba, as of August 5,2021:

Charles #GetVaxxed! dY’%o @charles _gaba

dY“£ DAILY STATE-LEVEL VAXX UPDATE: (RA2: 0.7369)

COVID-19 VACCINATION LEVELS BY STATE

Total doses / 2x TOTAL State Population w/J&J counted twice

Data: Centers for Disease Control • Graph: Charles Gaba @charles_gaba ACASignups.net

90%

imm. 85%

80%

75%


70%

• DC

65%                                         •ME

60%


■o

£  55%  National:  53.8%

e — — — — —---------------

’5

£ 50%

c
o

5□45%

CL
O

540%

035%

5?

V*AZ • IA *NE

*NV , .AK        • SO

N(f

• SC      ND<0K

• GA         .ng AR

• LA

_ *1D

•MS ,AL

• wv

«WY

30%

25%

20%

15%


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Rebecca Heilweil: From Ford Trucks to Xbox, the Chip Shortage Is Still Causing Problems'. a€~The 
chip shortage is getting worse. The semiconductor supply crunch came for cars and phones. Now 
consumers are facing higher pricesa€! <https 
://www.vox.com/recode/2021/8/5/22611031/chip-shortage-cars-electronics-automakers-gm-tesla-playstati
on-xbox>

•  Roland Li: Most Bay Area Companies Dona€™ t Expect Employees Back in the Office Five Days a 
Week: a€~Empty work stations are seen at the Fast office space in San Francisco. Two-thirds of 
businesses in the Bay Area dona€™ t expect employees to return to the office five days a week, once 
the pandemic ends. Nick Otto/Special to The Chronicle: More than two thirds of Bay Area companies 
plan to have workers in the office three days a
week or less after the pandemic, a shift that could lead to a permanent drop of more than 1 million 
commuters a daya€! 
<https://www.sfchronicle.com/bayarea/article/Most-Bay-Area-companies-don-t-expect-employees-16367912
.php>

•  Kate Riga: Finish Line On Bipartisan Bill Comes Into Sight With Reconciliation Struggle Still To 
Come: a€~Senate leadership is trying to a€cehotlinea€D 16 amendments and final passage of the 
bipartisan bill tonight, meaning they are trying to get unanimous consent to go forward with this 
expedited process. A CBS reporter tweeted out the email to senatorsa€™ staffa€! 
<https://talkingpointsmemo.com/live-blog/finish-line-on-bipartisan-bill-
comes-into-sight-with-reconciliation-struggle-still-to-come?entry=1383687>


Bijan: a€Damn turns out the fascists were the fascists all alonga€\


damn turns out the fascists were the fascists all along
8:51 PMr™ Jan 6,2021

246,596Likes41,520Retweets

Ron Filipkowski: a€~NC Republican Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson says that any politician who promotes or 
encourages people to get a covid vaccine should be voted out of officea€!

Ron Filipkowski @RonFilipkowski

NC Republican Lt. Gov. Mark Robinson says that any politician who promotes or encourages people to 
get a covid vaccine should be voted out of office.


3:23 PM r™ Aug 5,2021

890Likes358Retweets

Danny Blanchflower: a€~Me too I was always one idiot member who kept saying a recession was coming 
but the other eight knew better that there wasna€™ ta€!

Danny Blanchflower economist and fisherman @D_Blanchflower

Me too I was always one idiot member who kept saying a recession was coming but the other eight 
knew better that there wasna€™ ta€!. https://t.co/o4EILuzm5u

Adam Posen @ AdamPosen

@ChrisGiles @bankofengland @alanbeattie While I was on MPC, "some" meant 2 to 4.1 know this because 
when I was just one, I was not referred to as some.
11:10 PM r™ Aug 5,2021

Paragraphs:

Fernando P. Polack & al. for the C4591001 Clinical Trial Group: Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 
mRNA Covida€ “19 Vaccine: a€™ A total of 43,548 participants underwent randomization, of whom 
43,448 received injections: 21,720 with BNT162b2 and 21,728 with placebo. There were 8 cases of 
Covida€“19 with onset at least 7 days after the second dose among participants assigned to receive 
BNT162b2 and 162 cases [with onset at least 7 days
after the second dose] among those assigned to placeboa€!


BNT162b2

9------------------

Days after Dose 1


Efficacy End-Point Subgroup BNT162b2, 30 pg (N=21,669)                 Placebo (N=21,686)

No. of participants Surveillance time No. of participants Surveillance time

person-yr (no. at risk)  person-yr (no. at risk)

VE (95% Cl)

percent

Covid-19 occurrence


After dose 1                      50

After dose 1 to before dose 2         39

Dose 2 to 7 days after dose 2        2

>7 Days after dose 2               9

4.015 (21,314)         275

82

21

172

3.982 (21,258)    82.0 (75.6-86.9)

52.4 (29.5-68.4)

90.5 (61.0-98.9)

94.8 (89.8-97.6)

LINK: <https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/ne jmoa2034577>

Jeet Heer: The Right Versus the Military'. a€~As we get more reporting about the Trump era, I think 
therea€™ s more and more evidence supporting the idea of a failed but still dangerous wanna-be 
Ducea€!. Trumpa€™ s language became increasingly violent during Oval Office meetings as protests in 
Seattle and Portland began to receive attention from cable new outlets. The President would 
highlight videos that showed law enforcement getting physical with
protesters and tell his administration he wanted to see more of that behavior, the excerpts show. 
a€oeThata€™ s how youa€™re supposed to handle these people,a€D Trump told his top law enforcement 
and military officials, according to Bender. a€oeCrack their skulls!a€Da€! The fact that General 
Mark Milley resisted Trumpa€™ s commands is both heartening and disturbing. After all, the line 
separating democracy from military intervention in domestic
politics shouldna€™t have to depend on military leaders keeping their oath to the Constitution. 
There should be other safe-guards in place. Trumpa€™ s presidency shows how weak those safeguards 
are. Since Trumpa€™ s departure from the White House, a rift has opened up between the American 
right and the military. Republican politicians like Senator Tom Cotton and Congressman Matt Gaetz 
have taken to calling the military a€cewokea€D or infected
with a€oecritical race theory.a€Ua€! Milley offered a spirited defense of studying critical race 
theory and other radical intellectual traditionsa€!. Ita€™ s hardly a coincidence that the right 
now sees the military as the enemy. After all, they disobeyed Trump and were the major barrier for 
Trump carrying out his plans, both during the protests of 2020 and during the January 6 riot. The 
current right wing campaign is clearly designed to cow the military and make
it more obedient, with one eye on the next Republican president. The crisis of American democracy 
that started under Trump isna€™ t over. The Trumpists are trying to reshape institutions to destroy 
the restraints that held them backa€!

LINK:


7he TIME op MONS TERS

The Time of Monsters

The Right Versus the Military

Throughout Trumpa€™ s presidency there was a running debate on the left about fascism. Was Trump, 
as many ]thought, an authoritarian threat, a proto-fascist if not fascist tout court? Or was the 
fascist accusation, as others insisted, an over-reaction that ignored Trumpa€™ s ineffectuality, 
the simple fact that he was an often weak president incapable of impla€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 15 likes A- 7 comments A- Jeet Heer

Matthew Yglesias: Single-Family Houses Are Great, Single-Family Zoning Is Not: a€~Zoning reformers 
feel insecure about adhering toa€! a free-market regulatory position. Politicallya€! the most 
important thing is to appeal to older normies with moderate viewsa€!.. Socially, the most important 
thing is to fight with leftists about whoa€™ s a sellouta€!. That encourages the adoption of edgy, 
radical-sounding rhetoric when in most contexts, the best thing to
do is to appeal to old-fashioned American values like freedom, property rights, and the dream of 
abundance while reassuring everyone that if you like your detached single-family home you can keep 
it. The rhetorical turn that I think has been unhelpful here is that I often see reform proposals 
framed as an effort to a€oeabolish single-family zoning.a€D In left-wing activist circles, people 
like to try to associate themselves with the movement to abolish slavery, in
part because abolishing slavery was really good and in part because a€oeif wea€™ d listened to 
people like you wea€™ d have never abolished slaverya€D is a popular lazy rebuttal to voices 
calling for caution and political pragmatism. So you often end up in motte-and-bailey situations 
where people will say they are prison abolitionists, but then when you ask what should happen to 
serial killers they concede theya€™ 11 be involuntarily confined, just under
circumstances so different from what prevails in the contemporary American prison system (Norway, 
say) as to constitute a form of abolition. This is a dumb way to do politics but some people find 
it entertaining, and a similar tic leapt into the land use conversation^!

LINK:


Slow Boring

Single-family houses are great, single-family zoning is not

Berkley, California is considering zoning reform, which is great. It is naturally prompting some 
political opposition, including this sign which warns that a€oethe war on single-family homes is a 
war on families.a€D This sort of thing worries me for two reasonsa€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 104 likes A- 322 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

F.M. Cornford: Microcosmographica Academiccr. a€~2. PARTIES: First, perhaps, I had better describe 
the parties in academic politics; it is not easy to distinguish them precisely. There are five; and 
they are called Conservative Liberals, Liberal Conservatives, Non-placets, Adullamites, and Young 
Men in a Hurry .A Conservative Liberal is a broad-minded man, who thinks that something ought to be 
done, only not anything that anyone now desires, but
something which was not done in 1881a€“82. A Liberal Conservative is a broad-minded man, who thinks 
that something ought to be done, only not anything that anyone now desires; and that most things 
which were done in 1881a€“82 ought to be undonea€!.The Non-placet differs in not being open to 
conviction; he is a man of principle. A principle is a rule of inaction, which states a valid 
general reason for not doing in any particular case what, to
unprincipled instinct, would appear to be righta€!. The Adullamites are dangerous, because they 
know what they want; and that is, all the money there is goinga€!.. The Young Man in a Hurry is a 
narrow-minded and ridiculously youthful prig, who is inexperienced enough to imagine that something 
might be done before very long, and even to suggest definite things. His most dangerous defect 
being want of experienced!. The Young Man in a Hurry is afflicted
with    a conscience, which is apt to break out, like measles, in patches. To listen to him, you 
would think that he united the virtues of a Brutus to the passion for lost causes of a Cato; he has 
not learnt that most of his causes are lost by letting the Cato out of the bag, instead of tying 
him up firmly and sitting on him, as experienced people do. O young academic politician, know 
thyself !d!


Slow Boring

Single-family houses are great, single-family zoning is not

Berkley, California is considering zoning reform, which is great. It is naturally prompting some 
political opposition, including this sign which warns that doethe war on single-family homes is a 
war on families ,dD This sort of thing worries me for two reasonsd!
Read more

2 years ago A- 104 likes A- 322 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

F.M. Cornford: Microcosmographica Academical d~2. PARTIES: First, perhaps, I had better describe 
the parties in academic politics; it is not easy to distinguish them precisely. There are five; and 
they are called Conservative Liberals, Liberal Conservatives, Non-placets, Adullamites, and Young 
Men in a Hurry .A Conservative Liberal is a broad-minded man, who thinks that something ought to be 
done, only not anything that anyone now desires, but
something which was not done in 1881d“82. A Liberal Conservative is a broad-minded man, who thinks 
that something ought to be done, only not anything that anyone now desires; and that most things 
which were done in 1881d“82 ought to be undonea€!.The Non-placet differs in not being open to 
conviction; he is a man of principle. A principle is a rule of inaction, which states a valid 
general reason for not doing in any particular case what, to
unprincipled instinct, would appear to be rightd!. The Adullamites are dangerous, because they know 
what they want; and that is, all the money there is goingd!.. The Young Man in a Hurry is a 
narrow-minded and ridiculously youthful prig, who is inexperienced enough to imagine that something 
might be done before very long, and even to suggest definite things. His most dangerous defect 
being want of experienced!. The Young Man in a Hurry is afflicted
with    a conscience, which is apt to break out, like measles, in patches. To listen to him, you 
would think that he united the virtues of a Brutus to the passion for lost causes of a Cato; he has 
not learnt that most of his causes are lost by letting the Cato out of the bag, instead of tying 
him up firmly and sitting on him, as experienced people do. O young academic politician, know 
thyself !d!

LINK: <https ://www .maths ,ed.ac ,uk/~v Iranick/baked/micro .pdf>

John Stuart Mill: Dark Satanic Millian Liberalism'. d~[ 1 ] Mechanical inventionsa€l have not yet 
begun to effect those great changes in human destiny, which it is in their nature and in their 
futurity to accomplish. Only when, in addition to just institutions, the increase of mankind shall 
be under the deliberate guidance of judicious foresight, can the conquests made from the powers of 
nature by the intellect and energy of scientific discoverers become the
common property of the species, and the means of improving and elevating the universal lotd!.

[2]Every one has a right to lived!. But no one has a right to bring creatures into life, to be 
supported by other people. Whoever means to stand upon the first of these rights must renounce all 
pretension to the last. If a man cannot support even himself unless others help him, those others 
are entitled to say that they do not also undertake the support of any offspring which it is 
physically possible for him to summon into the worldd! the stated! is bound in self­
protection, andd! for the sake of every purpose for which government exists, to provide that no 
person shall be born without its consentd!.

[3] If the ordinary and spontaneous motives to self-restraint are removed, others must be 
substitutedd!. The guarantee of support could be freed from its injurious effects upon the minds 
and habits of the people, [only] if the relief, though ample in respect to necessaries, was 
accompanied with conditions which they dislikedd! some restraints on their freedomd! privation of 
some indulgencesd! [their] conditiond! needs not be one of physical suffering, or the
dread of it, but only of restricted indulgence, and enforced rigidity of disciplined!

LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2018/05/dark-satanic-millian-liberalism-from-john-stuart-mill.html>
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisd! weblog-like newsletterd! here:

Subscribe now

Thered™ s a free email list. Thered™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

