Subscribe now

CONDITION: More High Praise from a Smart Person for Slouching Towards Utopia1.:

<bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

MATT YGLESIAS: a€~Brad DeLonga€™ s book called Slouching Towards Utopia, which is a broad-based 
history of economic growth over the course of the long 20th century is really, really gooda€!

FIRST: I Had Thought A%e Twitter-Merger Drama Was Over?

This was a bizarre thing to wake up to Friday morning:

US Weighs Security Reviews for Musk Deals, Including Twitter Buy

• Concerns over Musk's stance on Russia, threat to cut Starlink

• Discussions at early stage as officials consider legal options

By Jennifer Jacobs and Saleha Mohsin

(Bloomberg) - Biden administration officials are discussing whether the US should subject some of 
Elon Musk's ventures to national security reviews, including the deal for Twitter Inc. and Space's 
Starlink satellite network, according to people familiar with the matter.

US officials have grown uncomfortable over Musk's recent threat to stop supplying the Starlink 
satellite service to Ukrainea€”he said it had cost him $80 million so fara€”and what they see as 
his increasingly Russia-friendly stance following a series of tweets that outlined peace proposals 
favorable to President Vladimir Putin. They are also concerned by his plans to buy Twitter with a 
group of foreign investors.
The discussions are still at an early stage, the people familiar said on condition of anonymity. 
Officials in the US government and intelligence community are weighing what tools, if any, are 
available that would allow the federal government to review Musk's ventures.

One possibility is through the law governing the Committee on Foreign Investment in the United 
States to review Musk's deals and operations for national security risks, they saida€!

First of all: Musk is paying out of his and his investorsa€™ own pocket for a great deal of 
Ukrainea€™ s battlefield communications. To call someone doing that a€oeincreasingly 
Russia-friendlya€D is Orwellian to an overwhelming degree.

Elon also wants peacea€”as do all non-psychopaths. Elon also does not see a path to peace this or 
next year that includes a retreat of Muscovite forces to the juridical boundary between Ukraine and 
Russiaa€”as do nearly everyone not off in some fantasyland. Elon also says what he thinks, 
immediately, unfiltered, and often what he thinks is based on unreliable information^’’which has 
good sides and bad sides (I would not invest in one of his ventures), but it
is not a crime, and not cause for a government to attempt to disrupt the operations of his business 
via transparent and false pretexts.

Elon is not a threat to the national security of the United States.

And while you might say that CFIUS has jurisdiction over whether foreigners can have an ownership 
interest in Starlink, which might someday be seen as a strategic asset, I know of no colorable 
theory for CFIUS having any jurisdiction whatsoever over the ownership of Twitter.
Second: a€oeBiden administration officialsa€™a€oe. Not a€oesenior Biden administration 
officialsa€D. And a€oepeople familiar with the mattera€D. Not a€oesenior officials familiara€!a€n 
or even a€oeofficials familiara€!a€D Do these weasel words have meaning?

My view is that you have nothing if you cannot say ^(^administration sources report that senior 
administration officials are advocatingz€S3. Those who are not administration sources may well not 
know what is going on. Mere administration officialsa€”who are not senior do not shape policy. And 
even senior administration officials do all kinds of scenario planning and discuss all kinds of 
things: no policy is possible without an advocate.
And yet the Twitter stock pricea€! reacted, and reacted substantially, and has since stayed down. 
While before it had been on track to smoothly converge to $54.20 a share come Friday and the 
closing of the Musk acquisition, it no longer is:

49.89 USD

+7.23 (16.95%) + year to date

Closed: Oct 21,7:05 PM EDT • Disclaimer
After hours 50.02 +0.13 (0.26%)

1D 5D 1M 6M YTD 1Y 5Y Max

55



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Canine Industrial Action

After 3.5 miles of horizontal and 800 uphill and 700 downhill feet of vertical, a sit-down strike.
She has to know that we are almost back at the car, right?


Leave a comment

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Brendan Scott: Xi and the new members of the Politburo Standing Committee: a€~An emerging 
powerbroker from todaya€™ s lineup is Shanghai party chief Li Qiang, 63, who appears set to become 
premier after Li Keqiang retiresa€!. Li is a close associate of Xi who sealed off Shanghai for two 
months this year, following one of the biggest virus outbreaks to breach Covid Zeroa€!

•  Elaine Moore: The driverless car revolution is stuck in the slow lane: a€~There is still no 
consensus on how autonomous vehicles should worka€!

•  Martin Sandbu: A political backlash against monetary policy is looming: a€~Defenders of 
independent central banks must think about their democratic legitimacya€!

• Luciano Canfora: The Fate of AristotleaC™ s Library

• Alfred Twu: a€~Taipei Zoning & City Planninga€!

•  Phillip Coggan: Free Market a€” the boundary between state and the economy: a€~[Jake Solla€™ s] 
timely and erudite history traces our ambiguous attitudes towards moneymaking and laissez faire 
tradea€!

• Ezra Klein: Interviews Matt Yglesiasa€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Noah Smith: The Banking-Finance Nobel Prize: a€~Codifyinga€! things we already knew into 
mathematical formatsa€! didna€™t really add any valuea€!. The mathematical macroeconomists of the 
70s and 80s did serious harm to economistsa€™ ability to understand the worlda€!. Charles 
Kindleberger [on]a€! Ben Bernankea€™ s prize-winning papers in 1983: a€oel think you have provided 
a most ingenious solution to a non-problem. The necessity to
demonstrate that financial crisis can be deleterious to production arises only in the scholastic 
precincts of the Chicago school with what Reder called in the last JEL its tight priors, or TP. If 
one believes in rational expectations, a natural rate of unemployment, efficient markets, exchange 
rates continuously at purchasing power parities, there is not much that can be explained about 
business cycles or financial crises. For a Chicagoan, you are courageous to depart
from  the assumption of complete marketsa€!a€D. Paul Krugman begs to differa€!. argues that formal 
mathematical modeling, of the kind that Bernanke and Diamond-Dybvig did, adds significant value to 
the lessons of historya€!. a€oel actually tooka€! [Kindlebergera€™ s] international finance course 
in grad school; all of us came out feeling very confused. Diamond-Dybvig-Bernankea€! cut through 
the fog. After DDB economists could read Bagehot very
differently and more productively than beforea€!a€D. I score this debate about evena€!

Charlie Stross: Strong and Stable!: a€~Russ Jonesa€! enumerates the Conservatives' five factions 
thuswise: One Nation Conservatives (eg. Ken Clark), the traditional faction of stable national 
unity government, now reduced to a rump (and arguably more at home with the Liberal Democrats, or 
even the Labour right wing); Xenophobic English nationalistsa€! Swivel-eyed Libertarians (see: Liz 
Truss, Kwasi Kwarteng, the 55 Tufton Street mob); Populist
bullshittersa€! (Johnson, Dorries)a€!. Machine politiciansa€! (Gove and May)a€!. And each faction 
has now given the other factions good cause to mistrust thema€!. And it's all David Cameron's 
faulta€!

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Visit the Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality chat
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

