Subscribe now

FIRST: Yet MO AR Comments on Adam Toozea€™s Review of My a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia"

In which I make four more comments on Adam Toozea€™ s review of my Slouching <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>:

Adam Tooze: Fueling Americaa€™ s Global Dream: a€~Is [this] how the American century ends?a€! The 
US Federal Reserve remains the hub of the
global financial system. American military power and technology span the globe and are girding 
themselves for a clash with China.

The US is a major energy producer and the supplier of last resort for liquefied natural gas. Which 
brings us to what is surely the most puzzling aspect of
DeLonga€™ s book: his failure to address the vast mobilisation of non-renewable resources that from 
its beginning defined and powered the American-led
growth model. If the escape from Malthusian constraint defined what was radical about the 20th 
century, that century also brought us, from the 1970s
onwards, a dawning certainty that environmental limits will indeed constrain our future.

Not by accident, modern environmentalism was born in the 1960s and 1970s above all in the US. In 
the 1990s, under Clinton and his vice-president Al
Gore, the US was the pivot of world climate policy. But Americaa€™ s political class abandoned that 
leadership role and the climate problem has since
become the most unambiguous indicator by which to gauge the end of the era of US economic 
preponderance^!. China emits more COa,, than the entire
OECD club of rich nations put together. In environmental terms, the American-led west no longer 
controls its own destiny. Of all of this there is no
mention  in DeLonga€™ s historya€!

1/ Yes. The U.S. remains a great power, even a superpower. But nobody outside it today mistakes it 
for the furnace in which the future is being forged, or for a global hegemon that
believes itself to be and in some respects is attempting to guide the world toward at least a 
semi-utopian future of peace and prosperity. The U.S. retains immense strengths as a
society,  an economy, and a power. But nobody takes it as a model, and very few indeed trust it as 
a leader. The U.S. power-and-influence trajectory from 1970-2020 is very
reminiscent                                                                               of the 
British trajectory from 1885-1935.

2/ The 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution century was in many respects the century of coal: the 
extraordinary bounty of the stored sunlight from more than 500 million years ago
available for pennies because the last round of glaciers had served as bulldozers to scrape off all 
the post-Permian rock in much of northwest Europe, and the knock-on effects from
the coal-fueled steamships that powered the ingathering of manufacturing to the districts of the 
world where it could be done most productively and efficiently. Those were perhaps
two-thirds of net global technological advance over 1770-1870. Add in cotton, textile machinery, 
ironmongery, and steam engineering and you have the bulk of the rest.

The 1870-2020 Long 20th Modern Economic Growth century was, in some respects, a century of the 
transition from coal to oil. But it was, technologically, many other things as far
as leading sectors were concerned as wella€”many other things in a way that the Industrial 
Revolution century of the coal, cotton, textile machinery, ironmongery, and steam
engineering complex was not.

I only had 536 text pages. I decided to spend those of them I could spare for engineering 
technology on electricity and silicon, rather than have one paragraph each on forty different
advances. Oil was one of the things that got left on the cutting room floor. So sue mea€”the 
consensus is that the book is too long, a€cesprawlinga€D in the words of polite people,
as   it is.

3/1 do write:

Four developmentsa€! brought to an enda€! the long twentieth century, anda€! might mark the end of 
humanitya€™ s time slouching toward utopiaa€!.

[1] 1990a€! industries of Germany and Japana€! undermininga€! American exceptionalisma€!. [2] 
200la€! fanatic religious violencea€!. [e] Great
Recessiona€! 2008a€! forgottena€! Keynesian lessonsa€!. [4] failurea€! from roughly 1989a€! to 
combat global warminga€!

One of the nice things about modern information technologies is that you can search, and are not 
forced to rely on your memory when you want to make a claim that there is a€oeno
mentiona€D of something.


