Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Rice and Bones <https://www.riceandbones.com/>

•  Wilhelm II Hohenzollern: d€™ Should you encounter the enemy, he will be defeated! No quarter 
will be given! Prisoners will not be taken! Whoever falls into your hands is forfeited. Just as a 
thousand years


ago me nuns unaer meir King Alina maae a name ror memseives, one mat even loaay maKes mem seem 
migniy in nisiory ana legena, may me name Lierman oe ainrmea ny you in sucn a way in cnina mat no

Chinese will ever again dare to look cross-eyed at a Germana€l 
<https://www.inspiringquotes.us/quotes/GM3c_NwHjVTzF>

• Bill Gardner: Why the U.S. Should Vaccinate the World'. a€~We should do this because it would 
save many livesa€!. This is all that needs to be saida€!. Alsoa€! the U.S. stood to benefit if we 
could substantially
reduce the number of global co vid casesa€! slow the rate of evolution of new coronavirus 
variantsa€!. The global vaccination effort would pay for itselfa€! 
<https://theincidentaleconomist.com/wordpress/20-
years-since-9-11 -why-the-u-s-should-vaccinate-the-world/>

Paragraphs:

The usually thoughtful and empathetic David French asks: why the death shaming, why the 
schadenfreude, when an unvaccinated MAGA moron dies of CO VID? Where is the empathy?

I think that the answer is clear: a€oeBrian (not his real name)a€D did not just kill himself out of 
his ofermod, he killed other peoplea€’’those to whom he gave the disease, and then further down the 
traina€”as well. He is not
just a victim and a casualty. He is a murderer. Why cana€™ t David French understand that people 
have a very human tendency to put themselves in the shoes of a€ceBrian (not his real name)a€Da€™ s 
victims, and have a
very human tendency to see his death as just karmic vengeance for his deeds.

The tell is when French describes a€oeBrian (not his real name)a€D as a€oenot view[ing] it as a 
meaningful riska€D. It was very much a meaningful riska€”it turned out to him, but much more so to 
the people he sneezed
on. That lack of empathy on the part of David French and of a€oeBrian (not his real name)a€D for 
those who were going to get infected further down the plague chain strikes me as the most 
appalling, inhuman, and
sociopathic piece of all this:

David French: The American Crisis of Selective Empathy. a€~And how it reaches into the churcha€!. 
Brian (not his real name) was a kind Christian man. He and his wife were always there to help a
friend in need, and in the local business community, he was known for his relentlessly cheerful 
disposition. He was Republicana€”like virtually everyone else in his church and communitya€’’but he
wasna€™ t defined by his politics. Then the pandemic hit. Brian hated the lockdowns, and he also 
hated masks and especially mask mandates. He hated them so much that he boycotted services until
the church allowed unmasked people to worship. Brian also refused the vaccine. Ita€™ s not that he 
thought that CO VID was a hoax, but he didna€™ t view it as a meaningful riska€!. You can guess
the rest of the story. Brian caught COVIDaCI. The disease he discounted had taken his lifea€!. Can 
you imagine the grief if a member of your family falls to COVID in this way? Can you imagine the
realization that an imminent death was entirely, easily preventable? Can you imagine how that 
understanding would tear at your heart and soul? Yet Ia€™ m seeing trends that are deeply 
unsettling. I
see schadenfreude. a€! Elizabeth Bruenig wrote powerfully in The Atlantic to decry what she rightly 
called a€oedeath shaming. a€D There is a profound lack of empathy for these terrible losses, an
unwillingness to a€oeweep with those who weep,a€D and a stubborn refusal to even try to place 
oneself in the shoes of the grieving. Why?a€!

LINK:


The French Press

The American Crisis of Selective Empathy

Ia€™ m going to tell you a true-life story, one of many virtually identical stories Ia€™ ve heard 
these past few weeks. Be honest with yourself as you consider how you feel. Brian (not his real 
name) was a kind Christian
man. He and his wife were always there to help a friend in need, and in the local business 
community, ha€!

Read more

a year ago A- 222 Ekes A- 746 comments A- David French

A true self-own: a pathetic parody of thinking-like-an-economist. A real economist says: ThereaC™ s 
an externality. The market will get it wrong. What is the best way to fix it? Alison Schragera€! 
does not:

Allison Schrager: Bidena€™ s Vaccine Mandate Is More Bad News for the Labor Market’. a€~The U.S. 
would be better off if as many adults as possible are vaccinated. But while President Joe
Bidena€™ s mandate will lessen risk for Americans, it wona€™ t eliminate it, and the benefits must 
be weighed against the costs that will be borne by the most economically vulnerablea€!. The
libertarianish economist in me feels ambivalent because of the trade-offs posed by any regulation 
on businessesa€!. It will be expensive for businesses to ensure everyone is vaccinated or to set up 
a
testing systema€!. Employers could be overwhelmed with testing and accommodating non-compliant 
employeesa€!.

If someone quits rather than get a vaccine or needs to be fired, it will be very expensive and 
difficult to replace them. This puts a outsized burden on companiesa€!. There are already lawsuits 
cropping
up against employers, such as the one brought by George Mason professor, Todd Zywicki, who already 
has immunity after having had the virus. More inevitable lawsuits will pose more costs to
employers and the economy a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-09-10/biden-s-vaccine-mandate-is-more-bad-news-for-
the-labor-market>

A very nice take on a difficult problem. I wish I could discern more just how confident those near 
the margin of going or not going to college are about their individual benefits and prospects, and 
whether they are right to have
that degree of confidence:

Daniel Herbst & Nathaniel Hendren: Opportunity Unraveled: Private Information and the Missing 
Markets for Financing Human Capital’. a€™ College is typically financed through non-
dischargeable, government-backed student loansa€!. Adverse selection has unraveled private markets 
for college-financing contracts that mitigate risk. We use survey data on studentsa€™ expected
post-college outcomesa€!. Students hold significant private knowledge of their future earnings, 
academic persistence, employment, and loan repayment likelihood, beyond what is captured by
observable characteristics^!. A typical college-goer must expect to pay back $1.64 in present value 
for every $1 of equity financing to cover the financiera€™ s costs of covering those who would
adversely select their contract. We estimate that college-goers are not willing to accept these 
terms so that private markets unravel. Nonetheless, our framework quantifies significant welfare 
gains
from government subsidies that would open up these missing markets and partially insure 
college-going risksa€!

LINK: <https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/hendren/files/opportunity_unraveled.pdf>

This strike me as sober and convincing. I do wish Natasha Loder were a little more sophisticated 
with respect to what knowledge is: what we fear, what we suspect, what we believe, what we know, 
and what organizations
agree is true for purposes of action are five different things. They are all a€ceknowledgea€D, but 
failing to distinguish between them can lead to a lot of confusion about how things went down when:

Natasha Loder: The November story. a€~Russell Westergard, the Deputy [U.S.] Consular Chief in 
Wuhana€!. writesa€!.

By mid-October 2019, the dedicated team at the U.S. Consulate General in Wuhan knew that the city 
had been struck by what was thought to be an unusually vicious flu
season. The disease worsened in November. When city officials began to close public schools in 
mid-December to control the spread of the disease, the team passed the word
to Embassy Beijing and continued monitoring. The possibility of a new viral outbreak was always on 
the consulatea€™ s radar. Still, the working assumption in every
scenario had always been that, as in past outbreaks like H1N1 (known as swine flu), it would appear 
in rural areas first and then spread to major urban centers across China.

One might read this and conclude that mid-December was the moment ConGen Wuhan started to pay 
attention. But the account doesna€™ t preclude any earlier discussionsa€!. [The] medical branch
of the Defense Intelligence Agency a€! [perhaps] knew something was up in Novembera€! a contagion 
sweeping through Wuhan in late NovemberaC! analysis of a€oewire and computer intercepts
coupled with satellite imagesa€da€!. This NCMI report was a€oebriefed multiple times"a€!. By this 
account, the briefings began at the end of NovemberaC!. It is [thus] hard to believe that the head
of  the Chinese CDC learned of the outbreak from a WeChat group on December 30th. Or that the 
worlda€™ s leading bat coronavirus researcher, based in Wuhan, didna€™ t find out until she
received a call that same eveninga€!. For there to be so many cases of what would become known as 
SARS-COVa€“2 in early December, there had to have been transmission in Novembera€!.

This is the correct context to consider the reports of cases in Europe (see here), particularly 
northern Italy, detected in stored patient samples in Novembera€!. Wuhan is well connected to 
Europe by
aira€!. Since the outset of the pandemic, many journalists have pieced together a sorry portrait of 
Chinese behaviour. Of a country that has consistently withheld knowledge and data on covida€“19
and  its origins. Whether the virus came from a laboratory, a field worker, or a food chain, China 
broke agreements with the world that it will promptly disclose an outbreak of a dangerous new
pathogen. One important question for the world is whether virologists themselves should also be 
bound by these rules to inform others. Or whether foreign governments should be bound to report on
countries they suspect to have outbreaks. For what it is worth, I think the virologistsa€’’indeed e 
very onea€’’needs to be more open about what they knew and when. A lot of people have died. Their
families deserve answersaCI

LINK:


Overmatter

The November story

This week I want to set sail into choppy and difficult waters. I want to try to assemble some of 
what we know about the origins of covid-19 into some sort of order. On this matter, there are many 
journalists who have written
with perseverance and brilliance. So this isna€™ t an easy subject to write about, and there are no 
easy answers to be had. But, evea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 15 comments A- Natasha Loder
Leave a comment

