a€!ack, evaluate, and assess. So I am going to see if I can use SubStack to try to do that:

I always see myself on Twitter as a pig digging for truffles. Herea€™ s what I have found: What 
have the Trumpists been doing with COVID? So James Bennet was a toxic boss at the Atlantic as well 
as at the New York Timesl The Gamestop corner. The media-assisted downward spiral of the Republican 
Party into pure Trumpist fascism. Marx, corners, & bubbles. Americaa€™ s
racist past is not dead: it is not even past. I still believe in a place called Hope:

What have the Trumpists been doing with COVID? & now the vaccine doses: have they been kicking them 
off the truck & selling them? (UNVERIFIED):

Eric Feigl-Ding: CONCERNINGa€’’Millions of doses of #COVID19 vaccine shipped by Trump WH/HHS are 
missing. Nobody knows why yet. Biden coronavirus task force have spent first days in office working 
overtime to solve puzzle. So far, one hasna€™t emerged. (by @ErinBanco) 
https://thedailybeast.com/miUions-of-covid-19-vaccine-doses-are-miaand-biden-team-isnt-
sure-whya€!

“ You have cities canceling
vaccination appointments while the
data   says they still haven’t
administered a large portion of the
vaccine  that's been shipped to
them.   That is the biggest problem."

— Dr. Craig Spencer


David Leonhardt Jun 29,2020: The current outbreak in the U.S. looks like nothing in any other rich 
country: https 
://nytimes.com/2020/06/29/briefing/coronavirus-mississippi-new-england-patriots-your-monday-briefing
.htmla€!

New confirmed cases per million residents, previous seven days


Europe includes all countries fully in Europe, regardless of E.U. status.

Mallory Harris: After spending last year encouraging governments to intentionally infect us for the 
sake of herd immunity, Scott Atlas & the three GBD authors are advising an organization that's 
telling people COVID19 infection is safer than the vaccine, 
https://pandata.org/you-asked-we-answered/ae!

population.  Once  this  is  established,
individuals,  with  the  help  of  their  physician
should    do  a  cost-benefit  analysis  based  on
their  individual  profile,  their  age  and  their
nealth  status  to  determine  whether  taking
the  vaccine  would  be  more  beneficial  than
getting a natural infection.

Currently,  there  is  no  one  for  whom  the
benefit would outweiah the risk of these


nursing  home  patients.  Both  COVID-19
tests and the vaccines are only cleared for
Emergency  Use  Authorization,  so
individuals       taking  the  vaccine  now  need  to
oe   aware  that  they  are  actually

participating  in  an  experiment  without
informed consent.

So James Bennet was a toxic boss at the Atlantic as well as at the New York Times'! (VERIFIED):

Eyes on the Prize: Ugh, toxic. It's amazing how toxic one person can make a work environment and 
how reluctant management is to do anything about it.

Peter Sterne: Former Atlantic managing editor writes about abusive workplace under her boss, James 
Bennet (who later went on to run the NYT opinion page, until being pushed out after publishing Tom 
Cotton's "send in the troops" op-ed)


I Left My Career in Prestige Media Because of the Shitty Men in Charge and They Are Still Ina€!: I 
had the plumb job. The top of the masthead of one of the most prestigious and respected 
publications with more than a 150-year-olda€!
ienzerb.medium.com

The Gamestop corner (VERIFIED):

Neil Irwin: Trying to make sense of the Gamestop thing as a 42 year old who has covered econ and 
markets for 20 years, I feel like Don Draper sitting back and trying to listen to the Beatles, then 
giving up after a short while, confused and discomfited.


Charlie Bilello: GameStop's market cap is now above $17 billion, up 13x on the year. $GMEhttps 
://compoundadvisors.com/2021/the-day-the-stock-market-became-a-video-gamea€!


GameStop Corp Market Cap

GameStop Market
Cap (^GME)

15.00B


10.00B

5.00B

0.00


2005

COMPOUND MwfeBitel

2010

2015                     2020

Jan 27 2021,9:14AM EST. Powered byYCHARTS

Shaan Puri; to be clear. This has nothing to do with gamestop as a business. They are just a piece 
of rope being used in a tug of war between internet nerds and wall st suits, the rally cry on 
r/wallstreet bets: "we can remain retarded for longer than they can stay solvent!"

Eric Balchunas; THEY DID IT: $GME was the most traded equity on the planet today w/ $20b in volume, 
more than $SPY, $AAPL and even the Mighty $TSLA. Surreal.

The media-assisted downward spiral of the Republican Party into pure Trumpist fascism (VERIFIED):

Charlie Sykes: Whata€™ s the GOPd€™ s Excuse Now?'. a€~The surrender enters a new phasea€!. On 
Tuesday all but five GOP senators (the usual suspects: Romney, Sasse, Murkowski, Collins, and 
Toomey) voted for a motion to declare a second Trump trial unconstitutional because he has already 
left office. That vote seems to make Trumpa€™ s second acquittal a forgone
conclusion, but it also reflected the GOPa€™ s broader refusal to quit Trumpa€! LINK: 
https://morningshots.thebulwark.eom/p/whats-the-gops-excuse-now

a€oeThe only hope you have is to accept the fact that youa€™re already dead,a€D the Republican 
congressman from Illinois says.


Frances Langum: Their 2020 "platform" said it all. No platform except support for Trump. OMG 
there's even a typo in the second "resolved." https://ballotpedia.org/The Republican Partv 
Platform, 2020a€!


RESOLVED, That the Republican Party has and will continue to enthusiastically support the
President’s America-first agenda;

RESOVLVED, That the 2020 Republican National Convention will adjourn without adopting a
new platform until the 2024 Republican National Convention;

RESOLVED, That the 2020 Republican National Convention calls on the media to engage in
accurate and unbiased reporting, especially as it relates to the strong support of the RNC for
President frump and his Administration; and

RESOLVED, That any motion to amend the 2016 Platform or to adopt a new platform, including
any motion to suspend the procedures that w ill allow doing so, w ill be ruled out of order.

Paul Loop: The Republican Party can't 'move on' from the twitterless Trump because they are 
identical. There is no non-Trumpian conservativism held in abeyance during his mad reign. There is 
only a lawless, nihilistic, feverish, idea-less ball of greed and id financed by Dark Money.

David Frum: I've often wondered whether a reason Canadian politics has been more moderate in the 
21st c than UK, US, or Australian politics is that there are no Murdoch-owned media properties in 
Canada.

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!1: Replying to @Atrios and @ Alex Ward Vox: I guess the lesson 
is that Ezra and Matt's hopes for voxa€”that it would work for its readers rather than for the 
insular Washington press communitya€”are now dead? I mean, if Alex Ward aligns himself with Steve 
Doocy & claims he is there to ask "legitimate questions", all is lost...

Scott Greer: So take @dziblatt's point that conservative parties defend democracy when the people 
in the party who think they do best in a democracy control the party Add exit-voice-loyalty, in 
which it seems those people are exiting the R party You get something really dangerous.

Manu Raju: New - GOP senators, rocked by Portmana€™ s retirement, looking to see who else may be 
eyeing the exits. Shelby, Grassley, Thune wouldna€™t divulge 2022 plans, while Ron Johnson says 
hea€™ s undecided. "I think this place is horribly dysfunctional,a€D Johnson says. 
http://cnn.com/2021/01/26/politics/retirements-republicans-2022/index.htmla€!

Sissy is Embarrassed By Shih Tzu Say: House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy will have 'conversation' 
with Marjorie Taylor Greene & ask her to keep her murder plots secretive in the future.


House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy will have 'conversation' with Marjorie Taylor Greene after 
her... Rep. Greene repeatedly expressed support on social media for assassinating leading Democrats 
prior to being elected.

Marx, corners, & bubbles:

tyson brody: Marx literally played with stocks instead of working and justified it to his friends 
like so many modern posters

I have, which will surprise you not a little, been
speculating  —  partly  in  American  funds,  but
more  especially  in  English  stocks,  which  are
springing  up  like  mushrooms  this  year  (in
furtherance    of    every    imaginable    and
unimaginable joint stock enterprise), are forced
up to quite an unreasonable level and then, for


the most part, collapse. In this way, I have made

over £400 and, now that the complexity of the
political situation affords greater scope, I shall
begin all over again. It’s a type of operation that
makes demands on one’s time, and it’s worth
while running some risk in order to relieve the
enemy of his money.

— Karl Marx writing to Lion Philips, 1864

Americaa€™s racist past is not dead: it is not even past:
Glenn Fleishman: Show this every month to white kids as they grow up.
The Black Detour: Traveling while Black: Never pay with a $20


Americaa€™s racist past is not dead: it is not even past:
Glenn Fleishman: Show this every month to white kids as they grow up.
The Black Detour: Traveling while Black: Never pay with a $20

I still believe in a place called Hope:

Janet Yellen: Economics isna€™ t just something you find in a textbook. It can be a potent tool to 
right past wrongs and improve peoplea€™ s lives. Thata€™ s why so many of Treasurya€™ s 84,000 
public servants joined the Department. Today, I am proud to be one of them.

Vice President Kamala Harris: Today I swore in @Janet Yellen as @USTreasury Secretary. Secretary 
Yellen is a trailblazer, whose deep commitment to working families will be essential as we confront 
the urgent economic challenges facing the American people. twitter.com/NBCNews/statusa€!


Vice President Kamala Harris: Today I swore in @JanetYellen as @USTreasury Secretary. Secretary 
Yellen is a trailblazer, whose deep commitment to working families will be essential as we confront 
the urgent economic challenges facing the American people. twitter.com/NBCNews/statusa€!

