CONDITION: Great-Power War & Proxy War Return to the European Continent

And here we are:


Adam Tooze: a€™ Truly dangerous spiral: Brave Ukrainian resistance frustrates Russian attack -> 
Kiev refuses humiliating negotiations. Russia about to ramp up destructiveness of attack -> NATO 
members rushing weapons to Ukraine, EU/US announce major sanctions. What is Russiaa€™ s next 
move?a€!
LINK:

Adam Tooze @adam tooze

We are in truly dangerous spiral: Brave Ukrainian resistance frustrates Russian attack -> Kiev 
refuses humiliating negotiations. Russia about to ramp up destructiveness of attack NATO members 
rushing weapons to Ukraine EU/US announce major sanctions. What is Russiaa€™ s next move?
10:38 PM r™ Feb 26,2022

3,395Likes587Retweets

Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...
Share

First: The Federal Reserve Continues to Look Like It Has Ita€!

David Beckworth @David Beckworth • Feb 23

Market forecast: credible macro policy over the long horizon.

5-Year Average Expected PCE Inflation Rate (CPI minus 20 bps)
5 Years in the Future




(Yes: these are both my Berkeley colleagues. There is a reason the Berkeley Economics Department 
punches massively, massively, far above the weight that its financial endowment fundamentals would 
justify. All those thinking about giving to an economics departments’’consider that our incremental 
funding-to-results ratio is easily 5 times that of the overendowed privates.)

A second reason is that the demand-side component of the shortfall between current employment and 
the pre-plague employment trend is now small: the rise in employment from 142 million at Bidena€™ s 
inauguration to 149 million nowa€”7 million in one yeara€”is an extraordinary economic-policy 
victory that Biden, Yellen, Powell, and Brainard should be very proud of, and that we should not 
ignore going forward:

Alex Domash & Lawrence Summers: How Tight Are U.S. Labor Markets?'. a€~(i) Unemployment is a better 
predictor of wage inflation than non-employment and (ii) vacancy rates and quit rates have 
substantial predictive power for wage inflations!. Vacancy and quit rates currently experienced in 
the United States correspond to a degree of labor market tightness previously associated with 
suba€“2 percent unemployment ratesa€!. Labor market
tightness is likely to contribute significantly to inflationary pressure in the United States for 
some time to comea€!

Figure 5: Employment shortfall relative to pre-pandemic trend


150

145

Counterfactual

Employment
shortfall of

7.3 million

Employment level

140


135-

130-

H---

Dec2018              Dec2019               Dec2020               Dec2021

Notes'. Employment is nonfarm payroll employment, which excludes proprietors, self-employed,
unpaid family or volunteer workers, farm workers, and cosmetic workers. Counterfactual
employment level assumes employment continued to grow at the 2019 rate. Results are similar if a
3-                                                                                    or 5-year 
pre-pandemic trend is used instead.

Source'. Authors calculations using data from Bureau of Labor Statistics Current Population Survey,

(CPS).

Figure 6: Estimated shortfall in labor facing employers in 2022, relative to Feb 2020

8.0


7.0

1.0

0.4

6.9


0.0

1.3

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0


0.0

Population Covid-19 health Immigration Excess
aging not concerns Restrictions Retirements
related to

pandemic

Reduced
incentives to
work

Mandated
employee
vaccinations

Total

Source'. Authors’ calculations

LINK: <https ://www .nber.org/system/files/working papers/w29739/w29739 ,pdf>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Wikinpditr Uistnirp tip diiillaump IP MarAf&rhnl ^httnsV/pn wikinp.dia nra/wiki/Histnirp dp. 
Criiillanmp IP                       AQrhal^


• Christine Benlafquih: Moroccan Merguez Sausage and Egg Tagine 
<https://www.thespruceeats.com/moroccan-sausage-and-egg-tagine-recipe-2394499>

• Michael C. Desch, ed.: Soldiers in Cities <https://publications.armywarcollege.edu/pubs/1595.pdf>

• Ben Thompson: An Interview with Intel CEO Pat Gelsinger 
<https://stratechery.com/2022/an-interview-with-intel-ceo-pat-gelsinger/>

•  Trevon Logan: a€™ Was slavery a€ceeconomically productive?a^DOnly if you fail to consider the 
costs to the enslaveda€!

Bloomberg Economics ©economics

Was slavery 'economically productive?1 Only if you fail to consider the costs to the enslaved, says 
©TrevonDLogan (via ©bopinion)
trib.alBloomberg - Are you a robot?

10:31 PMT™ Feb 24,2022

68Likes22Retweets

•  Ryan Avent: History & the Power of Ideas'. a€~Why averting the first world war would not have 
meant a 20th century of smooth sailinga€! <

Paragraphs:

Paul Poast: a€™How will Russiaa€™s invasion of Ukraine play out? What is Putina€™ s end game? Four 
scenariosa€L 1 a€!. Putin seeks to establish a pro-Russian regime in Kieva€! a€cesupporteda€D, 
indefinitely, by Russian forcesa€!. 2a€!. Putin seeks to annex all of Ukraine into Russiaa€!. 3: 
Imperial Overreacha€!. All of the a€oenear abroada€D is the next target. Scenario 4: Major Power 
War Putin specifically shifts his focus to the Baltic Statesa€!. Which
scenario is most likely? It depends on two factors. First, are Putina€™ s aims Maximalist or 
Limited? Second, the operational ease of invading Ukrainea€!

LINK:

Paul Poast ©ProfPaulPoast

How will Russia's invasion of Ukraine play out? What is Putin's end game? I see four scenarios, 
none of which are good. [THREAD]


Kherson Mariupol     separatists

10,342Likes3,352Retweets

Anthony Wilder Wohns & al.: A Unified Genealogy of Modern & Ancient Genomes: a€~Hundreds of 
thousands of moderna€! and thousands of ancient human genomesa€!. Every human genome contains 
segments from ancestries of varying ages. Wohns et al. applied a tree recording methoda€! to 
generate a unified human genealogya€!. This method allows for missing and erroneous data and uses 
ancient genomes to calibrate genomic coalescent times. This permits us to
determine how our genomes have changed over time and between populations, informing upon the 
evolution of our speciesa€!

LINK: chttps://www.science .org/doi/10.1126/science.abi8264>

Caitlin Talmadge: a€™ Developments in the last 24 hours are heartbreaking and a preview of great 
brutalitya€!. Putina€™ s pointed, not-veiled nuclear threats are really remarkablea€!. The 
Stability-Instability Paradox: the notion that mutual vulnerability (a€oeMADa€D) at the strategic 
nuclear level can actually make conflict more likely at lower rungs of the escalation laddera€! 
us[ing]a€! strategic nuclear forces as a shield behind which they can pursue conventional
aggressiona€!. Ukraine is not a member of NATO, nor a U.S. treaty ally. But then neither is Taiwan. 
So if you think nuclear stalemate is going to keep the peace in the Strait, you would need to do 
some hard thinkinga€!. Ita€™ s hard for me to see the Russian end game herea€!. Russia can 
steamroll Ukrainian regular forces, though I expect Ukraine can make this more costly than Russia 
has anticipated. Urban warfare is unkinda€!. But beyond that, what is military
endgame?  Regime change and then puppet government? Difficulties of indefinitely occupying a nation 
of 41 million should be apparenta€!

LINK:

ProfTalmadge @ProfTalmadge

Havena€™t tweet much on Ukraine crisis for multiple reasons. But developments in the last 24 hours 
are heartbreaking and a preview of great brutality I fear is coming. A few observations here on the 
nuclear & conventional dimensions. 1/
1:20 PMr™ Feb 24,2022

7,641Likes2,232Retweets
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA....
Share

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Subject: MediAival a€oeEntrepreneurshipa€d!

Why was technological progress so slow during the MediAlval Age? We think we have a world 
population of 240 million in 800, and 500 million in 1500, with a stable level of real income per 
capita. Using my rule-of-thumb that the value H of the stock of discovered, developed, deployed, 
and diffused technology^’’useful ideas about manipulating nature and organizing humansa€”can be 
gauged by multiplying income per capita by population, that gives us an annual
proportional rate of growth h of the value of this stock of only 0.052%/year. True, in the 
Dover-Circle economies our estimated h is 0.096%/year, as population within 300 miles of Dover 
grows from 8 to 25 million. But a good half of that wedge is simply a region poor and 
technologically backward in 800 catching up to the world average. (But then going beyond it in 
printing, gunpowder weapons, ocean-going ships, and precision metalwork.)

Here, from a poem of the early 1200s, is a clue:


John[?]: History of William the Marshal: The Tournament at Lagny-sur-Marne'.

Sir Herluin de Vancy,

who was the Seneschal of Flanders,
had at least thirty knights with him,
outside the press of battle.

One of his knights galloped up
to inform his lord, Herluin.

a€ceMy lord,a€Q he said, a€cein Goda€™s name,

look over there, the King is on the point of being captured.
You take him and get the praise for it;

hea€™s already lost his helmet
and is much distraught by that.a€Q

When Sir Herluin heard this,
his heart was filled with joy,

and he said: a€ceHea€™s ours, I think.a€Q
They all spurred on at a fast gallop

in pursuit of the King.

The Marshal was not idle,

instead he rode to meet them with lance in han
They clashed so violently

that his lance was completely shattered
as far as his horsea€™s hocks,

but I can assure you that he was soon upright again.

The fight homed in around him;
they attacked him, and he defended.

Everything he struck was broken and split,
shields were hacked to pieces, helmets staved in.

My lord William the Marshal performed so many feats
that nobody present had the slightest idea

what had become of the King.

Afterwards, the King, those who witnessed the event,
and those who heard speak of it,

said that never before had finer blows been witnessed
from a single knight, or known of,

as those dealt by the Marshal that day.


Tne bravest amongst tnem gave mm nign praise tor tnisac;

LINK: 
<https://deremilitari.org/2014/01/historv-of-william-the-marshal-the-tournament-at-lagny-sur-marne/>


I want to connect this closely to:

William Baumol (1990): Entrepreneurship: Productive, Unproductive, and Destructive (Journal of 
Political Economy 98:5,1 (Oct.): 893-921 <https ://www.j stor.org/ stable/2937617>)

Article Baumol Entrepreneurship

3.13MB a™ PDF File
Download

Download

Kevin Murphy & al. (1991): The Allocation of Talent: Implications for Growth (Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 106:2 (May): 503 <http://nrs.harvard.edU/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:27692664>)

Article Murphy Talent
414KB F™ PDF File

Download

Download


When young Anglo-Norman William the Marshal (1146-1219), fourth son of a minor baron, in 1158 wants 
to become a young man seriously on the make, he leaves his fathera€™ s English backwater home near 
Newbury:

Peterborough


opshire
s AONB

Birmingham     M69                  Corby

M5           Coventry    Mˡ

M6            Kettering

M40

A14

A1(M)

Ely

o


Hereford

Worcester

Royal
Leamington Spa

Northampton

Milton Keynes

Bedford

Cambridge


M50                                      M40

Cheltenham

Gloucester

Luton  A1(M)

M11


AONB

Stroud o Cirencester

Oxford

o


Swindon

Chiltern
Hills AONB

Watford


Chippenham                        Reading

Bath                 owns

M25

upon Thames0 Cr%don


Trowbridge

Basinastoke

^^<S^rev Hills


Winchester

Southampton

Natural Beauty

South Downs
National Park


Dorset AONB

Weymouth

Bournemouth

o o

Poole

Portsmouth o

° Chichester

Brighton
Worthing

Eastbc

Where does he go? He heads for Tancarville, Normandy, and the high-status Norman household of 
William de Tancarville, Chamberlain of Normandy:



There he was trained to be a bully-boy, a soldier, a politician, and a professional 
athletea€”a€oefightinga€n in tournaments before spectators for ransoms and prizes, and on his way 
to becoming first a knight-errant, then a sponsored tournament-fighting retainer, then Earl of 
Pembroke jure uxoris via his arranged marriage with Isobel de Clare, finally Regent of England for 
King Henry III Plantagenet, and a€oethe best knight that ever liveda€D

<https://archive.org/details/williammarshalknOOOOpain>. Entrepreneurship, but a career of negative- 
or at best zero-sum entrepreneurship.
Back then, even (especially?) the Christmas Feasts could become episodes for zero-sum status war by 
other means:

The History Jar: Christmas with Henry II & His Sons: a€~ 1182. Eleanor of Aquitaine was not in 
attendance, having been kept a prisoner since shea€™ d sided with her three elder sons in their 
first revolt against Henry [II Plantagenet] in 1173a€!. The Young King [Henry III] had 
semi-revolted against his father by waging war with brother Richard [Coeur de Leon] over Poitou. In 
the springa€! his brother Geoffrey of Brittany would join upa€!.
William Marshall, widely accepted as the hero of the age and all round trustworthy chap on account 
of his loyalty to a succession of Plantagenets, was facing accusations of adultery with none other 
than the Young Kinga€™ s wife, Princess Margaret of France. Anda€! [Chamberlain] William de 
Tancarville was insisting on his right to wash the kinga€™ s hands.

The great and the good were summoned to Caen for the celebrations. More than a thousand knights 
attended. William Marshall took the opportunity to challenge the Young King to bring out 
Marshalla€™ s accusera€”the non-too-subtle implication being that Marshall would then proceed to 
thrash them soundly. He volunteered to fight three accusers on three successive days and if he lost 
any of the knightly bouts then he would be deemed guilty of
adultery through trial by combat.

Young Henry did not accept the challenge.


The History Jar: Christmas with Henry II & His Sons: a€~1182. Eleanor of Aquitaine was not in 
attendance, having been kept a prisoner since shea€™ d sided with her three elder sons in their 
first revolt against Henry [II Plantagenet] in 1173a€!. The Young King [Henry III] had 
semi-revolted against his father by waging war with brother Richard [Coeur de Leon] over Poitou. In 
the springa€! his brother Geoffrey of Brittany would join upa€L
William Marshall, widely accepted as the hero of the age and all round trustworthy chap on account 
of his loyalty to a succession of Plantagenets, was facing accusations of adultery with none other 
than the Young Kinga€™ s wife, Princess Margaret of France. Anda€! [Chamberlain] William de 
Tancarville was insisting on his right to wash the kinga€™ s hands.

The great and the good were summoned to Caen for the celebrations. More than a thousand knights 
attended. William Marshall took the opportunity to challenge the Young King to bring out 
Marshalla€™ s accusera€”the non-too-subtle implication being that Marshall would then proceed to 
thrash them soundly. He volunteered to fight three accusers on three successive days and if he lost 
any of the knightly bouts then he would be deemed guilty of
adultery through trial by combat.

Young Henry did not accept the challenge.

So Marshall then suggested that if no one would fight him they could cut off one of his fingers and 
then have the fight. Unsurprisingly this resulted in a stunned silence. Now, what should have 
happened is that Marshall should have been declared innocent of the crime that no one was naming on 
the spot because quite clearly his accusers werena€™ t prepared to put themselves in dangera€™ s 
way. However, the Young King didna€™ t do what
protocol required.

It should also be added that some historians believe that Marshalla€™ s biography makes much of the 
accusation because he was actually guilty of being ambitious and greedy and he was trying to make 
the adultery smear into a scandalous smokescreen for his real activities (think more along the 
lines of a€oeGame of ThronesaCD than Sir Walter Scott). Marshall announced that he was being denied 
justice. Henry II gave the knight safe conduct and
Marshall left in what can only be described as a bit of a righteous huffa€! it also gave him an 
excuse to leave his lorda€! yes, thata€™ s righta€! the same lord who was just about to rebel 
against his father.

Marshall did not rejoin the Young King until he was dying of dysentery and hea€™ d sought 
permission not only from Henry II but also Philip of France.
Make of it what you will.

Meanwhile William de Tancarville, who was a hereditary chamberlain, insisted on his hand-washing 
rights. Apparently the king was just about to have his hands washed when Tancarville pushed his way 
to the front and grabbed at the silver basin that the chamberlain was using. The person who had 
been about to wash Henrya€™ s hands kept hold of the basin and I suspect that much sloshing about 
ensued until Henry told the bloke with the basin to
hand it over to Tancarville, who then made a great show of ensuring that Henry had clean 
handsa€“ceremonially speaking of course. And then he proceeded to pocket the basin that had held 
the water for the kinga€™ s clean up, as well as the basins employed for the handwashing of the 
princes.

It turns out that the silver basins were a perk of the job, which would perhaps account for why the 
first handwasher-in-chief wasna€™ t keen on letting go of it in the first place.

Good will at the Christmas Court at Caen in 1182 seems noticeable only by its absence. By January 
the king and his sons were heartily fed up of one another and took themselves off for a spot of 
perennial Plantagenet family fisticuffsa€ “de Tancarville siding with the Young Kinga€!
LINK: <https://thehistorviar.com/tag/william-de-tancarville/>

By contrast, when young William Gates (1955-) in 1975 wants to become a young man seriously on the 
make, he leaves Harvard College for Albuquerque to write software for the Intel 8080 
microprocessor. Entrepreneurshipa€”but not negative- or even zero-sum.

Gillian Kenny has a tweetthread about William the Marshala€™ s wife, the 26-years-younger Isobel de 
Clare, suo jure Countess of Striguil & Pembroke:

Gillian Kenny: a€~Recently watched (or tried to) the 2010 Robin Hood with Russell Crowe and 
Ironclad with James Purefoy. Both films feature William Marshal (or a version of), acclaimed as the 
greatest knight of his age but... let's be honest, he couldn't have done it without his Irish wife.

Who was she? She was Isabel, daughter of Richard de Clare (Strongbow) and Aoife, the daughter of 
Diarmait MacMurrougha€”the king of Leinster who, when deposed, sought Strongbow's help to reclaim 
his power. Strongbow got hold of Leinster through her. Then William Marshal married the heiress 
Isabel around 1189 when she was a teenager and he was a LOT older. They seem to have been happy 
though, and William was aware of what he
had gained through her (so much land). There's a famous poem about him and in it he says "as we 
well know: I have no claim to anything here save through her".

Anyway, she was young, rich and tough. In 1207-08 she was in Ireland, alone and pregnant and sorted 
out a rebellion. She commanded the defence of Kilkenny castle and ordered a man to be lowered from 
the walls to alert her followers rather than give in. Then she demanded that the leading unruly 
baron submit to her and give his son as a hostage for his future good behaviour. She had also 
forced the other rebel knights of Leinster to come to terms
and surrender their children or brothers if they had none, to her. The rebels were adherents of 
King John who had detained her husband in England but Isabel's actions foiled all plans. The king 
had to impart the a€oegood and welcome newsa€D to her anxious husband of her victory in Leinster 
and her own a€oegood health and spirits".

Isabel knew how to hold a grudge too The Marshal once he was back in charge forgave the rebels and 
returned the hostages she had taken. a€oeOnce the countess was informed of this, I can tell you 
that she was not at all pleased, for they had done her many a wrong and hurt".

She wasna€™ t just about kicking rebel arse though. She is reputed to have directed the erection of 
a motte at Old Ross in Wexford. She along with the Marshal also founded the town of New Ross in 
1207 as well as lots of castles, churches and boroughs. A slab found in St. Marya€™ s Church in New 
Ross appears to have been a cenotaph made in her memory (she was buried in Tintern Abbey). Or it 
may have been a heart burial. Anyway, she liked
New Ross.

She died shortly after her husband. Her distress at his sufferings and death are described: a€oeit 
was observed that the countess could not walk without danger of coming to grief, for her heart and 
body, her head and limbs, had suffered from her exertions her weeping and her vigilsa€D.
She also had TEN children too, though, which can take a toll on a body.

And yes she was very sad but even until the end she was getting shit DONE. Arguing at court over 
her lands, travelling all over the various lands belonging to her, and just continuing to be a 
complete badass woman.
She is buried in Tintern Abbey in Wales.

A woman who embodied the cultural exchange of late twelfth- and thirteenth-century Ireland, and 
whose wealth enabled her husband to become a power player. And who seems to have been written out 
of many narratives about him
Bloody typical.

LINK:

Dr Gillian Kenny @medievalgill

Recently watched (or tried to) the 2010 Robin Hood with Russell Crowe and Ironclad with James 
Purefoy. Both films feature William Marshal (or a version of), acclaimed as the greatest knight of 
his age but... let's be honest, he couldn't have done it without his Irish wife>
9:02 PM r™ Feb 22,2022

82Likes23Retweets


Anyway, she was young, rich and tough. In 1207-08 she was in Ireland, alone and pregnant and sorted 
out a rebellion. She commanded the defence of Kilkenny castle and ordered a man to be lowered from 
the walls to alert her followers rather than give in. Then she demanded that the leading unruly 
baron submit to her and give his son as a hostage for his future good behaviour. She had also 
forced the other rebel knights of Leinster to come to terms
and surrender their children or brothers if they had none, to her. The rebels were adherents of 
King John who had detained her husband in England but Isabel's actions foiled all plans. The king 
had to impart the a€oegood and welcome newsa€D to her anxious husband of her victory in Leinster 
and her own a€oegood health and spirits".

Isabel knew how to hold a grudge too The Marshal once he was back in charge forgave the rebels and 
returned the hostages she had taken. a€ceOnce the countess was informed of this, I can tell you 
that she was not at all pleased, for they had done her many a wrong and hurt".

She wasna€™ t just about kicking rebel arse though. She is reputed to have directed the erection of 
a motte at Old Ross in Wexford. She along with the Marshal also founded the town of New Ross in 
1207 as well as lots of castles, churches and boroughs. A slab found in St. Marya€™ s Church in New 
Ross appears to have been a cenotaph made in her memory (she was buried in Tintern Abbey). Or it 
may have been a heart burial. Anyway, she liked
New Ross.

She died shortly after her husband. Her distress at his sufferings and death are described: a€oeit 
was observed that the countess could not walk without danger of coming to grief, for her heart and 
body, her head and limbs, had suffered from her exertions her weeping and her vigilsa€D.
She also had TEN children too, though, which can take a toll on a body.

And yes she was very sad but even until the end she was getting shit DONE. Arguing at court over 
her lands, travelling all over the various lands belonging to her, and just continuing to be a 
complete badass woman.
She is buried in Tintern Abbey in Wales.

A woman who embodied the cultural exchange of late twelfth- and thirteenth-century Ireland, and 
whose wealth enabled her husband to become a power player. And who seems to have been written out 
of many narratives about him
Bloody typical.

LINK:

Dr Gillian Kenny @medievalgill

Recently watched (or tried to) the 2010 Robin Hood with Russell Crowe and Ironclad with James 
Purefoy. Both films feature William Marshal (or a version of), acclaimed as the greatest knight of 
his age but... let's be honest, he couldn't have done it without his Irish wife>
9:02 PM r™ Feb 22,2022

82Likes23Retweets

