Subscribe now

FIRST: Two Further Comments on Adam Toozea€™s Review of My a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia"

In which I make two further comments on Adam Toozea€™ s review of my Slouching <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>:

Adam Tooze: Fueling Americaa€™ s Global Dream: a€~The US is clearly the centre of [DeLonga€™ s] 
world. The Great Depression, postwar social
democracy, the race question, the history of technology, are all addressed from an American point 
of viewa€!.

For DeLong the long era of American dominance was concluded in the decade after 2008, a period 
characterised by secular stagnation and the ascent of
Donald Trump. One can see why this combination was traumatic for veterans of the 1990s-era Clinton 
administration. But, as a world historic caesura, it is
something of an anticlimax. Does the shock of Hillary Clintona€™ s 2016 defeat really rank 
alongside the fall of the Soviet Union or the rise of China? Or
is   the relative banality of that moment, the confirmation of the bigger point, that for all its 
monumental self-obsession the American narrative is losing its
ability to organise our understanding of the world?a€!

1/Well, yes.

Being the furnace where the future was being forged from circa 1870 up until circa 2010, and being 
the worlda€™ s hyperpower and hegemon from 1945 to 2005, will get you a
lot.

Views from Moscow or London or Paris or Delhi or Mombasa are very interesting, but you do see more 
from the perspective of Washington and New Yorka€”albeit from a point of
view that is, in many ways, very peculiar indeed. In fact, I would say that the failure of 
Hobsbawma€™ s Age of Extremes to take a properly Americanocentric point-of-view is (one
of the things that is) crippling to the booka€™ s ability to tell the history as it really 
happened. Ars longa; vita brevis. I believe the Americanocentric point-of-view allows us to
come closer to doing our proper job than any other.

2/1 think Adam has misread me here. I do not say that the long 20th century came to an end in 2016, 
with Hillary Rodham Clintona€™ s defeat. I say it had ended by 2010, as
various pieces of the pattern of previous history had fallen away in 1990,1993,2001,2005,2010, and 
so forth. 2016 marked the end of any hopes for revivification and
resurrection. The end of a funeral is not the moment of death.

Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.
Share

One Image:

Image not found

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Subscribe now


