CONDITION: An Unsuccessful Attempt to Bid on the FT Alphaville FTX NFP:

I did not get very far! I could not link OpenSea to Coinbase to my bank because Coinbase detected a 
name mismatch. Missing middle initial? Joint account? InterCapitalization failure? No time to sort 
it out!

Bryce Elder: The FTX investorsa€™ tombstoNFT: a€~Get it while ita€™ s non-fungible: Exclusive to FT 
Alphaville, we are delighted to reveal a digital tombstone in commemoration of those who ii    
their own and other peoplea€™ s money in collapsed crypto exchange FTX:

TEMASEK PARADIGM

ONTARIO TEACHERS PENSION PLAN

NEA   IZZY   ENGLANDER   IVP

SOFTBANK   VISION   FUND   2
LIGHTSPEED VENTURE PARTNERS
STEADV1EW CAPITAL SEA CAPITAL
INSIGHT PARTNERS IQONIO GROWTH
RIBBAT  CAPITAL  THOMA  BRAVO

SEQUOIA     CAPITAL

BLACKROCK  PRIVATE  EQUITY
THIRD    POINT    LUX    CAPITAL
BOND   CAPITAL   MANAGEMENT

COINBASE  VENTURES  40  NORTH

WILLOUGHBY  CAPITAL  ALTIMETER
MULTICOIN   CAPITAL   MANAGEMENT

TIGER                         GLOBAL

HUDSON     RIVER     TRADING

T„E  PAUL  TUDOR  JONES  EAMI^

AM      HOWARD     CIRCLE
HsiwTOWL VENTURE PARTNERS


-      Mihtdd 111 Virtual plastid 1UU pSf 661W BldCRCnain, mis precious KeepsaKe oners etdiW 
fdftteittbiWS 16 Cfyptdafe1™ § Biggest SCAtkiai oi me year so rar. iNames n records have 66611 
CateTUliy hatM-§616Ct6d by artisan paralegals rrom puonc documents including r 1 Aate*™ S senes B, 
Bl ana CTunamg rouna announcements.

The FTX bagholder tombstoNFT is a strictly limited edition of one. Bidding on OpenSea is now open, 
with all proceeds donated to preferred equity holders on a first-come-first-served basis (and 
contingent on telling us about your due diligence process).
Dona€™ t miss what might (but probably wona€™ t) be your only chance to grab a memento to 
monumental fiduciary negligence that surely will become a treasured family heirloom unless the 
image server goes offline, in which case sorry but no refundsa€!

Alas! I tried!

Subscribe now

FOCUS: Ten More Days to Decide What I Should Say at My Stone Lecture:

Stone Center Lecture

JLOUCHING 1

TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. Bradford DeLong


The Annual Stone Lecture: Slouching Towards Utopia: Join us for the annual Stone Lecture, featuring 
economist J. Bradford DeLong

Tue, November 29,2022,5:10 PM a€“ 6:30 PM PST

Around 1870 came a great shift: invention sprinted forward, doubling our technological capabilities 
each generation, utterly transforming the economy again and again. The possibility of being able in 
the not-too-distant future of baking a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to someday have 
enough came into view. Surely then we would be able to shift governance and politics so that we 
could collectively build a utopia? Surely it was the baking of the
sufficiently large economic pie that was the large problem. Surely the slicing and tasting the 
piea€’’equitably distributing humanitya€™ s immense technology-enabled wealth, and utilizing it so 
that people felt safe and secure and were healthy and happya€”were second-order, more-easily-solved 
problems?

Ji^oin us for a talk by Berkeley Economics Professor Brad DeLong, followed by audience Q&A. The 
event will be followed by a reception. Live-streaming available as well.
Ti»^his event is sponsored by The James M. and Cathleen D. Stone Center on Wealth and Income 
Inequality at UC Berkeley.

So What Should I Say?

Perhaps:

• Before 1870, the Devil of Malthus, ensorcelled humanity, via its spells of poverty and 
patriarchya€!

• Hence, there was no possibility that humanity could bake a sufficiently large economic pie for 
everyone to have enoughd^\

•  Therefore, if you were to have enough, you had to find some way to join an A©lite group that 
would elbow other potential elite groups out of the way and then run some 
domination-and-exploitation schemea€!

• Thugs with spears, and later gunpowder weapons, together with their team bureaucrats, 
accountants, and propagandists^!

•  Holding the A©lite together, and helping the A©lite continue its domination-and-exploitation 
scheme by adding some fraud to the force, required communication and coordination^!

•  Hence it is not at all surprising that back before 1870 the ruling ideas are the ideas of the 
ruling class, or, rather, primarily ideas that are useful to the ruling classa€!

•  Which means that back before 1870 the ruling ideas had a very strong tendency to say that gross 
in a quality was right, good, natural, justified, and even faira€!

• But 1870 broke the spell of the Devil of Malthusa€!

• After 1870, governancee and politics could be something else than elite competition to run and 
then maintain the domination-and-exploitation schemea€!

• But the ideas and practices of all dead generations weigh like an Alp on the brains of the 
livinga€!

So that would be the first 15 minutes. What should I say after that?
Share

One Video:

Danny Quah: The Liberalisation Delusion
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

World          Dtwdtv Map


KOLAI MJDCM

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: 40,000 Words on Crypto:

Matt Levine: The Crypto Story: Where it came from, what it all means, and why it still mattersa€!
Leave a comment

O A34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• David Glasner: Franklin Fisher on the Disequilibrium Foundations of Economics and the Stability 
of General Equilibium...

• Linda Kinstler: The good delusion: has effective altruism broken bad?a€!

• Paris Marx: Elon Muska€™ s useful philosophera€!

•  Alexander M. Dietrich: Consumption Categories, Household Attention, and Inflation Expectations: 
Implications for Optimal Monetary Policy: a€~While forming inflation expectations, households pay 
attention to the volatile non-core componentsa€! [so]targeting headline inflation is optimala€!

•  Neville Morley: The Roman Thing: 'The History of Ancient Rome, Definitively De-Woked; free from 
excessive emphasis on imperialism, colonialism and class strugglea€!

•  Veronica Aoki Santarosa: Long-Distance Trade without Banks : The Joint Liability Rule and Bills 
of Exchange in 18 th-century France: a€~A particular seventeenth century legal innovation, the 
joint liability rule, enabled the medieval bill of exchange to become the dominant means of payment 
and credit in the early modern period, thus supporting an unparalleled expansiona€!

•  David Graham: Trumpa€™ s Future Isna€™ t Up to Fox News: a€~A unified conservative-media front 
might have provided Senate Republicans the bulwark they needed to vote to convict Trump in an 
impeachment trial and prevent him from running again. Instead, the moment passed and many of the 
players blinked, reopening their eyes to a Trump still in control of the partya€!. Stopping Trump 
is arguably more difficult now...

• Edward Luce: The caging of Americaa€™ s Kraken: a€~Trump is the gift to Democrats that keeps on 
givinga€!

• Nouriel Roubini: a€~There is no diff btw FTXa€™ s FTT & Binancea€™ s BNB: they are both vaporware 
scams backed by NOTHING! As the former collapsed to 0 in days the same should happen to the latter. 
How much of BNB is float vs. held by Binance? How much of @binance assets/liabilities are BNB?No 1 
knows!a€!
Give a gift subscription


Tara Henley: Of Boys and Men: 'My conversation with Brookings fellow and author Richard V. Reeves: 
ThereaC™ s a group of people in our society who are in deep trouble. They lag behind in education 
and employment a€” and disproportionately die of suicides and overdoses. Who am I talking about? 
Ia€™ m talking about boys and men. My guest on the podcast today says that while this issue has 
long been taboo, ita€™ s time for a conversation about it,
as its impacts are felt all around us...

Matt Yglesias: Some thoughts on the FTX collapse: 'ita€™ s also hard not to just generally feel 
worse about the a€oeEA communitya€n as a set of social institutions.... I gave money to GiveWella€™ 
s Top Charities Fund for years before I ever attended my first EA conference. And... afterward I 
felt more confident that I would keep donating to Give Well than that I would ever go to another EA 
conference. Knowing now what I know, I feel even more strongly
about that. If two weeks ago you found the whole scene to be obnoxious and weird and suffused with 
an odd mix of arrogance and credulity, recent events have tended to vindicate that.  There are 
still lots of people working on lots of important causes, there are lots of causes that could use 
money, and there are even job opportunities available to help identify and evaluate scalable, 
cost-effective ways to help. I can only hope that one companya€™ s catastrophic

misdeeds dona€™t completely derail this work...

Diane Coyle: The 2022 Enlightened Economist Prize - longlist: 'Free Market: The History of an Idea 
by Jacob Soil (my review). The New Goliaths by James Bessen (my review). Cloud Empires by Vili 
Lehrdonvirta (my review). Jan Tinbergen by Erwin Dekker (my review). Slouching Towards Utopia by 
Brad DeLong (my review). The Journey of Humanity by Oded Galor (my review). The Vaccine by Joe 
Miller (my review). Money Men by Dan McCrum (no
review a€“ it reads like a thriller, excellent read). Restarting the Future by Jonathan Haskel & 
Stian Westlake (my review). The Money Minders by Jagjit Chadha...

Scott Aaronson: Sneerers: In the past few weeks, Ia€™ ve learned two ways to think about online 
sneerersa€!. First, theya€™ re like a train in a movie thata€™ s barreling directly towards the 
camera. If you havenaC™ t yet internalized how the medium works, absolutely terrifying! Run from 
the theater! If you have internalized it, though, you can sit and watch without even flinching. 
Second, the sneerers are like alligatorsa€”and about as likely to be moved
by                                                                                                  
                                                                                                    
          your appeals to reason and empathya€!. Youa€™re standing on a bridge high above, looking 
down at the gators as they snap their jaws at you uselessly. ThereaC™ s really no moral or 
intellectual obligation to go down to the swamp to wrestle them. If they mean to attack you, let 
them at least come up to the bridgea€!

Isaac Chotiner: John Mearsheimer on Putina€™ s Ambitions After Nine Months of War: a€~The realist 
political scientist explains why Russiaa€™ s move to annex four Ukrainian provinces isna€™t 
imperialism^!. Mearsheimer: It is clear to me that Putin was not lying. Chotiner: What is it about 
your study of leaders and lying that makes you think Putin was not lying? Mearsheimer: Well, first 
of all, leaders dona€™t lie to each other very oftena€!.
Therea€™s just simply no other case that even comes close to any leader lying time after time for 
purposes of fooling the other side. Chotiner: Would Munich be an example of a leader lying? 
Mearsheimer: Munich was a single case. I mean, therea€™s no question that Hitler lied at Munich, 
and one can point to one or two other instances where Hitler lied. Chotiner: Maybe more than one or 
twoa€!

Branko Milano vic: Reframing the world: a€~A challenge that China has had in influencing the 
economic organization of the rest of the worlda€! [is its] inability to formulatea€! principles 
that should guide other societiesa€!. In the political arena, the problem is perhaps even 
gravera€!. The Chinese modela€! [of a] good political systema€! [is] a well-educated, knowledgeable 
and non-corrupt elite, selected in a reasonable equitable manneraCI make[s]
important political decisionsa€!. In Singapore and ChinaaCI successful, [but] it is difficult to 
see how it could be transplanted elsewhere. Even the most extractive and self-interested elite will 
claim to be knowledgeable and non-corrupt. The advantage of the Western democratic model is 
precisely its focus, not on the ultimate result (a€oegood governancea€d) but on the processa€!. 
That system does not guarantee a good government, or a a€cecleana€C
government, does not protect against nationalism, populism or nationalization of property. But it 
places its faith in the common sense or ability of people to learn from their mistakes, so that 
ultimately they will tend to choose good and reasonably competent governments to lead thema€!

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

