Subscribe now

I have always found it very interesting how quickly John Stuart Mill turns here toward child 
licenses and state control of human fertility rather than to what policies would channel human 
energies toward a€cefurther improvementsa€l in the productive artsa€!a€D Friedrich Engels, at 
least, seems to have his head much more pointed in the right direction, in this respect
at leasta€oe. And do not fail to note Milla€™ s judgment that working-class life in his day is one 
of a€Ddrudgery and imprisonmenta€D. That puts him firmly in the camp of a€Dpositive liberty", 
strongly opposed to that of Isaiah Berlin:

Share

Panel B.The Partial Effect of Land Productivity on Income per Capita in 1500 CE

2 -

• Africa ♦ Europe ■ Asia △ Oceania o Americas

ITA

0

GAC


-2 -

-2                                0                               2

Log land productivity

John Stuart Mill: Of the Stationary State: a€~THE preceding chapters comprise the general theory of 
the economical progress of society, in the sense in which those terms are commonly understood; the 
progress of capital, of population, and of the productive arts. But in contemplating any 
progressive movement, not in its nature unlimited, the mind is not satisfied with
merely tracing the laws of the movement; it cannot but ask the further question, to what goal? 
Towards what ultimate point is society tending by its industrial progress? When the progress 
ceases, in what condition are we to expect that it will leave mankind?

It must always have been seen, more or less distinctly, by political economists, that the increase 
of wealth is not boundless: that at the end of what they term the progressive state lies the 
stationary state, that all progress in wealth is but a postponement of this, and that each step in 
advance is an approach to it. We have now been led to recognise that this ultimate goal is at
all times near enough to be fully in view; that we are always on the verge of it, and that if we 
have not reached it long ago, it is because the goal itself flies before us. The richest and most 
prosperous countries would very soon attain the stationary state, if no further improvements were 
made in the productive arts, and if there were a suspension of the overflow of capital
from those countries into the uncultivated or ill-cultivated regions of the earth.

This impossibility of ultimately avoiding the stationary statea€”this irresistible necessity that 
the stream of human industry should finally spread itself out into an apparently stagnant 
seaa€”must have been, to the political economists of the last two generations, an unpleasing and 
discouraging prospect; for the tone and tendency of their speculations goes completely to
identify all that is economically desirable with the progressive state, and with that alone. With 
Mr. McCulloch, for example, prosperity does not mean a large production and a good distribution of 
wealth, but a rapid increase of it; his test of prosperity is high profits; and as the tendency of 
that very increase of wealth, which he calls prosperity, is towards low profits,
economical progress, according to him, must tend to the extinction of prosperity.

Adam Smith always assumes that the condition of the mass of the people, though it may not be 
positively distressed, must be pinched and stinted in a stationary condition of wealth, and can 
only be satisfactory in a progressive state. The doctrine that, to however distant a time incessant 
struggling may put off our doom, the progress of society must a€oeend in shallows
and in miseries,a€U far from being, as many people still believe, a wicked invention of Mr. 
Malthus, was either expressly or tacitly affirmed by his most distinguished predecessors, and can 
only be successfully combated on his principles. Before attention had been directed to the 
principle of population as the active force in determining the remuneration of labour, the
increase of mankind was virtually treated as a constant quantity: it was, at all events, assumed 
that in the natural and normal state of human affairs population must constantly increase, from 
which it followed that a constant increase of the means of support was essential to the physical 
comfort of the mass of mankind.The publication of Mr.Malthusa€™  Essay isthe era
from which better views of this subject must be dated; and notwithstanding the acknowledged errors 
of his first edition, few writers have done more than himself, in the subsequent editions, to 
promote these juster and more hopeful anticipations.

Even in a progressive state of capital, in old countries, a conscientious or prudential restraint 
on population is indispensable, to prevent the increase of numbers from outstripping the increase 
of capital, and the condition of the classes who are at the bottom of society from being 
deteriorated. Where there is not, in the people, or in some very large proportion of them, a
resolute resistance to this deterioration^”a determination to preserve an established standard of 
comforta€”the condition of the poorest class sinks, even in a progressive state, to the lowest 
point which they will consent to endure. The same determination would be equally effectual to keep 
up their condition in the stationary state, and would be quite as likely to exist.

Indeed, even now, the countries in which the greatest prudence is manifested in the regulating of 
population, are often those in which capital increases least rapidly. Where there is an indefinite 
prospect of employment for increased numbers, there is apt toappear less necessity for 
prudentialrestraint. If it were evident that a new hand could not obtain employmentbut by
displacing, or succeeding to, one already employed, the combined influences of prudence and public 
opinion might in some measure be relied on for restricting the coming generation within the numbers 
necessary for replacing the present.

I cannot, therefore, regard the stationary state of capital and wealth with the unaffected aversion 
so generally manifested towards it by political economists of the old school. I am inclined to 
believe that it would be, on the whole, a very considerable improvement on our present condition. I 
confess I am not charmed with the ideal of life held out by those who think that
the normal state of human beings is that of struggling to get on; that the trampling, crushing, 
elbowing, and treading on each othera€™ s heels, which form the existing type of social life, are 
the most desirable lot of human kind, or anything but the disagreeable symptoms of one of the 
phases of industrial progress. It may be a necessary stage in the progress of
civilization, and those European nations which have hitherto been so fortunate as to be preserved 
from it, may have it yet to undergo. It is an incident of growth, not a mark of decline, for it is 
not necessarily destructive of the higher aspirations and the heroic virtues; as America, in her 
great civil war, is proving to the world, both by her conduct as a people and by
numerous splendid individual examples, and as England, it is to be hoped, would also prove on an 
equally trying and exciting occasion. But it is not a kind of social perfection which 
philanthropists to come will feel any very eager desire to assist in realizing. Most fitting, 
indeed, is it, that while riches are power, and to grow as rich as possible the universal object of
ambition, the path to its attainment should be open to all, without favour or partiality. But the 
best state for human nature is that in which, while no one is poor, no one desires to be richer, 
nor has any reason to fear being thrust back, by the efforts of others to push themselves forward.

That the energies of mankind should be kept in employment by the struggle for riches, as they were 
formerly by the struggle of war, until the better minds succeed in educating the others into better 
things, is undoubtedly more desirable than that they should rust and stagnate. While minds are 
coarse they require coarse stimuli, and let them have them. In the meantime,
those who do not accept the present very early stage of human improvement as its ultimate type, may 
be excused for being comparatively indifferent to the kind of economical progress which excites the 
congratulations of ordinary politicians; the mere increase of production and accumulation. For the 
safety of national independence it is essential that a country should
not fall much behind its neighbours in these things. But in themselves they are of little 
importance, so long as either the increase of population or anything else prevents the mass of the 
people from reaping any part of the benefit of them.

I know not why it should be matter of congratulation that persons who are already richer than any 
one needs to be, should have doubled their means of a consuming things which give little or no 
pleasure except as representative of wealth; or that numbers of individuals should pass over, every 
year, from the middle classes into a richer class, or from the class of the
occupied rich to that of the unoccupied. It is only in the backward countries of the world that 
increased production is still an important object: in those most advanced, what is economically 
needed is a better distribution, of which one indispensable means is a stricter restraint on 
population. Levelling institutions, either of a just or of an unjust kind, cannot alone
accomplish it; they may lower the heights of society, but they cannot, of themselves, permanently 
raise the depths.

On the other hand, we may suppose this better distribution of property attained, by the joint 
effect of the prudence and frugality of individuals, and of a system of legislation favouring 
equality of fortunes, so far as is consistent with the just claim of the individual to the fruits, 
whether great or small, of his or her own industry. We may suppose, for instance, (according to
the suggestion thrown out in a former chapter) a limitation of the sum which anyone person may 
acquire by gift or inheritance, to the amount sufficient to constitute a moderate independence. 
Under this twofold influence, society would exhibit these leading features: a well-paid and 
affluent body of labourers; no enormous fortunes, except what were earned and
accumulated during a single lifetime; but a much larger body of persons than at present, not only 
exempt from the coarser toils, but with sufficient leisure, both physical and mental, from 
mechanical details, to cultivate freely the graces of life, and afford examples of them to the 
classes less favourably circumstanced for their growth. This condition of society, so greatly
preferable to the present, is not only perfectly compatible with the stationary state, but, it 
would seem, more naturally allied with that state than with any other.

There is room in the world, no doubt, and even in old countries, for a great increase of 
population, supposing the arts of life to go on improving, and capital to increase. But even if 
innocuous, I confess I see very little reason for desiring it. The density of population necessary 
to enable mankind to obtain, in the greatest degree, all the advantages both of co-operation and
of social intercourse, has, in all the most populous countries, been attained. A population may be 
too crowded, though all be amply supplied with food and raiment. It is not good for man to be kept 
perforce at all times in the presence of his species. A world from which solitude is extirpated, is 
a very poor ideal. Solitude, in the sense of being often alone, is essential to
any depth of meditation or of character; and solitude in the presence of natural beauty and 
grandeur, is the cradle of thoughts and aspirations which are not only good for the individual, but 
which society could ill do without.

Nor is there much satisfaction in contemplating the world with nothing left to the spontaneous 
activity of nature; with every rood of land brought into cultivation, which is capable of growing 
food for human beings; every flowery waste or natural pasture ploughed up, all quadrupeds or birds 
which are not domesticated for mana€™ s use exterminated as his rivals for
food, every hedgerow or superfluous tree rooted out, and scarcely a place left where a wild shrub 
or flower could grow without being eradicated as a weed in the name of improved agriculture. If the 
earth must lose that great portion of its pleasantness which it owes to things that the unlimited 
increase of wealth and population would extirpate from it, for the mere
purpose of enabling it to support a larger, but not a better or a happier population, I sincerely 
hope, for the sake of posterity, that they will be content to be stationary, long before necessity 
compel them to it.

It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition of capital and population implies no 
stationary state of human improvement. There would be as much scope as ever for all kinds of mental 
culture, and moral and social progress; as much room for improving the Art of Living, and much more 
likelihood of its being improved, when minds ceased to be
engrossed by the art of getting on. Even the industrial arts might be as earnestly and as 
successfully cultivated, with this sole difference, that instead of serving no purpose but the 
increase of wealth, industrial improvements would produce their legitimate effect, that of 
abridging labour.

Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the daya€™ s 
toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery 
and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and others to make fortunes. They have 
increased the comforts of the middle classes. But they have not yet
begun to effect those great changes in human destiny, which it is in their nature and in their 
futurity to accomplish. Only when, in addition to just institutions, the increase of mankind shall 
be under the deliberate guidance of judicious foresight, can the conquests made from the powers of 
nature by the intellect and energy of scientific discoverers, become the common
property of the species, and the means of improving and elevating the universal lot.

LINK: <http://www.panarchv.org/mill/stationary.1848 ,html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€ I weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


It is scarcely necessary to remark that a stationary condition of capital and population implies no 
stationary state of human improvement. There would be as much scope as ever for all kinds of mental 
culture, and moral and social progress; as much room for improving the Art of Living, and much more 
likelihood of its being improved, when minds ceased to be
engrossed by the art of getting on. Even the industrial arts might be as earnestly and as 
successfully cultivated, with this sole difference, that instead of serving no purpose but the 
increase of wealth, industrial improvements would produce their legitimate effect, that of 
abridging labour.

Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the daya€™ s 
toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery 
and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and others to make fortunes. They have 
increased the comforts of the middle classes. But they have not yet
begun to effect those great changes in human destiny, which it is in their nature and in their 
futurity to accomplish. Only when, in addition to just institutions, the increase of mankind shall 
be under the deliberate guidance of judicious foresight, can the conquests made from the powers of 
nature by the intellect and energy of scientific discoverers, become the common
property of the species, and the means of improving and elevating the universal lot.

LINK: <http://www.panarchy.org/mill/stationary.1848 ,html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

