Subscribe now

Michael DeLong: My Condo Search Illustrates the Struggle of Home Buying in Montgomery County. 
a€~Homeownership is closely linked to the American Dreama€”most individuals and families aspire to 
own a place that they can call their own and pass on to their children. However, homeownership is 
becoming increasingly difficult in Montgomery County for a
variety of reasons. My experience becoming a condominium owner earlier this year illustrates 
several of those problems.

I first moved to Montgomery County in late 2015, and quickly liked the county for its 
neighborhoods, active civic and political fife, parks, forests, and streams, and excellent shops 
and restaurants. I became involved in local politics and joined the Montgomery County Young 
Democrats, eventually becoming President. And over the last several years, the county felt
more and more like home and I eventually decided to purchase a house here.

But this was much easier said than done. I quickly realized that while having a respectable income 
of $74,000 per year, I could not afford a single family home or even most townhouses. Since I work 
in D.C., like walkable neighborhoods with some green space, as well as access to stores, 
restaurants, and entertainment, I was searching for a place in or around
downtown Silver Spring. Since it was just myself, I thought it would be easy enough to find a small 
condominium in a location that checked these boxes.

To my surprise, I found there were very few condos in downtown Silver Spring and that the ones 
available were either extremely small or extremely expensive a€” sometimes both.

Over a couple of months I looked at a number of places; one was a bedroom and den apartment about 
640 square feet that was tempting but way too expensive at $379,000. A couple of other condominiums 
were old and poorly maintained. The most egregious place I viewed had a perfect location just up 
the hill from the Silver Spring Metro but it was only 460 square
feet and practically a studio apartment. The asking price? $260,000. A couple of larger 
condominiums came on the market, but they were over $500,000a€”significantly above my approved loan 
amount.

After searching fruitlessly, I realized I had to broaden my search. Eventually I found a 
condominium in a multifamily building about a mile to the west downtown that had substantial space 
and was in a delightful area. I had to pay almost $20,000 above the list price to beat out other 
offers. I love my new neighborhood, but there arena€™ t many buildings like mine
with prices that are attainable to middle-income residents like me.

I am a young professional with a good income who wants to live in a diverse, walkable, urban area, 
but was priced out of downtown Silver Spring due to expensive housing and a lack of options. 
Ultimately, my situation worked out, but I can only imagine how people with lower incomes are 
faring.

Fortunately, Thrive 2050, an update to the countya€™ s general plan, outlines strategies to support 
homeownership. It recognizes that in order to accommodate people like me, we need to build more 
housing in central areas and along public transit corridorsa€’’including single family homes, 
townhouses, apartments, and condominiums.
I urge people to embrace Thrivea€™ s vision for more people like me to live in this great county 
that has provided me with so many opportunities. While there can always be improvements, I urge the 
County Council to approve this plan that will make housing more affordable and benefit so many 
people.

My experience purchasing an affordable home in Montgomery County was a difficult one. Implementing 
Thrive Montgomery would make it easier for future residents..
LINK: 
<https://bethesdamagazine.com/bethesda-beat/opinion/opinion-my-condo-search-illustrates-the-struggle
-of-home-buying-in-montgomery-county/>

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

