Subscribe now

1. Thinking: Why would one want to think (or not think) a€oelike an economista€D? What benefits 
(and what costs) would doing so bring?

2. Course Organization: What do you think is likely to go wrong with this course structure, as we 
have outlined it so far?

3. Malthusian Economies: What are the key requirements for a society to get stuck in a Malthusian 
configuration?

4. Malthusian Economies II: How reliable is our inference that the typical human back before 1900 
was desperately poora€”had a standard of living that we would see
as about $2.50/day?

5. a€oeEfflorescencesa€D: Do you think the typical person was better off living in an 
a€ceefflorescenta€D society like the Roman Empire under the Antonine Dynasty
or in classical Athens, or in some non-efflorescent time?

6. The Slow Agrarian-Age Pace of Invention: Which proposed explanations of the very slow pace of 
invention and innovation back before 1500 did you find most
convincing, and why?

7. Inventive Ancients: Is there a good way to reconcile the belief that slavery meant that work and 
ingenuity were scorned with the artisanal creativity and care shown in,
for example the Anti-Kythera device? (cf.: Jo Marchand, Marcus Tullius Cicero, Mogi Vicentini, & 
Michael Wright: The Anti-Kythera Device

<https://www.icloud.com/pages/0oi9x6SqEHmpYIfDjc bBsNkw> 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/antikythera.pdf>

8. Modes of Domination: What were the typical patterns of social organization back before 1870 by 
which upper classes extracted enough wealth to become leisured and
well-nourished, and then how did upper classes maintain those patterns?

9. Aristotle: Was it worthwhile to assign the first scroll of Aristotlea€™ s Politics? Does he have 
anything useful to say to us?

10. Growth Theory: What underpins the theoretical conclusion reached this week that ideas and 
invention are much more important than thrift and capital accumulation in
driving economic growth? To what extent is this theoretical conclusion solid and reliable? Do you 
think it is correct?

11. William Baumol & Michael Polanyi: What struck you as important things in the Michael Polanyi 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-
files/blob/master/readings/michael-polanvi-republic-growth.pdf> or in the William Baumol 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/article-
baumol-entrepreneurship.pdf>        readings that were not mentioned by Professor DeLong in the 
lectures?

12. Breaking Through: Greg Clark wants to draw big & bold conclusions from the numbers he has 
collected on English construction worker wages. How solid are those
big & bold conclusions? How could we investigate whether they are correct or not?

13. Strait Is the Gate: How near run a thing does your leading of Allen lead you to think that the 
industrial revolution was? If we could rewind history, what do you think
the chances are that human civilization today, in 2021, would be industrial, rather than in some 
near-stagnation agrarian-age or commercial-imperial gunpowder empire
configuration?

14. The Slow Spread of Industrialization: Which of the reasons that Robert Allen adduces for the 
slow and partial spread of industrialization do you find most
convincing? Which do you find least?

15. Why Not China First, Anyway?: Which of the reasons that David Landes adduces as an important 
reason why the industrial revolution took place in Northwest
Europe rather than Southern China do you find most persuasive? Which do you find least?

16. The a€oeRise of the Westa€D: Starting in 1770, the economies of the "Global North" began to 
pull substantially ahead of the world average. Starting in 1870, the
speed of this pulling-ahead grew substantially. How can we understand the coexistence of (a) a 
world in which humans communicate, and in which ideas are the most
important pieces of economic growth, and (b) the substantial growth of global inequality after 
1870?

17. Globalization and Divergence: Starting around 1870, the world became fully globalized. Instead 
of taking months to communicate, it took hours. Goods could be
shipped all around the globe for pennies. One would have thought this would make the transfer of 
useful technologies and effective institutions easier. So why do you
think Pritchett found the facts of economic divergence that he did?

18. Hopes for Convergence?: Are there any good reasons to hope that 2020-2100 will see more in the 
way of a€oeconvergencea€D than 1870-2020 has?

19. Net Impact of Globalization and Colonialism: To what extent do you see the global south today 
ahead or behind of where it would otherwise have wound up now as
a result of colonialism and globalization? How would you go about assessing whether your 
interpretation is in fact the right one?

20. W. Arthur Lewis: Evolution of the International Economic Order 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/book-lewis-evolution-

selections .pdf>: How would we go about finding out whether Arthur Lewis is right in his belief 
that over 1870-1914 the world was divided into rich and poor countries
by the workings of the global market and by migration, rather than by the more direct consequences 
of imperialist rule?

21. Modern Economic Growth: DeLong has a theory for why the last watershed-boundary crossinga€”the 
acceleration of ideas growth around 1870a€”took place.
Suppose that DeLong is wrong. What is your guess as to what other historical factors and causes 
would have been most likely to cause that watershed-crossing?

22. a€oeAll established orders and institutions are steamed awya€U: What do you think were the most 
important consequences for the world, outside of the narrowly
economic ones, of the fact that the world average ideas-growth rate after 1870 was not 0.035%/year 
or 0.15% or even 0.44%, but instead 2.06%/year?

23. International Economic (and Political) Hegemony: To start off the discussion of "hegemony", 
what lessons should the U.S. learn to guide its conduct today from
Britain's experience of the superpower succession of itself by the U.S. a century and more ago? And 
what lessons should China's government learn to guide its conduct
today from America's experience of rising to superpower status a century and more ago?

24. American Exceptionalism: Brainstorm some ideas about why even the most technologically 
competent other economies had great difficulty in matching
Americaa€™ s productivity performance in the 1870-1916 era of American hegemony. Speculate on how 
you might test and evaluate some of your ideas.

25. Thirty Glorious Years: Lots of hypotheses have been thrown out for why the Post-WWII "glorious 
years" in the global north were so peaceful, harmonious, and
prosperous. What pieces of evidence should we go look for to try to judge between these hypotheses?

26. Conflict Between Systems: Back in 1990 or so, at the end of the Cold War, Frank Fukuyama wrote 
<https ://github.com/braddelong/public-
files/blob/master/readings/article-fukuvama-1989-end-of-history.pdf>: a€oeln the past century, 
there have been two major challenges to liberalism, those of fascism and
of                  communism. Fascism was destroyed as a living ideology by World War II. This was 
a defeat, of course, on a very material level, but it amounted to a defeat of the

idea as well. What destroyed fascism as an idea was not universal moral revulsion against it, since 
plenty of people were willing to endorse the idea as long as it seemed
the wave of the future, but its lack of success. After the war, it seemed to most people that 
German fascism as well as its other European and Asian variants were bound
to self-destruct. There was no material reason why new fascist movements could not have sprung up 
again after the war in other locales, but for the fact that
expansionist ultranationalism, with its promise of unending conflict leading to disastrous military 
defeat, had completely lost its appeal. The ruins of the Reich
chancellery    as well as the atomic bombs dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki killed this ideology 
on the level of consciousness as well as materially, and all of the pro­
fascist movements spawned by the German and Japanese examples like the Peronist movement in 
Argentina or Subhas Chandra Bose's Indian National Army withered
after the wara€!a€D How does this position need to be revised in light of all the history that has 
flowed under the bridge since 1990?

27. Moral Burdens for Economic Development: What responsibility does the history of the development 
of underdevelopment impose upon the rich of the global north
with respect to attempting to eliminate dire poverty and accelerate uneven and halting development 
in the global south?

28. Decline of Hierarchy: For much of human history, putting up barriers that keep opportunity and 
status in the hands of a small group has been much more the rule than

the exception. Why is it that in the 20th century there has been a broad movement for "inclusion"? 
What is different about the long 20th century that drives this very
different sociological current than we ever saw before in the human nast? Or are the sociological 
currents differenta€”is hierarchv based on ethnicitv. class, render. etc.


Share

truly on the decline?

29. Inequality: To what extent should we view inequality of the rough amount we have today as an 
evil to be dealt with, and to what extent should we just view it as a tax
on ourselves that is inescapable given all the problems of motivating humans to cooperate and 
contribute to society?

30. Plutocracy: Brainstorm some ideas about why it is that the more complex human societies become, 
the more it becomes a possibility that there will be superrich who
will exercise an enormous share of power over society. Speculate as to whether and why such 
superrich are an asset or a liability for society

31. Behind the Iron Curtain: Really existing socialism: So you build an economy that is not 
governed by the market, it is rather one big bureaucracy. That then leads to
six questions: (a) How does that work, exactly? (b) And how well does that work? (c) Specifically, 
why was the Soviet Union unable to adjust its economy in the 1980s
to deliver higher agricultural output levels to its population? (d) Is the Soviet Union best viewed 
as "colonized", as part of the global southa€”as much of Asia and
Africa were colonized by European masters, as much of Latin America was colonized by its own 
internal landlord notionally conquistadores-descended elitea€”and so
its relative economic performance ought to be judged by a global south rather than a global north 
yardstick? (e) Why, again, did Lenin not think that the market system
could be used by the party? Why did it have to be eliminated? (f) In the absence of Stalin's heavy 
industrialization and other programs, what do you think would have
been likely to happen during World War II?

32. Hyper globalization: In what ways, if any, was the hyperglobalized world that emerged after 
1995 qualitatively different from the globalized world that had emerged
after 1950, or the earlier first wave globalized world that had emerged after 1870?

33. East Asian Miracles: To what extent should we be surprised by China's successful economic 
growth trajectory since the overthrow by Deng Xiaoping Maoist policies
and practices? To what extent should we not be surprised, and say that we would've expected China 
to do this given common institutional and cultural patterns along
the Asian Pacific rim? Is it your sense of the institutions that China adopted and used after Deng 
Xiaoping's overthrow of Maoist policies and practices were superior to
or inferior to those adopted for successful growth in other East Asian economies?

34. Catching-Up and Overtaking: East Asian institutions and practices that were very successful in 
catchup and convergence do not appear to have been successful in
a€ceovertakinga€D. The United States is still preeminent in productivity in most of manufacturing. 
Aside from vehicles (Japan and Germany), precision equipment
(Germany and Switzerland), and semiconductor foundries (South Koreaa€”Samsunga€”and Taiwana€”TSMC) 
U.S. firms do not export because U.S. wages are so
high, not because U.S. workers are unproductive. Speculate on why institutions that are so very 
good as long as there is somebody more productive to copy and emulate
do not work so well when onea€™ s economy is already at the worlda€™ s technological frontier.

35. Implementing State-Led Development: Why have other regions of the world been so notably 
unsuccessful in executing the policies for successful economic
development and convergence that Peter Evans outlines in the chapter from his book Embedded 
Autonomy that we read?

36. The Southern Cone: Arthur Lewis and many others had theories that strongly suggest that the 
growth experience of the southern cone of South America since
1870a€”Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Southern Brazila€’’should have been like that of other 
temperate resource-rich economies like Australia and Canada. Why do
you    think such theories do not work?

37. The Color Line in the Global North: Suppose we were to consider the northern & western United 
States, the southeastern United States, and the Union of South
Africa. Where would you look to try to understand their comparative economic growth experiences?

38. Post-WWII Sub-Saharan African Retardation: What are the mechanisms through which Nathan Nunn 
argues that the Atlantic slave trade of 1500-1850 has left Sub-
Saharan Africa impoverished today? What are the mechanisms through which Robert Bates argues that 
the way that decolonization was conducted has left Sub-Saharan
Africa impoverished today? Do you see good reasons to expect Africa's relative economic performance 
to be better in the future than it has been since WWII?

39. The Great Recession: How was it that a mere $500 billion of bad mortgage debt in the United 
States was able, in 2007 and 2008, to cause a $20 trillion loss of value
on global financial markets? Why did not global north governments do the obvious thing in 
2008-2012a€’’print money and buy things to get back to full employment?

40. The AnAImic Recovery: In your view, is the balance of the evidence in favor of the hypothesis 
that the productivity-growth slowdown in the global north arriving with
the Great Recessiona€”in 2007a€”is predominantly a transitory, cyclical phenomenon? Or is the 
balance of the evidence in favor of the hypothesis that the slowdown
is predominantly a permanent, structural phenomenon?

Gain up to 6 points per thread by either (a) being one of the first five to give a substantive 
answer to (one of) the question(s) with which I launch the thread, and then giving a
substantive and relevant comment on one of your peersa€™ comments; or (b) making three substantive 
and relevant comments on one or more of your peersa€™ comments. Your
discussion-thread points are capped at 30 for the semester. (In short: you need to contribute to 
five threads to max out your discussion-thread points.)

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

This course is adapteda€”takena€”from one taught at Harvard as Econ 1342.1 have filed off some but 
not all of the serial numbers. Smart things here should be attributed to
Melissa Dell, who is innocent of all responsibility for dumb things here.

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

