Subscribe now

Aha! SubStack now has a LATEX module!

And this makes me think, once again, that I should worry the question of C.P. Snowa€™ s The Two 
Cultures in my economic history coursesa€!

Basically, the 1/3 of students who take my economic history courses who come from economics, and 
from the STEM departments can and do use words to thinka€’’although perhaps not at the level that I 
would wish them to be able to. But the 2/3 of students who come from non-economics social science 
and humanities departments by and large cannot, do not, use numbers and algebra to think. For them,
numbers, algebra, calculus, statistics, and so on are arcane ritual stumbling blocks, where 
sometimes they can learn to mouth the proper responses, but are by and large obstacles to 
understanding.

I keep thinking that there ought to be a way to shift thisa€”and to teach the humanities and 
non-economic social-science majors some data science as well. (It seems to me quite likely that 
data-science knowledge and expertise is likely for our students to be much the same thing that 
being able to write a fine chancery hand was for a mediAlval clerk, in terms of opening-up career 
and hence life possibilities.)
But how?

So here is a draft of a two-part lecture segment: one part on what economic models are, and a 
second trying to use an economic model to draw some conclusionsa€”in this case, conclusions about 
the working of pre-modern Malthusian economies, a€oeMalthusiana€n coming from the Rev. Thomas 
Robert Malthus, and his 1798 Essay on the Principle of Population:

Economic Models: What Are They Good For?:

In spite of the political complications, the nonexperimental nature, and the peculiar problems of 
cause and effect, economics is a quantitative science because most of the relationships that 
economists study come quantified. Thus economics makes heavy use of arithmetic and algebra, while 
political science, sociology, and most of history do nota€”save for statistics..

The American economy is complex: 150 million workers, 12 million firms, and 100 million households 
buying and selling $24 trillion worth of goods and services per year. Economists must simplify it 
to understand this and other complex phenomena. So they restrict their attention to (a) some 
definitions, (b) a few behavioral relationshipsa€”cause-and-effect links between economic 
quantitiesa€”and (c) a
handful of equilibrium conditionsa€’’conditions that must be satisfied for the state of the economy 
along some dimension to be relatively stable. They attempt to capture these behavioral 
relationships and equilibrium conditions in simple algebraic equations and geometric diagrams. Then 
they try to apply their equations and graphs to the real world, hoping their simplifications have 
not made the end-product of
this a€rebuilding the modela€D a distorted and faulty guide.

Just after the end of WWII Paul Samuelson of MIT discovered that many of his students were much 
more comfortable manipulating diagrams than solving algebraic equations. With diagrams, they could 
see what was going on in a hypothetical economy. Thinking of how a particular curve would shift was 
often easier than thinking of the consequences of changing the value of the constant term in an 
equation.

If you find analytic geometry easy and intuitive, then Samuelsona€™ s intellectual innovation will 
make macroeconomics more accessible to you. Behavioral relationships become curves that shift about 
on a graph. Conditions of economic equilibrium become dots where curves describing two behavioral 
relationships cross (and thus both behavioral relationships are satisfied). Changes in the state of 
the
economy become movements of a dot. Understanding economic theories and arguments becomes as simple 
as moving lines and curves around on a graph and looking for the place where the correct curves 
intersect. And solving systems of equations becomes easy, as does changing the presuppositions of 
the problem and noting the results. The equations, the graphs, and the descriptive words reinforce 
and shed
light                                                                                               
                                                                                           on each 
other.

But if you do not find analytic geometry easy and intuitive, then you are in troublea€!

When economists are trying to analyze the implications of how people act they almost always write 
an equation that represents a behavioral relationship: how people respond to such-and-such a 
situation. This behavioral relationship states how the effect (the total level of production) is 
related to the cause (the available capital stock). The economist usually draws a diagram to help 
visualize the relationship,
and also writes it down verbally: a€oeA larger capital stock means that the average employee will 
have more machines and equipment to work with, and this will increase total production per worker. 
But increases in capital will probably be subject to diminishing returns to scale, so the gain in 
production from increasing the capital stock per worker from $40,000 to $80,000 will be less than 
the gain in
production from increasing the capital stock per worker from $0 to $40,000.a€D

In addition to analyzing behavioral relationships, economists consider equilibrium conditions a€” 
conditions that must be true if the economy is to be in balance. If an equilibrium condition does 
not hold, then the state of the economy must be changing rapidly, moving toward a state of affairs 
in which the equilibrium condition does hold.
This model-building is a powerful way of thinking, if the details that you omit are indeed 
unnecessary, and if the factors emphasized are the most important factors.

Algebraic equations are the best way to summarize cause-and-effect behavioral relationships in 
economics. Because so many economic concepts are easily quantified, arithmetic might seem a more 
natural choice, but arithmetic quickly reaches its limits. For example, to know what the level of 
output per worker would be for each of a great number of possible levels of the capital stock per 
worker and the
efficiency of labor, you would need to carry around a huge table. Table 3.2 shows just a tiny part 
of what would be required. It is much better to remember and to work with a single algebraic 
equation, like this one:

Algebra, moreover, has another advantage. It allows us to think about the consequences of a host of 
different possible systematic relationships by replacing the fixed and known coefficients that 
apply to only one situation with unspecified and potentially varying placeholder parameters. Using 
algebra to analyze this single equation allows us to manipulate and analyze all at once, in 
shorthand form, all the
systematic relationships corresponding to different parameter values and all the tables that they 
summarize. And it is then easy moving back to the specific, when you want to consider a particular 
case with a particular set of values for the parameters.

Economic Modeling:

So with all that throat-clearing in the past, let us go to work:

Modeling & Simulating a Malthusian Economy:

Write down a very simple economic model for our pre-modern Malthusian economy. It will have four 
equations.
The first and second equations are simply definitions:

The first says that the proportional growth rate of living standards and productivity levelsa€”the 
proportional growth rate of the output per worker y variable on the left-hand sidea€”is equal to g, 
g for growth. The second says that the proportional growth rate of population and the labor force 
variable L, L for labor, on the right-hand side is equal to n, n for numbers.
The third and fourth equations are behavioral relationships:

The third says that ga€”the proportional growth rate of living standards and productivity 
levelsa€”on the left-hand side is equal to the proportional rate of growth h of human ideas about 
technology, minus the proportional rate of growth of population and the labor force n divided by a 
parameter E£ that tells us how salient ideas about technology are in generating productivity vis-A 
-vis resource scarcity. It is
human ingenuity versus resource scarcity. And resource scarcity is made more dire by population 
increases.

The fourth says that the population growth rate variable n on the left-hand side will be such that 
population will grow if living standards y are above, and shrink if living standards are below, 
some a€cesubsistencea€D level yA{sub}. It says that population will do so linearly, depending on a 
parameter I2 that tells us how responsive fertility and mortality are to want and deprivation. 
Twice as big a gap between
living standards and subsistence will produce twice as fast a population response, with the value 
of the I2 parameter calibrating how much. As people get poorer, fertility drops: women become 
sufficiently skinny that ovulation becomes hit-or-miss. And as people get poorer, mortality rises: 
it is not just that some people starve to death, it is that the malnourished have compromised 
immune systems, and
malnourished children, especially, are easily carried off by the common cold.

This model captures three features of the pre-modern economy:

• There is (slow) progress in technology

• A more prosperous society has higher population growth

• Resource scarcity matters
What consequences do those features have?

Well, let us set up a toy economya€”a simulationa€”with these features, and only these features, 
and see how history evolves. Let us set h = 0.0005a€”5% growth in technology over a century. Let us 
set I2 = 0.25a€”if real living standards are 40% over a€cesubsistencea€d, population grows at 1% 
per year, or doubles in three generations. And let us set E£ = 2a€”ideas about technology are twice 
as salient
as resources in generating productivity. And we also need to add a random term, an Iji term, for 
plagues, bountiful harvests, mild winters in which babies do not die of pneumonia, and all the 
other non-systematic accidents that affect the growth of population.

We could do this in Excel. We should not. Do anything even moderately complicated in excel, and you 
guarantee that you will make mistakes that you then will be unable to find and correct.

We will do this in Pythona€’’because it is easy, it is powerful, and it leaves a clear audit trail. 
You can skip the mechanics of the programming if you wish. Or you can work through thema€”either 
reading them, or creating your own Python Jupyter Notebook installation somewhere and programming 
it up.

A Simple Matter of Programming:

Go to <http://datahub.berkeley.edu> and create a new Python notebook file. Then we set up our 
simulation:

• We want it to draw graphs in the main notebook file, not in separate windows.

• We want to import three sets of commands and capabilities on top of the bare minimal Python 
installation^’’numerical Python, Python plot, and random numbers.


•  Then we are going to tell Python that it is going to have to keep track of five lists of 
numbersa€”the list of productivity growth rates g, of population growth rates n, of the labor-force 
level L (with L starting out at a benchmark index level of 1), of the productivity level y (with y 
starting out 25% above the subsistence level y = 1), and the list of random shocks to population .

•  We tell it what the values are of the technology-growth parameter h the ideas-salience parameter 
E£, and the population responsiveness parameter I2.

•  Then we set up a loop to see what happens to our simulated society for 1000 years, populating 
the n, g, L, and y lists with the values they take on in each year in this run of the simulation.

• Then we graph our variablesa€’’prosperity and population against time, and prosperity against 
population:

In [18]: %matplotlib inline
In [46]: import numpy as np

import matplotlib.pyplot as pit

import random as rnd

9 = []

n = []

epsilon = []
L = [1]

y = [1.25]

h = 0.0005

gamma = 2

beta = 0.025

for t in range(999):

epsilon = epsilon + [rnd.normalvariate(0, 0.02)]
n = n + [beta * (y[t] - 1) + epsilontt]]

g = g + [h - n[t]/gamma]
y = y + [y[t]*np.exp(g[t])]

L = L + [L[t]*np.exp(n[t])]

tseries = range(1000)
fig, ax = plt.subplots()

ax.olot(tseries. L. v)

Pythonistas may well groan at this point: This code cell looks like it was badly translated from 
the FORTRAN. (FORTRAN, for a€oeformula translatora€D, is a programming language that is now seventy 
years old.)
That is true: it is.

I can barely program any other way.

Pythonistas will say that there are more elegant, more concise, and more comprehensible ways of 
doing the job. And they are right. But in the words that Alfred Lord Tennyson puts in the mouth of 
his character Ulysses: a€oeWhat we are, we area€!a€D

Simulation Results:

Here is where those of you who skipped the programming should come back. Here is one sample run 
from our simulationa€’’graphs of simulated population and productivity over 1000 years:

The first graph plots time on the horizontal axis. On the vertical axis is the population of our 
simulated society over 1000 years, starting at an initial index value of 1, in blue; and also on 
the vertical axis is the productivity level of the economy over 1000 years, starting at an initial 
value 25% above the 1.0 benchmark of a€cesubsistencea€D at which population is stable. Population 
grows erratically, because of
the random shocks, but substantially over 1000 years. The economya€™ s productivity level does not: 
it stays near one, and pretty much all you can say is that productivity is relatively high after an 
extended period of population stagnation or decline, and low after an extended period of 
faster-than-average population growth:


And here is productivity on the vertical axis plotted against population on the horizontal axis. In 
terms of time, the (population, productivity) pair for the economy is initially in the upper-left 
corner of the figure: at (1.0,1.25). It then swings down and to the right and back up and to the 
left, all the while slowly moving right as technological knowledge accumulates:


Does this not remind you of what we know about British population and wages from the medieval era 
up through 1700 or so? From Greg Clarka€™ s The Condition of the Working Class in England'.


0     2     4     6     8     10    12

Population (m.)

14    16    18    20

After 1700 different processes were going on in English economy and society. But up to 1700, the 
family resemblance is clear. On average across the centuries the economya€™ s (population, 
productivity) point moves to the right, as technological progress (slowly) allows for a larger 
population to subsist in England. In a shorter but still substantial run, plagues and other 
demographic catastrophes cause the
economya€™ s point to swing up and to the left, with a smaller population associated with higher 
productivity levels; and then down and to the right, as better living standards allow population to 
growa€”and productivity decreases in response as resources per worker become scarce.

Lessons to Be Drawn:

One could take our simulation and write a history of different ages for it, searching for causes of 
the initial 250 years in which population doubles (and living standards decline), followed by 550 
years of intermixed plague and other catastrophe-driven demographic decline and slow population 
growth, but with productivity and living standards ending that 550-year period at a level in the 
year 800 40% above
their year-250 nadir. That age was then followed by another demographic boom in which the 
population doubles in 200 years.

No doubt stories about institutions, dynasties, cultures, and pathogens would play major and 
colorful roles in such a history. But when we look back at the guts of the simulation, we see that 
it is all chance: every year population and productivity are shifted not just by their structural 
determinants in the behavioral relationships, but by a random factor unconnected and uncorrelated 
with anything that has
happened before, is happening now, or will happen later on.

This should give you pause: We are pattern-finding minds, and we find patterns even when they are 
not really there. It is not the case that shifting institutions, cultures, pathogens, and dynasties 
are driving the evolution of population and productivity in this simulation. Rather, the only 
forces systematically at work are:

•  The slow growth of technology at rate h, and thus the slowly growing ability of the economy to 
support more people at the same living standards.

•  The oscillations, or societal respiration as English-Ukrainian-Jewish mediAlval economic 
historian M.M. Postan would say, as a series of past shocks that have generated a productivity 
level much higher than subsistence are then followed by relatively rapid population growth (and a 
decline in productivity and living standards), while favorable demographic shocks that have 
generated a relatively
high population and low living standards are followed by population decline or stagnation (and a 
rise in living standards).

As I said: This exercise should give you pause. There may be nothing more to explain once one has 
understood the drift and respiration of a Malthusian economy, even if your pattern-solving East 
African Plains Ape mind strongly thinks that there must be something more than simply time and 
chance happening to them all.
If we were to eliminate all of the random shocks from our simulation, we would find that the 
economy in it, over time, would converge to a Malthusian steady-state path, along which:

Population and the labor force would grow just fast enough that increasing resource scarcity over 
time would offset the potential benefits in terms of higher living standards flowing from better 
technology. The economy would settle at a constant level for living standards just enough above 
subsistence to generate the population growth that increases resource scarcity by enough to offset 
the (slow) technological
progress. It is this Malthusian equilibriuma€”and the fact that if disturbances shift the 
economya€™ s (population, productivity) pair away from it, the economy will move back toward the 
Malthusian equilibrium^’’that is the systematic, and hence the knowable, part of this system. At 
least, that is the case for this simulation.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


2.0

1.5

1.0

onn        /inn       Ann       onn       mnn

No doubt stories about institutions, dynasties, cultures, and pathogens would play major and 
colorful roles in such a history. But when we look back at the guts of the simulation, we see that 
it is all chance: every year population and productivity are shifted not just by their structural 
determinants in the behavioral relationships, but by a random factor unconnected and uncorrelated 
with anything that has
happened before, is happening now, or will happen later on.

This should give you pause: We are pattern-finding minds, and we find patterns even when they are 
not really there. It is not the case that shifting institutions, cultures, pathogens, and dynasties 
are driving the evolution of population and productivity in this simulation. Rather, the only 
forces systematically at work are:

•  The slow growth of technology at rate h, and thus the slowly growing ability of the economy to 
support more people at the same living standards.

•  The oscillations, or societal respiration as English-Ukrainian-Jewish mediAlval economic 
historian M.M. Postan would say, as a series of past shocks that have generated a productivity 
level much higher than subsistence are then followed by relatively rapid population growth (and a 
decline in productivity and living standards), while favorable demographic shocks that have 
generated a relatively
high population and low living standards are followed by population decline or stagnation (and a 
rise in living standards).

As I said: This exercise should give you pause. There may be nothing more to explain once one has 
understood the drift and respiration of a Malthusian economy, even if your pattern-solving East 
African Plains Ape mind strongly thinks that there must be something more than simply time and 
chance happening to them all.
If we were to eliminate all of the random shocks from our simulation, we would find that the 
economy in it, over time, would converge to a Malthusian steady-state path, along which:

Population and the labor force would grow just fast enough that increasing resource scarcity over 
time would offset the potential benefits in terms of higher living standards flowing from better 
technology. The economy would settle at a constant level for living standards just enough above 
subsistence to generate the population growth that increases resource scarcity by enough to offset 
the (slow) technological
progress. It is this Malthusian equilibrium^’’and the fact that if disturbances shift the 
economya€™ s (population, productivity) pair away from it, the economy will move back toward the 
Malthusian equilibrium^’’that is the systematic, and hence the knowable, part of this system. At 
least, that is the case for this simulation.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

