Subscribe now

FIRST: Alan Blindera€™s Monetary & Fiscal History:

Let me start this week off by recommending the very, very nice: Alan Blinder: A Monetary and Fiscal 
History of the United States, 1961-2021 
<https://www.google.com/books/edition/A_Monetary_and_Fiscal_History_of_the_Uni/vM5qEAAAQBAJ>. It is 
all about how the U.S. government has tried to manage the countrya€™ s macroeconomy in attempting 
to achieve price stability, full employment, financial robustness, and healthy investment. The big
lesson is that there is no big lesson. There is no linear development. There is no (or not much) 
a€ceprogressa€O in figuring out how to manage economies for macroeconomic stability. Rather, as 
Blinder writes:

wheels within wheels, spinning endlessly in time and spacea€! [with] certain themesa€! waxing and 
waninga€! monetary versus fiscala€! the intellectual realma€! the world of practical policy 
makinga€! the repeated ascendance and descendance of Keynesianisma€!

The book is a worthy successor to Herb Steina€™ s The Fiscal Revolution in America: Policy in 
Pursuit of Reality 
<https://www.amazon.com/Fiscal-Revolution-America-Pursuit-Reality/dp/0844739375>, broader in scope 
and later in time, but also more political-intellectual and less administrative-technocratic. 
Anyone wanting to know the history of fiscal and monetary policy in the United States needs to read 
them both.
A few passages especially struck my eye:

I entered graduate school in the fall of 1967a€!. The viewa€! was that while Friedman and Phelps 
had made convincing theoretical cases that I± should be equal to 1, the empirical evidence 
virtually screamed out that I± < 1. It was one of those stark cases in which theory and empirics 
clashed sharply. As Groucho Marx memorably asked, a€oeWho are ya gonna believe, me or your own 
eyes?a€D The view at MIT, as I recall, was go
with your own eyes. Meanwhilea€! Thomas Sargena€l was demonstratinga€”in a beautiful five-page 
paper that was underappreciated at the timea€”that the debate over the estimated parameter I± was 
beside the pointa€!


And:

And:

And:

And:

And:

And:

And:

And:

And:

Late in November 1965, [Fed Chair] Martin warneda€! Johnsona€™ s treasury secretary, that the Fed 
might vote to raise the discount ratea€!. Johnson replied ominously that he was a€oeprepared to be 
Jackson if he [Martin] wants to be Biddle.a€Da€l But Martin, though warning his Fed colleagues of 
the potential threat to their independence, did not hold back. The December discount rate hike 
passed by a 4a€“3 vote, which meant
that Martin had cast the deciding vote. A livid President Johnson, who was recuperating from 
surgery at his Texas ranch at the time, summoned the Fed chair down to banks of the Pedernalesa€!. 
The Fed chair was apparently unmoved, telling Johnson that the president and the central bank had 
different jobs to doa€!. No fiscal dominance there. The presidenta€! nominated him for yet another 
term a year latera€!

[Monetarism] rose to prominence on a combination of some hotly disputed scholarly work, Milton 
Friedmana€™ s singular brilliance and skill in debate, and perhaps most important the rise of 
inflation in the late 1960s (due to excess demand) and the early 1970s (due mostly to the supply 
shocks discussed in chapter 5). Keynesianism was unjustly tagged as inherently a€ceinflationary,a€D 
and monetarism stepped forward as the
replacement^!. [It] dieda€! only after monetarism had registered substantial influence on policy 
formulation in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and elsewhere. The policy debate was 
not, as Friedman and others sometimes claimed, over whether monetary policy mattered. It was about 
whether fiscal policy not accommodated by monetary policy mattered. As it turns out, it dida€!

New classical economics, with this a€oepolicy ineffectivenessa€D result, conquered vast swaths of 
academia in the 1970s and 1980s, but it never developed much of a following among central 
bankersa€! [who] saw that both inflation and real economies were crushed by Margaret Thatchera€™ s 
excruciatingly tight money in the United Kingdom and by Volckera€™ s excruciatingly tight money in 
the United States. No real effects?a€!

Clinton understood very well that whether his deficit reduction gamble would succeed or fail hung 
on the behavior of the Federal Reserve under its very Republican chair, Alan Greenspan. Perhaps 
even more frightening, it hung on the reactions of a bunch of bond traders in New York, London, and 
Tokyo. Both delivereda€!. The U.S. economy performed splendidlya€!. What most surprised mainstream 
economists was that the sizable
fiscal contraction (without any monetary easing) seemed not to slow the economy at all. Rather, it 
precipitated a strong bond market rally that overwhelmed the fiscal contraction. Now, that was 
something newa€!

By about 1972 the strong consensus among macroeconomists was that neither monetary nor conventional 
forms of fiscal policy had permanent effects on employment or output. There was a short-runa€! no 
long-run trade-offa€!. Expansionary monetary or fiscal policies could put the economy on a 
short-term a€oesugar high.a€D But the sugar would dissolve, leaving inflation somewhat higher in 
its wake. That quickly became the
canonical view in [A©lite high-status] academia, and it still isa€!

Ita€™ s an overused and sometimes abused adjective, my macroeconomic framework is decidedly 
Keynesian. How could it be otherwise if you want to make sense of history? Rival doctrines to 
Keynesianism have come and gonea€!. Competitorsa€! either fell of their own weighta€! or saw their 
most useful aspects incorporateda€!. Keynesian economics circa 2021 differs in many ways from the 
theorya€! in 1936, buta€! as Mark
Twain might have said, it rhymesa€!

Friedman and David Meiselmana€™ s (1963) lengthya€! a€oeThe Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity 
and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897a€“1958a€Da€!. They asked which was the 
better predictor of consumer spending (C): what we now call M2 or what they classified as 
a€oeautonomous expenditurea€D (A), conveniently eliding the facts that M had clearly not been the 
Feda€™ s policy instrumental.
Their basic methodology was to run statistical horse races between M and A via univariate 
regressionsa€! evidencea€! simplistica€! not very convincinga€’’unless you were already 
convinceda€!

The old-fashioned Phillips curve did indeed fall apart later in the 1970s. Why?a€! Not for 
Lucas-Sargent reasonsa€! [but] because [of] severe adverse supply shocksa€!

Greenspan saw that inflation was not rising. Why not? He hypothesized that rapid productivity 
growth from New Economy innovations was pushing potential GDP up faster than people realized. It 
was a hunch at first, but the data subsequently vindicated his iconoclastic view. Due largely to 
this a€oegreat call,a€D the Fed let the good times roll into the late 1990sa€!

If Blinder does have a single bottom line, it is that:

Fiscal policy decisions will continue to be made largely on political grounds while monetary policy 
decisions will continue to turn on technocratic, economic considerations. The twain will not soon 
meeta€!

I would add three things:

(1) Monetary policymakers permanently tarnish their reputations for all time when they make their 
decisions on political grounds. Arthur Burnsa€™ s reputation did not survive his excessive concern 
for Nixona€™ s reelection in 1972. And, as for Alan Greenspan:

During the congressional debate in 2001, Greenspan tarnished his gold-plated reputation by seeming 
to endorse the Bush tax cuts. His thinly disguised advocacy not only crossed the line between 
monetary and fiscal policy but also struck many people as way too political for the Federal 
Reserve. Democrats were naturally displeased. But Greenspana€™ s endorsement of the Bush tax cuts 
probably didna€™t hurt his chances for
reappointment by Bush in 2004a€!

(2) Proper demand-management-and-growth fiscal policy is incredibly complex. The appropriate 
rules-of-thumb shift from decade to decade in ways that it is impossible for the political system 
to comprehend in anything like real time. And this is a huge problem.

(3) Macroeconomic theories and doctrines turn out to be of appallingly little effective use, at 
least if we focus on the role played by the A©lite academic macroeconomics community.

At the best of times, those policymakers who took academic A©lite macroeconomists seriously and 
attempted to rely on cutting-edge macroeconomic theory to guide policy found themselves skating not 
to where the puck was going to be, not even to where the puck was, but to where the puck had been 
in the past. Cutting-edge A©lite theories were crystalized historical analogies from the past 
generation adulterated by ideologiesa€”and you had better hope that
the ideological adulteration was like oregano, rather than peyote. Such theories were of little use 
in a world in which changing technology-driven forces-of-production underpinnings had profoundly 
changed how the economy worked.

At the worst of timesa€”when RBC theorists or those who demanded that everything be hammered into 
the form of a forward-looking a€cemicrofoundeda€D DSGE modela€”those who attempted to rely on 
cutting-edge macroeconomic theory found that it told them to take off their skates entirely and 
exit the rink.
Highly, highly recommended.

Share

One Image: Of A%e Rings of Power & A%e Second Age:



Leave a comment

Other Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  The takeover of the Republican Party by election result-deniers is the most important of the 
many crises facing America today: Steve Schmidt: The country is edging towards an abyss: a€~Kari 
Lakea€! [if] electeda€! will become a central player in an ongoing conspiracy to topple American 
democracya€!. She has all but pledged to assault the integrity of the next presidential electiona€!

•  As I said, the takeover of the Republican Party by election result-deniers is the most important 
of the many crises facing America today: Heather Cox Richardson: October 16,2022: a€~ Arizona 
Republican nominee for governor Kari Lake refused to say that she would accept the results of the 
upcoming electiona€”unless she winsa€! an astonishing rejection of the whole premise on which this 
nation was founded: that voters have the right to
choose their leadersa€!

• The difference between the Trumpists and fascists on the one hand and garden-variety 
a€ceCaesariansa€mon the other is the glorification of irrationality and willa€” Louis Bonaparte, 
Andrew Jackson, Theodore Roosevelt, indeed, C. Julius Caesar understood means, ends, and 
rationality: Damon Linker: The Ever-More Incoherent GOP: a€~Intellectuals are especially ill-suited 
to grasping the character of whata€™ s going on in politicsa€!
because intellectuals aspire to coherenceaCI

•  My view: shaking things up will either kill Twitter or improve it, and so transferring it to a 
chaos monkey is the best way to get us out of what is a bad local equilibrium: Kurt Wagner: Twitter 
Faces Only Bad Outcomes If the $44 Billion Musk Deal Closes: a€~The company has been damaged by the 
drama over the deal, and things look bumpy if it goes througha€!

•  We cannot have nice things unless we power their production and utilization, hopefully in a 
green way: Brian Katulis: Energy security is central to an abundance agendaa€!

• Another Federal Reserve official who evades the opportunity to say a€oenothing we have done yet 
has affected production, employment, or price sd€m Kristine Aquino: Five Things You Need to Know to 
Start Your Day: a€~Jumbo hike? St. Louis Fed President James Bullard left open the possibility that 
the central bank would raise interest rates by 75 basis points at each of its next two meetings in 
November and December, while saying it was too
soon to make that calla€!

•  No, YIMBYism is not just a boon to developers: Addison Del Mastro: A D Who?: a€~When you let 
homeowners be small developers, they do it: As a test case of the YIMBY agenda, California's 2016 
legalization of ADUs is almost too perfecta€’’besides the fact that the homes are in literal 
backyards, it has been a runaway success, permitting ~60,000 new homes in five yearsa€!

• How is this feasible given the likely continued evolution of variants?: Linda Lew: China 
President Xi Jinping Doubles Down on Covid Zeroa€!

•  I confess this was not something I had on my Biden-administration bingo card: Noah Millman: The 
China Syndrome: a€~The Biden Administration^™ s dramatic moves to try to hobble the development of 
Chinaa€™ s advanced semiconductor industrya€!. A rubicon has been crossed that cannot easily be 
crossed back. This is not just a decoupling, but virtually a declaration of economic wara€!

• As Dan Wang stresses, things like this do align the Chinese tech community 100% with the 
government: Irene Zhang: China Responds to Chip Export Controls: a€~a€oeWe cannot return to the old 
waysa€Da€l. Official statements are focused on rebukinga€! Bidena€!. [The] wolf-warrior streama€! 
sound[s] almost tepida€!. In this moment its in no-onea€™ s interest in China to highlight a 
setback for a core Party goala€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Not a Trumpd€”not even the force of personality of an Andrew Jackson or a C. Julius CA\sara€”but, 
rather, a Louis Bonaparte with modern propaganda tools at the head of not a 19th but rather a 21st 
century administrative machine. The tides of history were, however, flowing in Louis Bonapartea€™ s 
way from 1848 to 1870. It is unclear that Xi Jinping will be as lucky:

Noah Smith: Xi Jinping, forever: a€~In each casea€”Zero Covid, aggressive diplomacy, tech 
crackdowns, the crushing of Hong Konga€”a failure of outcome is presented as a triumph of will. As 
long as a unified China stood strong and acted tough, success has been achieved, despite any 
negative economic and diplomatic consequences. Beyond obvious screw-ups, Xi has simply changed the 
character of Chinese society. Acquaintances
who lived in China during the fast-growth Hu Jintao years, or even during the early years of Xia€™ 
s rule, recall a China full of hope and energya€”one that seemed like it was opening up 
economically and culturally, even if it not politicallya€!. That China is gone now. Chinese people 
realize this, and I think Americans are just starting to realize it. Xi Jinping crushed that 
Chinaa€”not with tanks, but with tech-industry crackdowns, with
restrictions on TV idols and video games, with campaigns against Western, Japanese, and Korean 
influence, with crackdowns on the VPN services that Chinese people had used to access the global 
internet, with steadily increasing levels of mass surveillance and social credit systems, with 
increased communist party presence at every level of life, and now with Zero Covid.

Some are saying that Xia€™ s ascendance represents a return to Chinaa€™ s old imperial system, or a 
reprise of Mao. But I see something a bit differenta€”a nostalgic Baby Boomer kicking against 
modernity and yearning for a semi-imagined past greatness. This reminds me a lot of Donald 
Trumpa€”and like Xi, Trump is a guy whoa€™ s proven adept at bullying a political party to obey and 
worship him. In fact, my ability to see
through Xia€™ s veneer of competence was really just pattern-matchinga€”I recognized a certain type 
of strutting, nostalgic, domineering old guy. The big difference, of course, is that the GOP isna€™ 
t a pervasive bureaucratic oligarchy that has given itself quasi-absolute power over business and 
society. A Trump-type figure in China thus commands much more power than in Americaa€!

This I question: America accepted a role as Britain's junior partner from 1865 on up until 1943, 
and benefited anonymously from it. Why would not wise Chinese leaders seek to do the same? The 
answer, I think, is that, from Deng Xiaoping on they didd€” until Xi Jinping and the coming of the 
wolf warriors. The question is why Xi Jinpinga€™ s China became Wilhelmined€”is attempting to 
emulate the geopolitical and economic strategies of Imperial Germany
after the fall of Bismarck. Is it just so that the Communist Party of China can, like the Prussian 
cabbage-squire bureaucrat-officer aristocracy, demonstrate that it does have a viable social role?

Noah Millman: Why China Didna€™ t Liberalize: a€~The CCP has successfully embedded itself in 
Chinese private enterprise, to the point that upward social mobility continues to depend on support 
from the party. The internet and other modern communications technologies that many hoped would 
democratize information and thereby limit state power have massively increased the partya€™ s 
capacity for surveillancea€!. I suspect
that an underrated factor has to do with Americaa€™ s execution of the a€oesecurity componenta€D of 
its engagement strategy. The expansion of NATO into Eastern Europe, the NATO military operation 
during the Kosovo War, and Americaa€™ s wars in Iraq and Libya were undoubtedly alarminga€!. The 
mere fact that the United States was championing democracy and liberalism meant that those 
political ideals came to be identified
with American leadership^!. The sheer scale of Chinaa€™ s potential power, moreover, made it 
especially unrealistic that the country would accept a spot as Americaa€™ s junior partnera€!. Why 
would such a powerful country ever be satisfied with an American-led global order? And if they 
would not, why would we assume they would willingly bring their political system into line with our 
own?a€!

Yes. U.S. democracy as we know it may well die over the next four years. Each recurrence of the 
Gingrich Disease is worse and worse:

Aaron Rupar: a€~Kari Lake went on CNN on Sunday and acknowledged an ugly truth about Trumpism a€” 
it only accepts elections insofar as Trumpers win them. And when one of the major parties in a two 
party system turns against democracy, every election cycle is an existential threat. Lake is 
anything but a fringe character. The TV news anchor-turned-Arizona Republican governor hopeful is 
probably the closest thing MAGA
has to a rising star. Seeing her on TV, you can understand why Trump loves hera€”shea€™ s clearly a 
skilled and polished communicator. But just below the hazy filters she uses for her cable hits is 
deep adherence to the lie that Trump had the 2020 election stolen from him. Shea€™ s even said that 
had she been governor in 2020, she woulda€™ ve refused to certify Bidena€™ s victorya€!

a€(£Techno-serfdomd€ddoes not capture it. But an economic world in which the sources of value are 
primarily intellectual property plus the channels through which peoplea€™ s attention focuses are 
accustomed to move is not one in which economistsa€™ market-optimality theorems hold:

John Quiggin: Capitalism without capital doesna€™t work: The future of the information (non) 
economy: a€~In an information economy, the relationship between investment, production and profit, 
central to capitalism, no longer worksa€!. To the extent that innovation and productive growth 
arise from

activities that are pursued primarily on the basis non-economic motives, the link between 
incentives and outcomes is weakened. This in turn undermines the rationale for policies aimed at 
sharpening incentivesa€!. Haskel anda€! WestlakeaCI presented a relatively optimistic view of a 
market economy in which a€oeintangible capitala€D plays a central role. Buta€! the real intangible 
here is likely to be monopoly power, generated either
by intellectual property laws or control over platformsa€!


The next AI frontier is clearly going to be your own personal read-and- summarize system:

John Quiggin: AI is coming for bullsh-t jobs: a€~Jaspera€! has thea€! goal of producing advertising 
copy, blog posts and so on. Jasper clearly wona€™ t pass a Turing test if you ask for anything 
complex, but it is very good for its intended purpose: turning out text that looks as if a human 
wrote it. This has big implications for a large category of jobsa€!. Thata€™ s not likely to create 
mass unemployment any time soon. But it will
mean thata€! routine copywriting will be done much faster, by writers who have the skills to give 
programs like Jasper the right prompts, and then to touch up the final outputa€!. Lots of middle 
management jobs, for example, involve writing memos and reports justifying one corporate decision 
or anothera€!. AI can distil the essence well enough to mimic the style. After that, ita€™ s just a 
matter of fitting the verbiage around the
desired conclusiona€!

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

