Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)It is very difficult to take over a running organization and then to strike the right note in 
onea€™ s initial communications^’’neither anodyne platitudes, nor too great a shock to
the organization, nor submerging onea€™ s own agenda. I think incoming Equitable Growth President 
Michelle Holder managed this very well:

Michelle Holder: Equitable Growth President & CEO Addresses Conference Attendees in First Public 
Appearance'. a€~The current moment calls for a
vision of sustained public investment in structures and institutions to spur equitable economic 
growtha€!. The current moment also calls for addressing
inequitiesa€! for centering people in that vision who have been ignored by policymakers for far too 
longa€! for a coherent and comprehensive vision for
emerging  from the pandemic stronger and more equitable, unafraid of addressing the ongoing and 
overlapping racial, climate, and care crises our nation
faces. Public investments in these areas can spur strong, stable, and broad-based economic growth 
by addressing longstanding racial and income inequality,
driving clean energy and creating good jobs, and jumpstarting a new era of innovation. This is a 
moment we must continue to face head on if we want an
economy that works for everyone, not just the fewa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/equitable-growth-president-and-ceo-addresses-conference-attendees-in-fi
rst-public-appearance/>

2) Back in the real old days, large family sizes meant that the economies-of-scale in child care 
were captured for the most part within the family, and certainly within the extended
family. In our time of nuclear families and low fertility a great deal of this essential work and 
life is done at a much greater societal resource load per child than a better organized
society would do:

Sam Abbott: The Child Care Economy. a€~How investments in early care and education can fuel U.S. 
economic growth immediately and over the long
term. Fast facts: Insufficient child care options can prevent parents who wish to work from doing 
so, with mothers often bearing the brunt of this
challenged!. High-quality early care and education provides critical socialization and learning 
opportunities when the brain is developing rapidlya€!.
Adequate funding is necessary for human capital developmenta€!. Supporting child care workers is 
crucial for promoting quality care and human capital
developmenta€!. Investing in the nationa€™ s children is one of the safest bets policymakers can 
make. Research on early care and education programs
finds    that $1 in spending generates $8.60 in economic activitya€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/research-paper/the-child-care-economv/>

3) given the current structure of the US Senate, making legislative progress on promoting equitable 
growth requires the huge and enthusiastic cooperation and endorsement of at
least a dozen Republican senators in the long run. And those who are interested in good public 
policy for the nationa€™ s sake are likely to listen to the Niskanen Institute, where
Steve Teles works. If the game is to have a chance of legislative progress via normal ordera€”or, 
indeed, of legislative progress that is not reversed in short ordera€’’people like
those at the Niskanen Institute need to be strongly on board:

Steve Teles, Noah Smith, & Brad DeLong: PODCAST: True, Neo-, and Illiberalisnr. a€~Key Insights: 
Todaya€™ s meaning of a€oeneoliberalisma€n is
the result of the collision of two different applications of the terma€”to Margaret Thatcher, and 
to the Washington Monthlya€!. Intermediary institutions
are very suspicious to a€oeliberalisma€na€! [which] has a bias toward atomizing solutions to social 
problemsa€!. YIMBY vs. NIMBY is the fundamental
political debate in America today. Sometimes the answer will be command-and-control, sometimes the 
answer will be deregulation^!. The need to detach
a€oeliberalisma€n from centrism or moderation^!. Liberals are thinking about things that are 
important and visionary about productivity, and Biden is
listeninga€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/podcast-hexapodia-is-e-kev-insight-152>

4) This, I think, was the best session at last weeka€™ s Equitable Growth conference:

Hakeem Jeffries & Kate Bahn: How Do We Build a Just & Competitive Economy?^.}

LINK: <https://twitter.com/equitablegrowth/status/144040Q52668481537Q>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)This Martin wolf column seem to me to be very gooda€! up until its end. He seems to be heading 
for the Hobsonian position that central banks face an impossible task without a
major, major equalization of incomes. But where I expected to see a call for in the short-run a 
4%/year inflation target or a massive increase in infrastructure investment and in
investment tax credit incentives both to rebalance savings and investment and to alleviate 
bottlenecks, I find, insteada€! a call for increasing interest rates a€oea littlea€D. I am not
sure that that is wise, given the fiscal contraction that is entrained here in the United States. 
And I cannot quite follow the logic:

Martin Wolf: Inequality Is Behind Central Bank Dilemma'. a€~What happens when the rich get richer 
and so try to save more? Interest rates must fall. It
turns out that the impact of this on business investment is quite feeblea€!. So the offsets have 
had to come either from persistent fiscal deficits or from
higher spending by the bottom 90 per cent. Both are fuelled by debt, while the latter is also 
powered by asset price bubbles, especially in house pricesa€!.
The financial crisis of 2007a€“12 should be seen as an outcome of these processes, resolved at the 
time by rescuing the financial system, tightening
regulation and doubling down on low rates across the yield curve. The Covid crisis was a bolt from 
the blue but the response was more of the same, but on
an  even bigger scaled!. So how might the story evolve ?d! There is an excellent reason for a huge 
investment boom, notably the climate transition. But
that will not occur without consistent, determined, intelligent and globally aware policymaking, 
none of which we can expeetd!. The short termd! if it
goes wrong, is disturbingd!. The worry must be that the price shocks persist and then get baked 
into expectations, which will then only be reversed by a
period of significantly higher short-term ratesd! which would create painful dilemmas for central 
banks and surely cause devastating problems for weaker
borrowers, notably but not exclusively heavily indebted emerging economiesd!. [But] bond yields 
ought to rise a little. When the facts change, central
banks  should change their minds. That time is nowd!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/lb65d2c0-251c-467d-b924-42f0c78c3d34>

2) I think these are, for the most part, exactly the right people whom the Hamilton Project has put 
on this panel. I do, however, question Doug Holtz-Eakin and Paul Ryan. Holtz-
Eakin did his best to try to get Ben Bernanke to slow the pace of recovery for reasons that made no 
technical macroeconomic sense, and has never satisfactorily explained why. At
the very least, his judgment seems to me to be very poor 
<https://www.hoover.org/research/open-letter-ben-bernanke>. And as for former Speaker of the House 
Paul Ryand!.
There are lots of younger, smarter Republicans and conservatives who would talk sense and add 
intellectual value to a conversation. And I do not see either Holtz-Eakin or Ryan as
having any utility in actually getting legislators into any supporting coalition. I might be wrong, 
but I do want to raise the question:

Hamilton Project: Resilience After Recession: The Emerging Landscape for American Workers & 
Families'. d~The COVIDd“19 pandemic continues to
have consequences for the U.S. economy and has exacerbated economic disparities facing American 
women, people of color, and low-wage workersd!
persistent inequities in labor market outcomes, greater housing insecurity, reduced access to child 
care, and widened disparities in educational attainment.
Now is an opportune moment to assess where there have been positive developments and where new 
policies are needed to ensure long-term stability and
opportunity for families and workers. On Wednesday, September 29,2021, The Hamilton Project at the 
Brookings Institution will host a webcast
examining how different groups are experiencing the economic recovery from the recession and policy 
solutions to ensure the recovery is more broadly
feltd!. Roundtable discussions with: David Autor (MIT), Douglas Holtz-Eakin (The American Action 
Forum), Wendy Edelberg (The Hamilton Project),
Bradley Hardy (Georgetown University), Michelle Holder (Washington Center for Equitable Growth), 
Trevon Logan (The Ohio State University), Heather


Long cine wasnington Post), snaron Parrott (Center on Budget and Policy Priorities), hornier 
speaker ot tne House Paul Kyan, Heidi sniernolz (Economic

Policy Institute), and Betsey Stevenson (University of Michigan). The webcast event will coincide 
with the release of two Hamilton Project essays and an
Economic Facts piecea€!

LINK: <https://www.hamiltonproject.org/events/resilience_after recession>

3) There is a very large fiscal contraction coming down the tracks, targeted at AmericaaC™ s 
non-rich. It is not at all clear that macroeconomic forecasters optimistic about
production and employment are taking full and proper account of it:

Asha Banerjee & Ben Zipperer: All Pain & No Gain: Unemployment Benefit Cuts Will Lower Annual 
Incomes By $144.3 Billion And Consumer
Spending By $79.2 Billion'. a€~Congress and the Biden-Harris White House have let expanded 
unemployment benefits expire in the middle of the ongoing
COVIDa€“19 pandemic, even while employment is still well below pre-pandemic levels. As a result, 
annual incomes across the U.S. will fall by $144.3
billion    and annualized consumer spending will drop by $79.2 billion, according to the best 
available evidence on the effects of recent unemployment
benefit cutsa€!. About half of states prematurely terminated these programs between June and late 
July 2021, and then, by letting the federal law expire in
September, Congress and the White House cut off pandemic UI entirely. In total, more than 10 
million workers lost all of their unemployment benefits
because                                                                       of either the 
state-level program terminations or the September program expiration. Claims that the pandemic 
unemployment benefits have slowed
economy-wide job growthaC’’which fueled the state-level terminationsa€”are false. Instead, any 
potential gain to job growth driven by lower benefits
chasing people into the labor market seems to have been offset by two counterweights: first, a 
consumer demand effect, in which there is a drag on growth
stemming from reduced household spending when UI benefits are lost; and second, a a€cecongestiona€D 
effect, in which job gains among former UI
recipients crowd out other job seekers. In fact, new research from a team of economists shows that 
the early, state-level UI terminations significantly
reduced total incomes and consumer spending. The study found the benefit losses following these 
early terminations led to only the smallest boost in job­
finding: Earnings from work rose by only $14 per UI recipient per week in states that cut off 
benefits, but weekly UI income fell by $278, for an average
weekly net income loss of $264 per recipient. Because of lower total incomes, UI recipients spent 
$145 less weekly. On an annualized basis, the average
person losing UI saw their annual income drop by $13,728, leading to an annual spending reduction 
of $7,450a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.epi.org/blog/all-pain-and-no-gain-unemployment-benefit-cuts-will-lower-incomes-and-cons
umer-spending/>

4) No. The American economy was not supply-constrained by a€celavisha€D government benefits. By 
chip and other shortages, yes. By fear of plague and death, yes. But not by
a€celavisha€D government benefits:

Colby Smith & Christine Zhang: End of USa€™ s Extra Unemployment Benefits Gives Little Boost to 
Labour Market'. a€~The end of extra federal
unemployment benefits for millions of Americans this month is unlikely to provide a significant 
boost to the US labour market, according to an analysis by
the  Financial Times and studies by economists and industry analysts. Before S eptember a€™ s 
expiry a€” which left more than 7.5m people without access
to enhanced pandemic-related benefits a€” unemployed people had this year received an extra $300 
per week from the federal government in addition to
state aid. The federal benefits have been politically divisive, with many Republican leaders 
arguing they have dissuaded people from returning to the
workforce and fuelled a nationwide labour shortage that has inhibited the economic recovery. In 
June, 22 states withdrew the supplemental paymentsa€!.

An FT analysis of monthly data from the US Department of Labor shows that states that ended 
benefits early did not report faster job growth than those
that opted to keep additional aid flowing. Non-farm payrolls rose by about 1.3 per cent in both 
sets of states from May, when the bulk of the states laid out
their plans to abandon the federal programme, to Augusta€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/dl 3b204d-a0c0-4eeb-bbfa-a4b0ce 1 d 1 c3f>

5) Behind the Republican belief that Black people just happen to make bad choices is blame: either 
of the culture, or (more often) of the genesa€’’although that is mostly whispered
in polite society. Until we can convince the overwhelming majority of Americans that people are, at 
bottom, the same, and that groups where a€oebad choicesa€D are more
common arise from structural causes, equitable growth will be a nearly impossible task:

Alberto Alesina, Matteo F. Ferroni, & Stefanie Stantcheva: Perceptions of Racial Gaps, Their 
Causes, C& Ways to Reduce Them'. a€~Using new large-
scale survey and experimental data, we investigate how respondents perceive racial inequities 
between Black and white Americans, what they believe
causes them, and what interventions, if any, they think should be implemented to reduce them. We 
intentionally over- sample Black respondents, cover
many cities in the US, and survey both adults and very young people aged 13 to 17. In the 
experimental parts, we consider the causal impact of information
on racial inequities (such as the evolution of the Black-white earnings gap or the differences in 
mobility for Black and white children) and explanations for
these inequities (i.e., the deep-seated roots and long-lasting consequences of systemic racism) on 
respondentsaC™ views. Although there is heterogeneity
in                                                                    how respondents perceive the 
magnitude of current racial gaps in economic conditions and opportunities, the biggest 
discrepancies are in how they
explain them.

There is a stark partisan gap among white respondents, particularly in the perceived causes of 
racial inequities and what should be done about them. White
Democrats and Black respondents are much more likely to attribute racial inequities to adverse past 
and present circumstances and want to act on them
with race-targeted and general redistribution policies. At the same time, white Republicans are 
more likely to attribute racial gaps to individual actions.

These views are already deeply entrenched in teenagers based on their race and their parentsaC™ 
political affiliation. A policy decomposition shows that
the perceived causes of racial inequities correlate most strongly with support for race-targeted or 
general redistribution policies, a finding confirmed by the
experimental resultsa€!

LINK: 
<https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/stantcheva/files/alesina_ferroni_stantcheva_perceptions_racial_ga
ps.pdf>

6) Very important: a successful movement needs to learn from, listen to, and communicate with the 
people whom it wants to have as its basea€”not fund itself via spam:

Nelson Minar: a€™ Just look at this deceptive fundraising spam I got from BOLD Dems. I support 
their goals but they and Ruben Gallego should be
ashamed of this kind of insulting marketing. (And of course I never signed up for this mailing list 
at all.) There a€™ s a distinctive design vernacular for
political fundraising spam. It looks very much like itself and not much else except maybe the 
warning labels on cigarette packsa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/nelson/status/1441441982283272195>

7) The middle-income trap comes for China, specifically for the one billion people in the interior 
who have the living standards of Peru. a€oeDual circulationa€D will require that
they make something of value that the rich coastal provinces are willing to pay handsomely for. And 
what could that be?:

Scott Rozelle: Invisible China: How the Urban-Rural Divide Threatens Chinaa€™ s Rise: a€~Terry 
Sicular and her colleagues have a fabulous paper
written with national data that basically shows China has a huge middle-class, ita€™ s 400 million 
people, but they have 950 million people that are in
low-income. Ita€™ s a lot easier to solve poverty for 20 million people than it is to solve the 
low-income problem for 900 million people. The myopia
problem,   the nutrition problem, the intestinal worm problem, theya€™ re invisible problems. 
ChinaaC™ s trying to develop 2,000 county seats, fourth and
fifth tier cities, into little urban centers. They a€™ re trying to make 2,000 Cincinnatis, right? 
I dona€™ t see what people are going to do there.

There a€™ s not going to be any manufacturing in those cities. ThereaC™ s not going to be any 
construction in the long run in those citiesa€! and
e very body a€™ s low income! ThereaC™ s not going to be any demand for servicesa€!

LINK: <https://chinatalk.substack.eom/p/invisible-china-how-the-urban-rural>

8) Outside my wheelhouse, but this is very, very important indeed. If you have the power to enforce 
it, the form of words is unimportant save as it reacts back upon your power. But
that back-reaction is very, very weak indeed: after the fact, there are lots of people who will 
agree with the form of words useda€”or who say that they agree with the form of words
useda€’’whatever it happens to be:


Kzra Klein: {a^l“ inerea&im s a lot oj laugning about now implausible mis is but coups are 
ultimately about power, YOU need sometning to say, ana men

you need the power to enforce that reality. This was just the a€oesomething to say.a€D If Trump had 
the power to enforce it, he woulda€™ ve tried ita€!
LINK: <https ://twitter.com/ezraklein/status/1440088104065372173>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

