The Future of the U.S. and Chinaa€™s Relationship

J. Bradford DeLong

August 30,2021

Chinaa€™ s growth has created three Chinasa€”a Spain-level 60-million megacity growth poles, which 
also possess the worlda€™ s second-leading high-tech economy; a Poland-
level 300-million coastal economy, which is the worlda€™ s largest export manufacturing machine 
ever (and which is mostly integrated with the rest of the world much more than
with ChinaaC™ s interior), and a Peru-level one-billion interior economy, whose performance has 
been very good by global-south standards, but sub-par by Pacific Rim standards.
Coastal Chinaa€™ s growth was hobbled by its lack of experience and institutions, and its 
consequent need to grab for second-best good-enough practices hobbled it, especially in
the interior. But the fact that the technology gap vis-a-vis the outside when coastal China began 
its ascent was larger than had been the case for the rest of the Pacific Rim was a
factor that boosted growth and largely offset that obstacle.

However, the fact that the billion people in interior China have not managed to experience growth 
at the standard Pacific Rim pace has important consequences. They are one billion
people. They do not feel especially rich. And they do not feel that the coastal-centered economic 
order of China today is fully working for them. That has consequences: it makes Xi
Jinping think that he should try to flatter them by asserting Chinaa€™ s predominance in 
international affairs. Vladimir Putina€™ s conquest of the Crimea made him very popular,
for  a while. Xi Jinping has taken note.

How should the United States respond to the China we will see in the next several decades? What the 
U.S. should do is obvious: be its best possible self. As George F. Kennan
wrote at the start of the Cold War: a€ceThe issue of Soviet-American relations is in essence a test 
of the overall worth of the United Statesa€!. The United States need only measure
up to its own best traditions and prove itself worthy. Surely, there was never a fairer test of 
national quality than thisa€!a€D

The question of what the United States will do is more fraught.

Before Trump, the USa€™ s China policy was: engage and embrace. Work hard so that China would have 
much more to gain by playing cooperatively with the U.S. than
competitively. Establish the Trans-Pacific Partnership to maximize negotiating leverage on issues 
like IP. Point out that China has a short-run growth problem, a medium-run
succession problem, and a long-run legitimacy problem. Point out that Zhao Ziyang was wise in at 
least trying to think about how to create a party and a space in which the people
could  be represented to those in the corridors of power so that their livelihood can be advanced. 
Point out that no system can be good or stable without substantial space and
protection for people like Peng Dehuai.

Whether that was the right policy or not, now, of course, all of this has gone smash.

In the future, there will be a faction inside Washington that greatly fears the acquisition of 
monopoly power by Chinese state-directed entities, and it will seek strongly to curb
Chinese firmsaC™ footprint in the US. There will be a faction that greatly fears the acquisition by 
the Chinese government of frontier military technologies, and it will seek
strongly  to hobble Chinese abilities to draw on products and processes from outside. And there 
will be a faction that aims for a poor China as an end in itself, as a poor China will
not  be an attractive model to others, just as there were those who sought a poor Cuba as an end in 
itself during the Cold War.

There is unlikely to be a Cold War. There is likely to be a substantial decoupling. And Korea will 
be caught in the middle.


