Subscribe now

FOCUS: This Makes Zero Sense!

WAIT! WHAT?!

The big reason why Britaina€™ s Conservative Party is in trouble right now is precisely economic 
idiocya€”that Brexita€™ s effect on GDP was dire, and that the GDP was, in fact, owned by the 
heckler in Newcastle:

Sebastian Payne: To woo voters, Rishi Sunak must fix the UKa€™ s a€~palpable economya€™: a€~The 
Tories may be desperate to boost the economic data, but everyday signs of improvement will be more 
important: High streets are filled with boarded-up shops, public services are verging on collapse 
and therea€™ s a spiralling wave of
strikes: It was one of the most famous soundbites of the Brexit campaign. In a debate on the 
economic impact of leaving the EU, a heckler in Newcastle shouted at a university professor, 
a€oeThata€™ s your bloody GDP, not oursaCD. As Rishi Sunak will soon discover, many Britons still 
feel the samea€!. What they care about is what you
might call the a€oepalpable economya€D a€” the one that really touches people, as opposed to the 
data-driven one. Sunak needs to focus on the general state and mood of Britain: does the country 
feel more prosperous than it did at its lowest economic ebb (ie: right now), are the high streets 
improving, are job opportunities plentiful? And are
public services working well? Were there to be an election in the next six months, the answers to 
all these questions would be negativea€!

There are second-order arguments about the distribution of that GDP, and there is a 
dog-in-the-manger aspect to the Conservative Partya€™ s base not wanting to see anyone they do not 
regard as deserving prosper. But the ditinction between the a€oepalpablea€n and the 
a€cedata-drivena€D economy simply does not exist. Add up all the instances of the palpable
economy and you get the data-driven one:

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Iryna Voichuk: a€ceToday is the first day of winter and I want you to watch this video of 
Christmas #Mariupol as it was a year ago, when the city and its residents didna€™ t yet know what 
awaited them in 2 monthsaCI

• China Charts: LONG VIEW: Energy, Chips, War-Making Capacity, and Taiwana€!

•  Gillian Tett: https://www.ft.com/content/68cbf8a2-051d-4123-a0a9-dbal4d5dea6d New York is 
staring at a dangerously divided future... esembles not just the face of America but an extreme 
microcosm of its challenges.  Its economy may be growing and its entrepreneurial spirits soaring, 
but its economic and social divides seem likely to worsen

• Marques Brownlee: a€oel have some thoughts. the VR headsets are cominga€!

•  Eric Levitz: Why Railroads Refuse to Give Their Workers Paid Leavea€D: a€~Why do these rail 
barons hate paid leave so much?a€! The answea€! precision-scheduled railroadinga€!. Already 
understaffed and underperforming, the railroads cannot allow unanticipated absences to become 
significantly more prevalent without either pulling back from

P.S.R. or suffering even more frequent disruptions and customer complaintsa€!

•  Ian Allison: Divisions in Sam Bankman-Frieda€™ s Crypto Empire Blur on His Trading Titan 
Alamedaa€™ s Balance Sheeta€! (2022-11 -02)

•  James Block: Is Alameda Research Insolvent?: a€~The hedge fund's finances appear to rest on the 
same scheme that destroyed Celsius Network. Will it work out any differently for Sam 
Bankman-Fried?a€! (2022-11-04)

• Joe Nye: War Over Taiwan?: a€~For five decades, both China and the US benefited from the time 
they had bought on the question of the islanda€™ s status. To prevent what is currently a managed 
competition from spiraling out of control, the United States should take careful but clear steps to 
strengthen its longstanding policy of a€oedouble
deterrencea€da€!.

• Greg Sargent: a€~So richly deserved: Now that Musk suspended Ye for sharing a swastika, Musk is 
getting slaughtered by his fans, who are finally realizing his "free speech absolutism" was always 
the scam we told you it would bea€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

AJs:

Robert Skidelsky: Friedrich Hayek: a great political thinker rather than a great economist: a€~His 
theorising was abstract, but his purpose was practical: to make the case for a liberal economic 
order which would be proof against the political and economic wickedness and madness through which 
he lived: the two world wars, the Great Depression and the rise and
fall of fascism and communism.... The theoretical case for entrusting to the free market exclusive 
direction of the flow of societya€™ s goods and services depended heavily on demonstrating its 
god-like capacity for rapid adjustment to changing conditions, and it is here that the Austrian 
School fell short  Hayeka€™ s main popular appeal was to the anti-Roosevelt

right in the USA. He never considered that Roosevelta€™ s New Deal might have been an antidote to 
serfdom rather than a prelude to it. Institution-building took place against the background of 
Hayeka€™ s relocation from the LSE to Chicago University, where an American businessman guaranteed 
his salary, his messy divorce from Helena Fritsch, his marriage to

his first love a€~Lenerla€™ Bitterlich and his break with his English patron Lionel Robbins...

Anup Roy & Ruchi Bhatia: Global Economy Must Start Bracing for Low Inflation, Rajan Says: a€~a€oeWe 
should be prepared to potentially go back to low inflation regime,a€D he said Fridaya€!. a€oeWe 
need to examine what constrained us, Rajan said. a€oeWe need to assess if we didna€™t recognise 
inflation building or we were actually waiting for our
instruments to play out, wanting to preserve them for the next time.a€D Therefore, it is important 
for central banks today to pursue policies that provide for changes in inflation dynamics over 
time, he said, adding that headwinds, including de-globalisation, slow growth in China and K-shaped 
recovery in emerging economies can hurt growtha€!

Jonathan Weil: Rising Tether Loans Add Risk to Stablecoin, Crypto World: a€~Tether reports hadna€™ 
t disclosed that loans it issues are denominated and payable in the token: The company behind the 
tether stablecoin has increasingly been lending its own coins to customers rather than selling them 
for hard currency upfront. The shift adds to risks that the
company may not have enough liquid assets to pay redemptions in a crisis. Tether Holdings Ltd. says 
it lends only to eligible customers and requires that borrowers post lots of a€ceextremely 
liquida€D collateral, which could be sold for dollars if borrowers defaulta€!

James Livingston: The Contested Fed: a€~The US Federal Reserve is a monument to the idea that the 
market, if left on its own, will destroy everything in its path, including itself. Three recent 
books suggest that the Fed has the capacity to function as a device of indicative planning, 
coordinating economic activities to fulfill democratically determined social
purposes: Ben S. Bernanke, 21st Century Monetary Policy: The Federal Reserve from the Great 
Inflation to COVID-19a€!. Edward Chancellor, The Price of Time: The Real Story of Interesta€!. Lev 
Menand, The Fed Unbound: Central Banking in a Time of CrisisaC!

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

