Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Cat Rambo: You Sexy Thing: a€~I first learned about hopepunk froma€! Alexandra Rowland. I ended 
up incorporating it in a class I was teaching, All the Punks, which covered cyberpunk, steampunk, 
biopunk, solarpunk, splatterpunk, and morea€! 
<https://whatever.scalzi.com/2021/11/16/the-big-idea-cat-rambo- 3/>

• Alice Evans <https: //w w w.draliceevans ,com/>

•  Ronan Farrow & Jia Tolentino: How Britney Spears Got Free, and What Comes Next'. a€~Spears 
fought for years to end the conservatorship she was under, and finally won. But the legal battles 
arena€™ t overa€! 
<https://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/how-britnev-spears-got-free-and-what-comes-next>

•  John Lippert: Bloomberg 2008a€“12a€“23: a€~John Cochrane was steaming as word of U.S. Treasury 
Secretary Henry Paulsona€™ s plan to buy $700 billion in troubled mortgage assets rippled across 
the University of Chicagoa€!. a€oeWe should have a recession,a€D Cochrane said in November, 
speaking to students and investors in a conference room that looks out on Lake Michigan.
a€oePeople who spend their lives pounding nails in Nevada need something else to doa€Da€!



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: John Lippert on AMe Idiocy of AMe Chicago School in Late 2008

a€!Cochranea€™ s declarationa€”made at a time when the share of the U.S, labor force in 
construction was below its long-run average and had been below its long-run average for fifteen 
monthsa€”that: a€oewe should have a recession. People who spend their lives pounding nails in 
Nevada need something else to do.a€D No recognition at all that the structural-adjustment ca€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 2 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong

• Mark Silk: Did John Adams Out Thomas Jefferson & Sally Hemings?


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: Mark Silk: Did John Adams Out Thomas Jefferson & Sally Hemings?


Mark Silk: Did John Adams Out Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings?: a€~The first eight months of 
1802 were mercifully dull for President Jefferson. France and England signed a peace treaty, 
reopening European and Caribbean ports to American commerce. The Navy was making headway against 
Barbary pirates in the Mediterranean. West Point was established. A pria€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 1 like A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong

Paragraphs:

Andy Kessler: The Chip That Changed the World'. a€~In 1969, Nippon Calculating Machine Corp, asked 
Intel to design 12 custom chips for a new printing calculator. Engineers Federico Faggin, Stanley 
Mazor and Ted Hoff were tired of designing different chips for various companies and suggested 
instead four chips, including one programmable chip they could use for many products. Using only 
2,300
transistors, they created the 4004 microprocessor. Four bits of data could move around the chip at 
a time. The half-inch-long rectangular integrated circuit had a clock speed of 750 kilohertz and 
could do about 92,000 operations a second. Intel introduced the 3,500-transistor, eight-bit 8008 in 
1972; the 29,000-transistor, 16-bit 8086, capable of 710,000 operations a second, was introduced in 
1978. IBM used
the  next iteration, the Intel 8088, for its first personal computer. By comparison, Applea€™ s new 
Ml Max processor has 57 billion transistors doing 10.4 trillion floating-point operations a second. 
That is at least a billionfold increase in computer power in 50 years. Wea€™ ve come a long way, 
baby. When I met Mr. Hoff in the 1980s, he told me that he once took his broken television to a 
repairman, who
noted a problem with the microprocessor. The repairman then asked why he was laughinga€!

LINK: chttps://www.wsj 
.com/articles/the-chip-that-changed-the-world-microprocessor-computing-transistor-breakthrough-intel
-11636903999>

Martin Ravallion: The Degrowth Fallacy : a€~In an example of the Degrowth Fallacy, in a radio 
interviewa€! Jason Hickel (introduced as an economist and anthropologist at the London School of 
Economics) points to Costa Rica to support his claim that rich countries can maintain their social 
outcomes at lower mean income. Yes, Costa Rica has had good social and environmental policies over 
many
decades, and other countries can learn from that experience. However, the country did this in 
combination with economic growth. Indeed, mean income has tripled in real terms since 1960, and the 
average growth rate has been above average for Latin America (World Bank). By combining social 
policies with policies that directly supported economic growth, Costa Rica was able to attain over 
time good
social outcomes for a country at its level of mean income. Costa Rica is definitely not an example 
of how good social outcomes are possible without economic growthaCI

LINK: chttps://economicsandpoverty.com/2017/12/2 l/the-degrowth-fallacy/>

Paul Krugman (May 21,2020): Crying Fire! Fire! In Noaha€™ s Flood'. a€~Ia€™m getting a lot of rage 
from people who want their deficit-and-inflation crisis, and wona€™t take no for an answera€!. I 
was trying to come up with an explanation of the curious insistence that wea€™re facing an imminent 
interest rate and/or inflation crunch; then I realized that John Maynard Keynes had already done
that, in explaining the hold classical economics retained on thought despite its obvious inability 
to account for the Great Depression: a€oeThe completeness of the Ricardian victory is something of 
a curiosity and a mystery. It must have been due to a complex of suitabilities in the doctrine to 
the environment into which it was projected. That it reached conclusions quite different from what 
the ordinary
uninstructed person would expect, added, I suppose, to its intellectual prestige. That its 
teaching, translated into practice, was austere and often unpalatable, lent it virtue. That it was 
adapted to carry a vast and consistent logical superstructure, gave it beauty. That it could 
explain much social injustice and apparent cruelty as an inevitable incident in the scheme of 
progress, and the attempt to change such
things   as likely on the whole to do more harm than good, commended it to authority. That it 
afforded a measure of justification to the free activities of the individual capitalist, attracted 
to it the support of the dominant social force behind authoritya€la€D And all of this has a real, 
damaging effect on policy. The econ team at Goldman Sachs (not online) makes the interesting point 
that FOMC inflation
forecasts are pulled up by a small group that keeps forecasting much higher inflation than anyone 
else; this in turn helps limit the Feda€™ s willingness to support the economy. And the deficit 
hawks have, of course, killed any hope of more stimulus. Anyway, Ia€™ m sure that the usual 
suspects wona€™ t change their tune. Even if we do have a Japan-style lost decade, theya€™ 11 keep 
predicting
hyperinflation just around the cornera€!

LINK: chttps://krugman.blogs .nytimes .com/2010/05/21/crying-fire-fire-in-noahs-flood-3/>

Noah Smith: The Metaverse & (Near-)Infinite Economic Growth'. a€~Think of the classic movie 
American Graffitia€\ a 1950s world where young people have fun, hook up, and get social status by 
driving around in cars all day and all nighta€! hugely resource intensive. Nowadaysa€! chatting, 
sharing stories, and playing video gamesa€! Tindera€! get social status by accumulating Facebook 
likes, TikTok
views, and Twitter follows. Thus, young people have been ditching cars for smartphonesa€!less 
gasoline burned, less steel and aluminum useda€!. But more funa€!. The Metaverse is just that 
process taken one step further. The more fun or useful stuff you can do in VRa€”games, business 
meetings, vacations, hangoutsa€”the less youa€™ 11 have to suck up physical resources to do it in 
meatspace. The
more                                                                                                
                                                                                you can transform 
your subjective world by overlaying it with AR, the less youa€™ 11 have to suck up resources 
transforming your physical environment to suit your tastes. Thus, the Metaverse can help continue 
the decoupling of physical resource use from economic growth. The logical endpoint of all this, of 
course, is personality uploada€!

LINK:

Noahpinion

The Metaverse and (near-)infinite economic growth

People have been pestering me to write a blog post about how infinite growth is possible on a 
planet with finite resources. Now Facebook has changed its name to Meta, and has announced that 
ita€™ s spending $10 billion this year on augmented reality and virtual reality, which it calls the 
a€ceMetaversea€D. So that gives me a good opportunity to write that post a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 41 likes A- 75 comments A- Noah Smith

Derek Davison: Justice Is for The Bad Guys'. a€~I dredge this exchange back up because so far this 
month wea€™ ve seen two fairly explicit cases that undermine Secretary Blinkena€™ s assertion that 
the United States has the a€cedemonstrateda€D a€cecapacitya€D a€oeto make sure that there is 
accountability in any situations where there are concerns about the use of force and human 
rights.a€D
Leta€™ s consider them briefly. The first of these cases involves the August 29 drone strike in 
Kabul, the Pentagona€™ s parting shot on its way out of Afghanistan. After first insisting that the 
strike was a a€cerighteousa€D one that had prevented an imminent Islamic State suicide bombing at 
the overcrowded Kabul airport, the US military acknowledged weeks latera€”and only after a New York 
Times
investigation turned up no evidence to support that initial claima€”that its attack had in fact 
killed ten civilians and zero would-be bombersa€!. Case twoa€! reaches back to the last days of the 
war against the Islamic Statea€™ s a€cecaliphatea€D in 2019. With ISa€™ s remnants having taken up 
position in the eastern Syrian town of Baghuz, on March 18,2019, the US military undertook an 
airstrike on a
large   crowd of people huddled in a field just outside of town. That strike killed at least 70 
people, we now know, thanks to another New York Times investigation, that they, or most of them, 
were civiliansa€!. The Pentagon knew they were civilians, because one of its drones filmed the 
crowd and the strike. Nevertheless, military officials quickly moved to cover it upa€!. Charged 
with determining whether or
not they themselves had committed a war crime in orchestrating this airstrike, the members of Task 
Force 9 unsurprisingly concluded that they had not. And the Pentagon was happy to let that be the 
last word and to leave the March 18 incident to languish in obscurity, despite several internal 
whistleblower reports to the contrarya€’’until the Times investigation reached the publication 
stage. Now the
Pentagon has acknowledged that the airstrike took place but is insisting that it was legitimate. It 
claims the death toll included only four confirmed civilians along with 16 IS fighters and 60 
people whose circumstances could not be determineda€!. Because the US military is allowed to 
investigate itself, a privilege that only agents of national security or law enforcement are 
permitted to exercise, wea€™ 11
never know, and the victims of the Baghuz strike will likely never have justice. Their families 
will see even less than the pittance the Pentagon intends to give to the families of the Kabul 
victims. Your mileage may vary, but personally I see nothing in either of these instances to 
suggest that the United States can be trusted to investigate its own atrocitiesa€!

LINK:


Discontents


Discontents

Justice Is for The Bad Guys

Back in June, during a session of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Congressperson Ilhan Omar 
(D-MN) asked Secretary of State Antony Blinken a pointed question about international justice. 
Given that the United States rejects the authority of the International Criminal Court to judge US 
military personnel, Omar asked, how could the victims of possibla€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- Derek Davison

Addison Del Mastro: The Record-Tape Missing Link'. a€~A fascinating piece of industrial design 
evolution: This is another one of those occasional old-technology posts (a bunch of you came in 
through one of those, so hopefully youa€™ 11 appreciate this!) As is often the case, Ia€™ ve 
learned most of whata€™ s in here from Techmoan, a British YouTuber who acquires and demonstrates 
an incredible
range of old and largely forgotten electronic devices, largely failed audio and video formatsa€!

LINK:

The Record-Tape Missing Link

This is another one of those occasional old-technology posts (a bunch of you came in through one of 
those, so hopefully youa€™ 11 appreciate this!) As is often the case, Ia€™ ve learned most of 
whata€™ s in here from Techmoan, a British YouTuber who acquires and demonstrates an incredible 
range of old and largely forgotten electronic devices, largely failed audia€!


The Record-Tape Missing Link

This is another one of those occasional old-technology posts (a bunch of you came in through one of 
those, so hopefully youa€™ 11 appreciate this!) As is often the case, Ia€™ ve learned most of 
whata€™ s in here from Techmoan, a British YouTuber who acquires and demonstrates an incredible 
range of old and largely forgotten electronic devices, largely failed audia€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- Addison Del Mastro

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

