Subscribe now

CONDITION: Filibuster Elimination Threat:

When I arrived in Washington, in the spring of 1993, the very wise then-Assistant Secretary of the 
Treasury for Legislative Affairs Mike Levy told me that things would pass the senate only under 
three conditions:

1. They were Republican priorities that enough Democrats thought were on balance good for the 
nation, or

2. They were done via the Reconciliation process, or

3. Republicans would go along because Democrats would credibly threaten to use Reconciliation to 
pass something less good for the country that Republicans would dislike even more.
He was wise.

Now we need to add:

(4) Things pass because if they dona€™ t Manchin and Sinema will be really pissed, and might vote 
to get rid of the filibuster.
This is how I think it will be in the Senate, for a while.

The House over the next two years will be weird: it will be almost impossible for McCarthy to 
control the Republican caucus, so the things that will pass the House will be:

1. Republican priorities where Speaker McCarthy will induce and Hakeem Jeffries will allow enough 
Democrats to join the coalition to make up for Republican defections.

2. Democratic priorities that moderate Republicans think are good for the nation where 
Shadow-Speaker Jeffries will convince ten or so moderate Republicans to tell McCarthy to go f*** 
himself.

Joseph Zeballos-Roig: Big scandal, weird scandal: a€~Sen. Todd Young, the Indiana Republican who 
helped author one of this yeara€™ s highest-profile bipartisan bills, recently offered his 
theorya€!. Working across the aisle helped Republicans keep the filibuster alive in a 50-50 Senate 
by givinga€l Manchina€l anda€l Sinemaa€l winsa€l. a€oe [Republican] leadership [did not] try to 
blow up
deals,a€D Young saida€l McConnella€l. a€oeWe wanteda€l center-right or center-left deals that had 
broad appeala€l but as importantly, kept Sinema and Manchin happy so they didn't join the 
'eliminate the filibuster' crowd. It was a wise calculation.a€D McConnell said much the samea€l. 
Passing the bipartisan bills was in the a€oebest interest of the country,a€D it also a€oemay have
reassureda€D Manchin and Sinemaa€l. Young also suggested CHIPS would have drawn more GOP support 
under a Republican administration. a€oel had countless colleagues approach me and say that they 
believed in this investment and believed it was important to national security and economic 
security ,a€d he said. a€oeBut they shared with me this was a very hard argument for some
constituentsa€Da€!

Share

FOCUS: Perhaps Some Stochastic Parrots Are Intentional?:

a€oeTell me a storya€D, I prompt Chat-GPT:

Tell me a story...

Once upon a time, in a small village nestled in the rolling hills of the
countryside, there lived a young girl named Maria. She was a bright and
curious  child, always eager to explore the world around her and learn new
things.

One dav. while wanderina throuah the fields near her home. Maria came


across a strange and beautiful flower. She had never seen anything like it
before, with its bright purple petals and delicate, fragrant scent.

Intrigued, Maria plucked the flower from the ground and took it home with
her. She spent the afternoon studying it, marveling at its intricate structure
and trying to learn as much as she could about it.

As the sun began to set, Maria decided to plant the flower in a pot on her
windowsill, where it could receive plenty of sunlight. She watered it carefully
and tended to it every day, watching as it grew and bloomed into a stunning
display of color.

Over time, the flower became a source of joy and inspiration for Maria. She
would sit for hours, lost in thought as she gazed at its beauty and tried to
capture its essence in her drawings and paintings.


As the years passed, Maria grew into a talented artist, her love for the
magical flower fueling her creativity and passion. And even as she moved on
to                                                             new adventures and experiences, the 
flower remained a constant source
of inspiration and wonder, a symbol of the beauty and magic that can be
found in the world if we only take the time to look.

What is Chat-GPT doing here? We are told:

Murray Shanahan: Talking About Large Language Models <https://arxiv.org/pdf/2212.03551 
.pdf?ref=the-diff> a€~[It] has no communicative intenta€l no understanding^! does nota€! have 
beliefsa€!. All it does, at a fundamental level, is sequence predictiona€!. Knowing that the word 
a€oeBurundia€n is likely to succeed the words a€oeThe country to the south of Rwanda isa€d is not 
the

same as knowing that Burundi is to the south of Rwandaa€l. A compelling illusiona€!. Yeta€! such 
systems are fundamentally not like ourselvesa€! presenta€! a patchwork of less-than-human with 
superhuman capacities, of uncannily human-like with peculiarly inhuman behavioursa€!. It may 
require an extensive period of interacting with, of living with, these new kinds of artefact before 
we learn
how best to talk about them. Meanwhile, we should try to resist the siren call of 
anthropomorphismaC!

Does this really get it right? Yes, we should resist aCcethe siren call of anthropomorphismaCD. But 
is it right to say that there is no intentionality here?
My punchline: I disagree with Shanahan. There is intentionality. But we have to be precise about 
just whose.

Consider: Yes, what Chat-GPT has done in response to my prompt is to predict a sequence of tokens. 
But what sequence did it predict?

It took all of the sequences of tokensa€”wordsa€”it has available, all of those in which a human 
being responded to "tell me a storya€D in some way, plus some others. It then took those sequences, 
put them, in a bag, shook them, and printed what came out. Chat-GPT had no intention of a€oetelling 
me a storya€D.
But each of the sequences of tokens that went into Chat-GPT had, attached to it, a human who did 
intend to tell a story. Thus all the intentions of all the people who ever told a storya€”they lie 
behind the token sequences are its raw material. Each of the sequences in its database as 
intentionality.

Can there be a sense in which averaging a huge number of speech acts, each of which has 
intentionality, removes the intentionality?

Well, noa€! and yes. Yes, in that what makes things intentional is precisely the individuality of 
the thought process, and that is what is averaged away.
But also noa€!

Remember the a€oeChinese-Speaking Rooma€D?

Wikipedia: Searlea€! supposes that he is in a closed room and has a book with an English version of 
the computer program, along with sufficient papers, pencils, erasers, and filing cabinets. Searle 
could receive Chinese characters through a slot in the door, process them according to the 
program's instructions, and produce Chinese characters as outputa€!. Searle himself would not be 
able to
understand the conversation. ("I don't speak a word of Chinese," he points out)...

It is true that if you accept Searlea€™ s framinga€”a sentence in Chinese comes into the room, and 
he then consults the books in the room to decide how to responda€”then to have the complexity of a 
human brain, the a€ceChinese-Speaking RoomaCD would have to be the size of the globe, and managed 
by 50,000 robots traveling at lightspeed. The system that is the room understands Chinese just as 
well (or poorly) as a
human speaker of Chinese does,

My view is that Chat-GPT already has that branch of intentionality that humans have when they think 
a€oel am going to write a grammatical sentencea€D, because that intentionality was shared by 
virtually everyone whose writings have gone into the bag. And, similarly, if we can elicit 
responses from GPT that are derived from a community of humans every one of which used that 
response with the same intention, I have
no problem ascribing intention to Chat-GPT.

For example:

Could you remind me what is the sentence that linguists most often
use to demonstrate that there is a strong divide between syntax and


semantics'

The sentence that linguists often use to demonstrate the divide
between syntax and semantics is "Colorless green ideas sleep
furiously."  This sentence was famously used by Noam Chomsky in
his                                                         book "Syntactic Structures" to 
illustrate the distinction between
syntax and semantics. Syntax is concerned with the structure and
arrangement of words in a sentence, while semantics is concerned
with the meaning of words and how they relate to each other. The
sentence "Colorless green ideas sleep furiously" is grammatically
correct, but it does not make sense semantically because the words
"colorless," "green," and "furiously" do not typically go together in a
way that conveys a meaningful idea. This example demonstrates that

it ic nnccihln fnr a cpntpnro tn ho Qvntartirallv rnrrnrt hi it


semantically nonsensical.

Every human who has ever used the sentence a€oeColorless green ideas sleep furiouslya€n has done so 
not to assert that colorless green ideas sleep furiously, but to illustrate the huge gulf between 
syntax and semantics.
So I have no problem ascribing that intention to Chat-GPT, just as I have no problema€”at least 
adopting the intentional stancea€”with saying that Chat-GPT intends to write grammatical sentences.

On the other hand:

What is the right conclusion to draw from seeing a black swan?

The phrase "seeing a black swan" is often used as an example of a rare and
unexpected event, and it is derived from the saying "all swans are white,"
which was traditionally used to denote the idea that all members of a
particular category or group have certain characteristics. The phrase "black
swan" was coined by the philosopher and scientist Francis Bacon to refer to
an event that is both rare and has a major impact, and the idea has since
been popularized by the philosopher and statistician Nassim Nicholas Taleb

in his book "The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable."


If you see a black swan, it would be reasonable to conclude that the saying
"all swans are white" is not necessarily true, and that it is possible for a
member of a group or category to exhibit characteristics that are
unexpected     or unusual. It would also be reasonable to conclude that the
occurrence   of a black swan could have a significant impact on your
understanding    of the world and your expectations about what is possible or
probable.

where in his work does francis bacon discuss black swans

Francis Bacon did not use the phrase "black swan" in his writing. The phrase "black swan"
was coined by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his book "The Black Swan: The Impact of the
Highly Improbable," published in 2007. The concept of a "black swan" event, however, can


Francis Bacon did not use the phrase "black swan" in his writing. The phrase "black swan"
was coined by Nassim Nicholas Taleb in his book "The Black Swan: The Impact of the
Highly Improbable," published in 2007. The concept of a "black swan" event, however, can
be traced back to the work of Francis Bacon, who wrote about the idea of rare and
unexpected events in his book "Novum Organum," published in 1620. In this book, Bacon
discusses the concept of "idola," or "idols," which refer to the biases and prejudices that
can influence our thinking and understanding of the world. He argues that these idols can
lead us to make false assumptions about the nature of reality and to overlook or
underestimate the possibility of rare and unexpected events occurring. Bacon's ideas
about         the influence of idols on our thinking and understanding of the world have been
influential in the development of the concept of a "black swan" event.

I remember reading about a€oeblack swansa€D in 1973 (p. 350 of Time Enough for Love <https 
://archive .org/details/timeenoughforlovOOOOhein t4d7/page/350/mode/2up?q=swan>). The phrase was 
certainly not coined by N.N. Taleb. And I very much doubt that it was coined by Francis Bacon.

There is no intentionality here. We have a long, long way to go. Chat-GPT costs, I guess, $30 
million to train and then $0.10 per 300-word answera€”$l for a full 3000-word chat. Unless there 
are clever software improvements I cannot envision, perhaps we need a 100-fold increase in deployed 
computrons for a truly satisfactory conversation: $100 per consultation. And I do not think that 
Moorea€™ s Law is going to save
us.

There is at least the possibility that here we have a task where using wetware is going to always 
be cheaper than using silicon hardwarea€l
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

