Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) From last March: Liz Hippie. The Child Allowance will be, if it becomes permanent, aa€”in the 
words of Joe Biden a€oeBig Fa€”-ing Deal!a€D:

Liz Hippie: The Child Allowance Will Pay Dividends for the Entire U.S. Economy far into the 
Future'. a€~Economists, other social scientists, and
policymakers alike already know from research into other, similar income support programs, such as 
the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program, that increasing the economic resources that families have helps them 
make investments in their childrena€™ s human capital
development, which, in turn, improves childrena€™ s school performance and completion and boosts 
their future earnings A 2018 study finds that an extra

$1,000 in the Earned Income Tax Credit increases the probabilities of children graduating high 
school by 1.3 percent, completing college by 4.2 percent,
and being employed as a young adult by 1 percent, and grows their earnings by 2.2 percent. Other 
recent research finds that a $1,000 tax credit increases
childrena€™ s math and reading scores by 6 percent to 9 percent of a standard deviation. These are 
just two examples of the extensive body of research
into    the positive effects of the EITC on childrena€™ s human capital, with future benefits of 
higher earnings accruing both to the beneficiaries, as well as
the wider economy in the form of increased tax revenue on those higher earningsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-child-allowance-will-pav-dividends-for-the-entire-u-s-economy-far-i
nto-the-future/>

2) A very important point that is often neglected. The labor market is not competitive. But to jump 
from there to the belief that it is monopolistically competitive is also wrong, if
not as wrong:

Arindrajit Dube: a€™ The idea that wages are set competitively, i.e., W=MRPL, is mostly false. But 
the idea that wages are set based on a standard
model of monopsony, MCL=MRPL, may also be false. Rather, imperfect competition in labor market 
means wage setting is guided by a lot of a€oeother
stuff .a€D Soa€! monopsony is real! But current models of wage setting under monopsony may not be! 
Ultimately, imperfect competition in the labor
market allows a wide range of wage policies to arise and survive. What leads those to arise and 
survive, however, depends on a much broader set of factors
than typically considered in standard models of monopsonistic competition. These ideas were 
fundamentally understood by institutionalist labor
economists  in early/mid 20th century. Employer wage setting power (monopsony) is a starting point. 
But what wages are set are based also on economic
and   social pressures, norms, and polices. OK, one last time, in meme form. Tired: MRPL=W. Wired: 
MRPL=MCL. Inspired: wages are set by employers
within a range, pressures arising from inside and outside of the workplace. And we need a better, 
more empirically accurate, description of that processa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/arindube/status/14209404858379223Q7>

3) That the economic-growth news is very good does not mean that there is any sense in which 
economic growth is now a€oetoo fasta€U, or that we should ignore how far we still
are from full employment. We should eat the temporary inflation that is being served us to avoid 
another lost half-decade like the Obama first half of the 2010s:

Austin Clemens: ^TThis is a great GDP report: 6.5% annual is better than forecasters predicted 
early in the year, services finally got a huge bump, driven
mostly by restaurants, and we caught up to 2019 GDP. We should ignore it and continue stimulative 
policies. There are big risks right around the corner.
The eviction moratorium is ending, student loan payments are coming back, and enhanced unemployment 
is ending. September is a big cliff. And our labor
market indicators dona€™ t look that great. Employment is still way down from where we were. Lots 
of the unemployed have been unemployed for long
durations, these people are often the hardest to get back into the labor market. And unemployment 
remains elevated for Black Americans, indicating that
the recovery isna€™ t reaching everyone. After the Great Recession, relatively little stimulus was 
done, with most coming in the immediate aftermath, and
the results were disastrous: 5 years of lousy labor market outcomes that hurt millionsa€!

LINK: <https://twitter .com/AustinClemens2/status/1420771452572389379>

4) Karl Popper, Friedrich von Hayek, Joseph Schumpeter, Victor Adler, Peter Drucker, Karl 
Polanyia€”all extraordinarily insightful figures in the social sciences all in the
intellectual ferment of the Austro-Hungarian empire early in the 1900s. A neglected member of this 
group, however, is Karl Polanyia€™ s younger brother Michaela€’’chemist,
cognitive scientist, and moral philosopher:

Brad DeLong: Suppose I wanted to drop a footnote: a€~If my editors would let me, here I would also 
trace the current of 20th-century thought and action for which Michael
Polanyi, born in 1891 in Budapest, is a convenient marker: how society needs not just the 
decentralized mercenary institution of the market and definitely does not need
comprehensive central planning (which can never be more than a fiction), but needs as well 
decentralized fiduciary institutions, focused on advancing knowledge about theory and
practice,   in which status is gained by teaching and learning from othersa€’’institutions like 
modern science, communities of engineering practice, communities of legal
interpretation, honorable journalism, evidence-based politics, and othersa€”and in which people 
follow rules that have been half-constructed and have half-emerged to advance not
just    the private interest and liberties of the participants but to advance the broader public 
interest and public liberties as well.a€™ And at the end of that I would drop a reference to
where people should go to read further. What would the single best reference to drop be?

LINK: <https://twitter.com/delong/status/1419678330039635972>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)This is very strange: we are now moving to public-health policymaking via leaked draft powerpoint 
document. The bottom line is that minimally burdensome non­
pharmaceutical measuresa€”universal indoor masking, social distancing, no large crowds gathering 
and singing in hot, moist, unventilated batcavesa€”are necessary to give the

U.S. time to convince the currently unvaccinated to get vaccinated before the Delta Variant comes 
for them. That will be difficulta€”even though it remains unclear just what the
grifters who are feeding vaccine-resistance think the profitable endgame for them is:

Meredith McMorrow: Improving Communications Around Vaccine Breakthrough & Vaccine Effectiveness'. 
a€~Vaccine breakthrough cases are

expected and increase as a proportion of total cases as vaccine coverage increasesa€!. Vaccine 
breakthrough cases will occur more frequently in congregate
settings, and in groups at risk of primary vaccine failurea€!. Greater risk of disease, 
hospitalization and death among unvaccinated vs. vaccinated people:
National estimates [of vaccine effects:]a€!. Disease Incidence: 8-fold reduction. Hospitalization 
Incidence: 25-fold reduction. Death Incidence: 25-fold
reductiona€!. Delta variant is as transmissible as: chicken poxa€!. Delta variant vaccine 
breakthrough cases may be as transmissible as unvaccinated
casesa€!.   Delta variant may cause more severe diseasea€!. Canada: Higher odds of 
hospitalizationa€! 2.20a€! and deatha€! 2.37a€!. Singapore: Higher
odds   of oxygena€! ICUa€! deatha€! pneumoniaa€!. Scotland: Higher odds of hospitalizationa€!. 
Given increased transmissibility, lower VE [Vaccine
Effectiveness], and current vaccine coverage, NPIs [Non-Pharmaceutical Interventions] needed to 
reduce transmission of Delta varianta€!. Model
Assumptions:  Vaccine effectiveness 75-85%. 50% infections reported. Masking: Source control 40-60% 
effective. Personal protection 20-30%
effectivea€!. UNIVERSAL MASKING IS ESSENTIAL TO REDUCE TRANSMISSION OF DELTA VARIANTa€!

LINK: <https ://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/cdc.pdf>

2) A very good point from Diane Lim. The Biden administration needs to be thinking less of where 
the aggregate demand sweet spot is and thinking more of what the optimal
demand sectoral mix is:

Diane Lim: Will the Infrastructure Bill Fail to Create Jobs Where We Most Need Them?: a€~Two 
months. Thata€™ s how long our most recent economic
recessiona€! lasteda€! February to April 2020a€!. Does the latest policy effort focused on physical 
infrastructure (predominately roads and bridges)
funding   make sense given the economic condition it is intended to treat?a€! Consumer demand is 
largely back, especially in the leisure and hospitality
sectora€!. The trouble witha€! leading with the physical infrastructure investments and not the 
family investments in caregiving and other a€cehuman
infrastructurea€D is that it might not create the kinds of jobs in the industries and occupations 
where our economy is still operating below our full
capacitya€!

LINK: 
<httns://www.avisonvoung.us/sightline/-/article/2021/07/28/will-the-infrastructure-bill-fail-to-crea
te-jobs-where-we-most-


need-them->

3) Smart words about how to create a robust wafer sector underlying our post-industrial economy:

Laura Tyson & John Zysman: Americaa€™s Vital Chip Mission: a€~This yeara€™ s semiconductor 
shortages underscore the need for a comprehensive
strategya€!. Competitive market conditions must prevail throughout the industry, because excessive 
market power in any one segment can jeopardize
supplya€!. What CRSS does mean is that the US should cooperate closely with the European Union, 
Japan, Singapore, Israel, and others who form core
parts                                                                     of its secure supply 
base. CRSS also does not mean preventing China from purchasing or selling semiconductors on global 
markets, or from
developing its own semiconductor industry in ways that do not violate global trade and investment 
rules. Weaponizing trade and investment restrictions to
thwart Chinaa€™ s long-run semiconductor ambitions will be costly and counterproductivea€!. There 
is a danger that generous fiscal support will end up
subsidizing private investments that are already being planneda€!. USa€! ability to prototype and 
scale innovations has been hampered by the a€oelab-to-
fab valley of deatha€D a€! prohibitively expensive to demonstrate, leaving them starved of the 
private investment needed to achieve scale. A promising
approach to address this problem is a pre-competitive public-private R&D partnership^!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/us-semiconductor-strategv-by-laura-tyson-and-john-zysm
an-2021-07>

4) One of the more interesting young moral philosophers in early 1900s Vienna came to the United 
States and became the U.S.a€™ s BOSS management consultant and managerial
theorist. Peter F. Drucker sought the reconciliation between the advantages of capitalisma€”bold 
entrepreneurship and growtha€”and socialisma€’’redistribution, common concern,
and all pulling in the same directiona€”in the figure of the manager, whose social role was 
precisely to arrange things so that society could be an a€oeassociation, in which the free
development of each is the condition for the free development of alla€D. J.D. Connor found for me a 
quote from the a€oeThe Once and Future Managera€D

<https://www.oreilly.com/library/view/peter-f-drucker/9781647820275/10394/QEBPS/xhtml/chapter006.xht
ml>: a€oeThe professional manager has not one job, but three. The first
is to make economic resources economically productive. The manager has an entrepreneurial job, a 
job of moving resources from yesterday into tomorrow; a job, not of minimizing
risk, but of maximizing opportunity. Then there is a managerial or a€~administrativea€™ job of 
making human resources productive, of making people work together, bringing to a
common task their individual skills and knowledge; a job of making strengths productive and 
weaknesses irrelevant which is the purpose of organization. Organization is a machine
for maximizing human strengths. Then there is a third functiona€!. They are public. They are 
visible. They represent. They stand for something in the community. In fact, they are
the only leading group in societya€!. Managers have a public functiona€! Royal Commissions a€! the 
local Boy Scout troopa€!. within their own business by leadership and
example. But they always do discharge it. Nothing anybody who is a manager does is private, in the 
sense that one can say: a€~This is my own affair. It does not concern anybody
else. What I do is, therefore, of no real interest to anybody.a€D Managers are on the stage, with 
the spotlight on thema€™:

Peter F. Drucker: Management: a€~Friedmana€™ s argument that business is an economic institution 
and should stick to its economic task is well
takena€!. But it is also clear that social responsibility cannot be evaded. It is not only that the 
public demands it. It is not only that society needs it. The fact
remains that in modern society there is no other leadership group but managers. If the managers of 
our major institutions, and especially of business, do not
take responsibility for the common good, no one else can or willa€!

LINK: <https://archive.org/details/management0000druc/mode/2up>

5) I am not sure that this is correct. Perhaps it ascribes more rationality and concern for 
long-run societal well-being to the doings of the Chinese government that has always been
focused primarily on maintaining the effective power monopoly of the Chinese Communist Party. But 
it is definitely a possibility:

Noah Smith: Why Is China Smashing Its Tech Industry?: a€~China never really shifted out of survival 
modea€!. Growth has always been toward the telos
of comprehensive national power. Chinaa€™ s young people may be increasingly ready to cash out and 
have some fun, but the leadership is just not
therea€!. Chinaa€™ s leaders look at what kind of technologies they want the countrya€™ s engineers 
and entrepreneurs to be spending their effort on,
[and] theya€! dona€™t wanta€! stuffa€! for fun and convenience^!. Their consumer internet 
sector[a€™s]a€! linka€! [to] geopolitical power had

simply become too tenuous to keep throwing capital and high-skilled labor at it. And so, in classic 
CCP fashion, it was time to smasha€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/whv-is-china-smashing-its-tech-industrv>

6) Coming back to this, from a year ago, as truly the most bizarre thing I have seen an economist 
with a tenured job at a research university saya€”shades of Paul Sweezy receiving
lessons on economic history and political economy from Josef Stalin. Moreover, if the advisors were 
a€ceweaka€D how were they able to keep Tomas Philipson out of the room?
And  if Tomas Philipson really thinks Trump by himself has a€oeinstinctsa€D a€oeon par with many 
Nobel economistsa€D, doesna€™ t that say that economists are unnecessary
for Trump to waste his time listening toa€”that he already knows what they have to say? And what 
reason is there to believe that the world would be a better place if Tomas
Philipson were allowed into the Oval Office, ever? And even if it is cult-membership dynamics, I 
can understand why a careerist might want to work towards (or beyond) a leader
whose armies command from the North Cape of Norway to the sands of Libya. But what is in it for 
Philipson to embarrass himself so completely in front of his colleagues and
professional peers?

Nick Timiraos & Andrew Restuccia (2020a€“06a€“26): White House Economist Tested Positive for 
Covidd€“19: a€~[Tomas] Philipson praised Mr.
Trumpa€™ s economic instincts as a€oeon par with many Nobel economists I have worked with at 
Chicago ,a€D but he said other officials had
marginalized the CEA, which normally has three members but will be down to just one with Mr. 
Philipsona€™ s departure. a€oeWeak advisersa€D
excluded a€oegood advice by the CEA, even though the president would have benefited from it,a€D he 
saida€!

LINK: <https://www.ws j 
.com/articles/white-house-economist-tested-positive-for-covid-19-11593212011>

7) Paul Krugman is thinking, productively, about similarities and differences between post-COVID 
plague and post-WWII civilian economic reopening:

Paul Krugman: What Inflation Risks & My Intermittent Fasting Have in Common: a€~This creates a 
situation very different from the one that prevailed
after World War II. Then, people rushed to buy the cars and home appliances they had been prevented 
from buying under rationinga€!. There really was a
lot of pent-up demand. But you cana€™t suddenly eat all the restaurant meals you didna€™t get to 
eat during lockdown; people will probably spend a
few months dining out more than usual, and they may engage in some revenge vacation and travel. But 
therea€™ s a limit to how much of that you can
doa€”just as therea€™ s a limit to how much you can stuff yourself after a fast daya€!. So my guess 
is that thereaC™ s less to those huge excess savings
numbers and big stimulus numbers than meets the eye. Overheating is still possible, and the Fed 
should keep its eye on that possibility. But the big numbers
arena€™t as scary as they seema€!

LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2>

8) Class and ethnic stumpling-blocks to easy vaccine access are in need of attention:

Scott Lemieux: The Tucker/Berenson Corridor, & the Blue State Holdouts: a€~The CO VID surge is of 
course concentrated heavily among the
unvaccinateda€”the vaccines are extremely effective !a€’’and so ita€™ s not surprising which states 
are seeing the worst numbersa€!. Stilla€! lower
vaccination    rates in the Black community have concentrated cases there to an extraordinary 
degree. Before vaccines, Black people represented about one-
third                                                                    of new coronavirus cases 
in Maryland and half in D.C. In the latest data, Black people represent just under half of the new 
cases in Maryland and
more than 80 percent in D.C. In jurisdictions where ita€™ s politically viable, we need more 
vaccine mandates and more positive incentives to take the
vaccines. Solving the problem of MAGA non-vaccination is harder but therea€™ s still plenty of 
lower-hanging fruit out there in absolute numbersa€l

LINK: 
<https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2021/07/the-tucker-berenson-corridor-and-the-blue-state-holdou
ts>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


