Things that went whizzing by that I want to remember...

First:

Here we see a striking difference between Paul Krugman and Larry Summers. Krugman sees models as 
intuition pumpsa€”and believes strongly, very strongly, that if you cannot make a simple model of 
it, it is probably wrong. Summers believes that our models are, at best, filing systems (and at 
worst tools for misleading the unwary)a€”and that the right way to think about the economy is as, 
in some way, a two-state system, with expansion being one state and
recession the other, so that you cannot halt an expansion without tipping the economy fully into 
recession:

Paul Krugman: Wonking Out: Braking Bad?: a€~A more explicit critique comes from Larry Summers, who 
has warned that the stimulus may lead to stagflation. He appears to believe that the Fed cana€™ t 
use monetary tightening to offset overheating generated by fiscal expansion without causing a nasty 
recession. But I have to admit to being a bit puzzled about whya€!. Summers[a€™ s]a€! underlying 
macroeconomic model is
pretty much the same as minea€!. And that model seems to say that the Fed can indeed tap on the 
brakes if needed. Indeed, the Fed has done that in the past: in the 80s and again in the 90s it 
acted to rein in booms without causing recessionsa€!. Claims that we cana€™ t rely on the Fed to 
rein in inflation if the stimulus turns out to be too big have to rest on some departure from the 
workhorse model most sensible people use to think
about macroeconomic policya€!. Even if youa€™re uncomfortable with President Bidena€™ s fiscal 
policies, you should be very cautious about making arguments against them that rely on novel 
propositions about why inflation cana€™t be contained. Conventional analysis says what Janet Yellen 
said: If the stimulus proves bigger than needed, the Fed can keep things under control. If youa€™re 
asserting otherwise, think hard about
why youa€™re saying thata€!

LINK: chttps://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2>

My take? Of the last six tightening cycles, three have been followed by demand-shock recessions 
within two years of the tightening cyclea€™ s end. I interpret this as: you gotta halt the 
tightening before you overdo it, and that is not the easiest thing in the world. But there is no 
law-like regularity there.

FRED — Unemployment Rate

— Effective Federal Funds Rate

15.0

Substantial monetary tightening

1985             1990             1995             2000             2005             2010           
  2015            2020

Snippet from a Dialogue:

Axiothea: The gap between the labor-force participation rate for prime-age workers and the 
unemployment rate is still largea€”as large as it was in 2014. That suggests to me that our first 
take should be that, except for rate-of-change effects, the labor market now is about as tight as 
it was in 2014.

Kephalos: That the a€oelabor shortagea€n crowd thinks that the unemployment rate includes a bunch 
of people who are really out-of-the-labor-force is something I find somewhat disturbing. Or do they 
not know that unemployment is still elevated?

Glaukon: The job-openings series hit an extraordinary record high at the end of March: over 8 
million. I suggest that helps answer some of the questions. It certainly would not be easy to fill 
that many slots quickly, no matter what level of benefits people are receiving (or indeed, how 
quickly employers boost wages).


FRED — Labor Force Participation Rate - 25-54 Yrs.

— Employment Rate: Aged 25-54: All Persons for the United States

Share


Share

Paragraphs:

Yes, there is a substantial amount of craziness in the froth around the a€oefight structural 
racisma€D movement. No: I do not think it is terribly important. Any further questions?

John Ganz: a€o?Thata€™ s Not A Personality, Sweetiea€m a€~Tema Okuna€™ s anti-racism training 
materialsa€! with a slightly different emphasisa€! sound likea€!white nationalis[m]a€!. They 
suggest only a€oewhite supremacy culturea€D inculcates fastidiousness, precision and a concern with 
logic and objectivitya€! white supremacist propaganda that connects a€cecivilizationa€D necessarily 
with whitenessa€!
LINK: <https://iohnganz.substack.eom/p/thats-not-a-personalitv-sweetie>

When Tim Duy left the open internet, the public sphere took a big loss:

Tim Duy: Fed Watch 202la€ “05a€ “10: a€™ It strains credibility to argue that the enhanced 
unemployment benefits do not disincentive job search efforts. That said, I fear unemployment 
benefits receive outsized attentiona€!. Financial support from tax rebates, ongoing pandemic fears, 
lack of access to childcare and schools, and retirements. Together, these factors point toward a 
fairly slow recovery of the labor supplya€!. There is
also the fundamental issue that firing happens more quickly than hiringa€!. A level shift up in 
wages and prices does not by itself equate to a change in the underlying dynamic that would 
perpetuate into persistently higher inflation. We most likely will not have much sense of the 
persistence of inflation until the known base and reopening effects pass. That means the Fed will 
not want to validate any moves by market participants to pull
rate hikes forward again on the basis of near-term inflation numbersa€!

I do think that worry about raising taxes should be postponed until interest rates have 
semi-normalized. But, otherwise, this is very wise indeed:

Barry Eichengreen: Will the Productivity Revolution Be Postponed?: a€~The 1918a€“20 influenzaa€! 
came on the heels of advancesa€! the assembly linea€! the superheterodyne receivera€! Radio 
Corporation of America, the leading high-tech companya€! chemical processesa€! lowered fertilizer 
costsa€!. Buta€! the full impact was felt only in the 1930s. Firms used downtime during the Great 
Depression to reorganize production,
and those least capable of doing so exiteda€!. Government invested in roads, allowing the nascent 
trucking industry to boost productivity in distribution. But more than a decade first had to 
passa€!. This extended delay suggests two important lessons. First, some lag is likelya€!. Second, 
government can take steps to ensure that the acceleration commences sooner rather than latera€!. It 
would be counterproductive, obviously, to curtail
infrastructure spendinga€! or spending on early childhood educationa€!. But the more concerned you 
are about a delay before faster productivity growth materializes, the more strenuously you should 
insist that Bidena€™ s spending plans be financed with taxes in order to avert the overheating 
scenarioa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/pandemic-technologv-delaved-effect-on-productivitv-bv-
barrv-eichengreen-2021-05>

a€oeNeoconservatisma€n focused on the Cold War and the a€oetraditional family a€Ua€” with more than 
a soupA§on of racism attached. a€oeNeoliberalisma€n focused on economic structure and incentives. 
They were not, really, allied, except at moments of convenience. This is not to say that people 
could be both. But it is also worth noting that a€oeneoconservatisma€n was a strong reaction 
against Nixon-Kissinger-Ford foreign policy:

Adam Tooze: Chartbook Newsletter #19: a€~In 1971 Congress passed the Comprehensive Child 
Development Billa€!. As Walter Mondale remarked at the time: a€oethe American people must realize 
that there is no answer to the unfairness of American life that does not include a massive 
preschool comprehensive child development program. Anything less than that is an official admission 
by this country that we dona€™t care.a€D
Despite the fact that the Bill was passed with bipartisan support by both the House and the Senate, 
it was vetoed by Richard Nixon. In the explanation for his veto he warned that public child care 
would weaken the family and import to the United States the practices of the Soviet Uniona€!. The 
alliance between neoliberalism and neoconservatisma€! linking a defense of a restored 
a€cetraditionala€D family to a reassertion of the market
order and an overturning of the New Deal compromise on welfarea€!

LINK: <https://adamtooze.substack.eom/p/chartbook-newsletter-19>

Longer:

Furman and Powell are talking sense, both about the current situation and about the uncertainties:

Jason Furman & Wilson Powell: The US Labor Market Is Running Hota€\ or Not?: a€~The United States 
added 266,000 jobs in April while the unemployment rate rose slightly to 6.1 percent with the 
realistic unemployment rate, which adjusts for misclassification and the unusual decline in labor 
force participation, falling to 7.6 percenta€! still 10 million jobs short of its pre-pandemic 
trend in April with the employment rate down


The labor market has still been behaving as if there was relatively little or even no slack left: 
Openings were at record levels, quits were near record levels in February, composition-adjusted 
wages were growing at the same pace they did in the relatively tight 2019 labor market with the 
largest wage gains for the lowest-wage workers, wages not adjusted for changing composition rose 
0.7 percent in April, and average weekly hours remain
very higha€!. With so many conflicting signals as the labor market changes rapidly with demand and 
supply returning to different degrees in different sectors, it is hard to make a confident 
assessments!.

The labor market has a ways to go before it is healed. The question is what form this adjustment 
will take and what the risks area€!. Looking forward there are good reasons to expect large 
increases in both demand for labor and supply of labora€!. One downside scenario is overheatings!. 
A second downside scenario is an incomplete jobs recoveryS!. The third downside scenario is that 
the virus itself takes a turn for the worseS! The
most likely outcome may be the Goldilocks scenario. In this scenario both demand and supply return. 
Patches of mismatch in timing and sectors would lead to noticeable shortages and price and wage 
increases in some areas, especially over the spring and summer as high demand is temporarily unable 
to fully be satisfied by available labor. However, these mismatches work themselves out with only 
transitory increases in the level of
prices and no persistent changes in inflation or inflation expectations .a€!

LINK: <https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/us-labor-market-running-hotor-not>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Hoisted from the Archives:

When I first saw the Solow growth model in one of my first economics classes, I raised my hand, and 
I asked: Why is it assumed that gross savings is a constant share of gross incomea€”that is, income 
plus depreciation. Isna€™t that the same as assuming that people are too stupid to calculate 
deprecation? Shouldna€™t the right assumption be that net savings is a constant share of nerincome?
The teacher then filibustered.

I eventually asked Bob Solow this question. He saida€”accuratelya€”that in his original paper it 
had indeed been net savings and net output (Cf. Solow (1956): A Contribution to the Theory of 
Economic Growth <http: //piketty.pse .ens .fr/files/Solo w1956.pdf>, in which there is no 
deprecations’’the key parameters are Seethe savings rate, the capital-output ratio, the rate of 
increase of the labor force). When asked why he had shifted to gross savings as a
constant share of gross income, he shrugged his shoulders and said SUreferees".

Indeed.

Unless you assume that people cannot calculate depreciation, the first optimizing model for a 
representative agent one would naturally write down has net savings a share of net income, with the 
share depending on expected real risk and return.

I have always taken it to be a sign of the low quality of so much of the criticism of Thomas 
PikettyS™ s Capital in the 21st Century that professors claim PikettyS™ s assumption that net 
savings is a constant share of net income is a gotchaS”is (a) some kind of an analytical mistake, 
because it implies an ever-growing share of depreciation in gross output in a world where the 
economic growth rate of the economy n+g = 0 is zero; and (b) that it is a hugely
consequential mistake. IMHO, you can only maintain it is consequential if you lack familiarity with 
the NIPA, and its depreciation ratesS”if the SceillustrativeSD deprecation rate you keep in year 
head is 10% of income-earning wealth a year, and so think that in the U.S. today annual deprecation 
allowances are more like $12 trillion/year (60% of GDP, 12% of the income-earning wealth stock) 
than like $4 trillion/year (15% of GDP; 4% of the income­
earning wealth stock).

This, seven years ago, really did not go well at all.

You woulda thunk that people wouldnS™ t double down after it was pointed out to them that (a) far 
from being fundamental and canonical, depreciation was not even in the Solow (1956) that is cited 
ten times a day, and (b) that something is badly wrong with your thinking if the numbers you have 
in your head say that depreciations’’capital consumption allowancesS”are 60% of U.S. GDP. But no! 
Far from it!:

Per Krusell & Tony Smith: Is PikettyaC™s aCceSecond Law of Capitalismd€dFundamental?^.'[PikettyS™ 
s] argument about the behavior of k/y as growth slows, in its disarming simplicity, does not fully 
resonate with those of us who have studied basic growth theoryS! orS! optimizing growths!. Did we 
miss something important, even fundamental, that has been right in front of us all along? Those of 
you with standard
modern trainings! have probably already noticed the difference between PikettyS™ s equation and the 
textbook versions!. The capital-to-income ratio is not s/g but rather s/(g+T), where V is the rate 
at which capital depreciates when growth falls all the way to zero, the denominator would not go to 
zero but instead would go from, say 0.12S”with g around 0.02 and L=0.1 as reasonable estimatesS”to 
0.1S!S™

LINK: <https ://web .archive.org/web/20150529012920/http://www.econ.yale .edu/smith/piketty 1 .pdf>

James Hamilton: Educating Brad DeLong'. S~Reader Salim points out that I was misinterpreting 
PikettyS™ s use of a 10% figure in his books™ s calculations of depreciation. Piketty uses 10% for 
depreciation as a percent of GDP, not as a percent of capital as my original post suggested. In 
order not to mislead, I have deleted the inaccurate paragraphs that were included in the first 
version of this postSiS™
LINK: <https://econbrowser.com/archives/2014/06/educating-brad-delong>

Per Krusell: S~We consider the subject of PikettyS™ s work really importantS!. ThisS! however, is 
no excuse for using inadequate methodology or misleading argumentsS!. We provided an example 
calculation where we assigned values to parametersS’’among them the rate of depreciation. DeLongS™ 
s main point is that the rate we are using is too highS!. It is, however, disappointing that 
DeLongS™ s main point is a detail
in an example aimed mainly, it seems, at discrediting us by making us look like incompetent 
macroeconomistsS!. We have read Pikettya€™ s book and papers, and so we of course know that Piketty 
knows; our note is thus not written for him but instead, as we say in the introduction to the 
paper, for all of those who might be puzzled by the striking result that he derives from his 
non-standard theorya€!a€™

LINK: <https://ekonomistas.se/2014/05/29/krusell-och-smith-darfor-koper-vi-inte-pikettys-prognos/>

Brad DeLong: Brad DeLong brad .delong @ gmail .com Wed, Jun 4,2014,2:34 PM: Please tell me if I am 
crazya€I.

Pikettya€™ s estimates of the capital/annual income ratio in France and Britain in 1910 are both 
equal to 7. At an annual depreciation rate of 10% and with a net-of-depreciation concept of income, 
that means that 41.176% of gross income is devoted to replacing worn-out capital.
That cana€™t be what anybody thinks, can it? For Pikettya€™ s purposes, a 10%/year rate of 
deprecation cannot be a sensible choice can it? Krusell and Smitha€™ s choice of a 10%/year 
depreciation rate to calibrate Pikettya€™ s model makes no sense, does it?

Do people really think that in 1900 41.176% of French gross output was taken up by capital 
consumption?

Physical capital depreciation rates in growth (as opposed to business-cycle) models are more like 
5% than 10%, arena€™t they?

And to the extend that a substantial chunk of your capital stock takes the form of 
high-productivity landa€“which doesna€™t depreciated“5% is too large, isna€™t it?
Am I crazy?

Sincerely Yours,
Brad DeLong

Thomas Piketty: a€™ Hello, we do provide long run series on capital depreciation in our a€oeCapital 
is backa€D paper with Gabriel (see <http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/capitalisback>, appendix country 
tables US.8, JP.8, etc.). The series are imperfect and incomplete, but they show that in pretty 
much every country capital depreciation has risen from 5a€“8% of GDP in the 19th century and early 
20th century to 10a€“13% of GDP in the late
20th and early 21st centuries, i.e. from about 1% of capital stock to about 2%a€!

Best,
Thomasa€™

Dear Professors Krusell, Smith, Hamilton:

This is not going well at alla€!.

At Pikettya€™ s reported wealth-to-annual-income ratio for France in 1910 of 700%, a 10%/year 
depreciation rate implies that capital consumption is 70% of net incomea€”41% of gross output.
Thus I have seven questions:

1. Do you believe that capital consumption was 70% of net income/41% of gross output in France in 
1910?

2. If you do so believe, how is such a remarkably high sharea€“40% of all economic activity in 
France devoted to replacing and repairing capital as it wears out and becomes obsoletea€“consistent 
with even a surface acquaintance of the structure of the French economy in 1910?

3. If you do so believe, can you point me to any sources to back up such a huge wedge between gross 
output and net income, especially since Piketty and Zucmana€™ s estimates of the wedge between 
gross output and net income tend to be in the 5a€“8% range for the nineteenth century and the 
10a€“13% range for today?

4. If not, why did you assume a deprecation rate that would lead to such an absurd picture of the 
structure of the French economy as of 1910?

5. Have you thought about what the appropriate depreciation rate should be?


Unless you assume that people cannot calculate depreciation, the first optimizing model for a 
representative agent one would naturally write down has net savings a share of net income, with the 
share depending on expected real risk and return.

I have always taken it to be a sign of the low quality of so much of the criticism of Thomas 
Pikettya€™ s Capital in the 21st Century that professors claim Pikettya€™ s assumption that net 
savings is a constant share of net income is a gotchaa€”is (a) some kind of an analytical mistake, 
because it implies an ever-growing share of depreciation in gross output in a world where the 
economic growth rate of the economy n+g = 0 is zero; and (b) that it is a hugely
consequential mistake. IMHO, you can only maintain it is consequential if you lack familiarity with 
the NIPA, and its depreciation ratesa€”if the a€oeillustrativea€n deprecation rate you keep in year 
head is 10% of income-earning wealth a year, and so think that in the U.S. today annual deprecation 
allowances are more like $12 trillion/year (60% of GDP, 12% of the income-earning wealth stock) 
than like $4 trillion/year (15% of GDP; 4% of the income­
earning  wealth stock).

This, seven years ago, really did not go well at all.

You woulda thunk that people wouldna€™ t double down after it was pointed out to them that (a) far 
from being fundamental and canonical, depreciation was not even in the Solow (1956) that is cited 
ten times a day, and (b) that something is badly wrong with your thinking if the numbers you have 
in your head say that depreciation^’’capital consumption allowancesa€”are 60% of U.S. GDP. But no! 
Far from it!:

Per Krusell & Tony Smith: Is Pikettya€™ s a€ceSecond Law of Capitalismd€dFundamental?^.'[Pikettya€™ 
s] argument about the behavior of k/y as growth slows, in its disarming simplicity, does not fully 
resonate with those of us who have studied basic growth theorya€! ora€! optimizing growtha€!. Did 
we miss something important, even fundamental, that has been right in front of us all along? Those 
of you with standard
modern traininga€! have probably already noticed the difference between Pikettya€™ s equation and 
the textbook versiona€!. The capital-to-income ratio is not s/g but rather s/(g+T), where r is the 
rate at which capital depreciates when growth falls all the way to zero, the denominator would not 
go to zero but instead would go from, say 0.12a€”with g around 0.02 and T=0.1 as reasonable 
estimatesa€”to 0.1a€!a€™

LINK: chttps://web .archive.org/web/20150529012920/http://www.econ.yale .edu/smith/piketty 1 .pdf>

James Hamilton: Educating Brad DeLong'. a€~Reader Salim points out that I was misinterpreting 
Pikettya€™ s use of a 10% figure in his booka€™ s calculations of depreciation. Piketty uses 10% 
for depreciation as a percent of GDP, not as a percent of capital as my original post suggested. In 
order not to mislead, I have deleted the inaccurate paragraphs that were included in the first 
version of this posta€!a€™
LINK: <https://econbrowser.com/archives/2014/06/educating-brad-delong>

Per Krusell: a€~We consider the subject of Pikettya€™ s work really importanta€!. Thisa€! however, 
is no excuse for using inadequate methodology or misleading argumentsa€!. We provided an example 
calculation where we assigned values to parametersa€’’among them the rate of depreciation. 
DeLonga€™ s main point is that the rate we are using is too higha€!. It is, however, disappointing 
that DeLonga€™ s main point is a detail
in an example aimed mainly, it seems, at discrediting us by making us look like incompetent 
macroeconomistsa€!. We have read Pikettya€™ s book and papers, and so we of course know that 
Piketty knows; our note is thus not written for him but instead, as we say in the introduction to 
the paper, for all of those who might be puzzled by the striking result that he derives from his 
non-standard theorya€!a€™

LINK: <https://ekonomistas.se/2014/05/29/krusell-och-smith-darfor-koper-vi-inte-pikettys-prognos/>

Brad DeLong: Brad DeLong brad .delong @ gmail .com Wed, Jun 4,2014,2:34 PM: Please tell me if I am 
crazya€!.

Pikettya€™ s estimates of the capital/annual income ratio in France and Britain in 1910 are both 
equal to 7. At an annual depreciation rate of 10% and with a net-of-depreciation concept of income, 
that means that 41.176% of gross income is devoted to replacing worn-out capital.
That cana€™t be what anybody thinks, can it? For Pikettya€™ s purposes, a 10%/year rate of 
deprecation cannot be a sensible choice can it? Krusell and Smitha€™ s choice of a 10%/year 
depreciation rate to calibrate Pikettya€™ s model makes no sense, does it?

Do people really think that in 1900 41.176% of French gross output was taken up by capital 
consumption?

Physical capital depreciation rates in growth (as opposed to business-cycle) models are more like 
5% than 10%, arena€™t they?

And to the extend that a substantial chunk of your capital stock takes the form of 
high-productivity landa€ “which doesna€™t depreciated “5% is too large, isna€™t it?
Am I crazy?

Sincerely Yours,
Brad DeLong

Thomas Piketty: a€™ Hello, we do provide long run series on capital depreciation in our a€oeCapital 
is backa€D paper with Gabriel (see <http://piketty.pse.ens.fr/capitalisback>, appendix country 
tables US.8, JP.8, etc.). The series are imperfect and incomplete, but they show that in pretty 
much every country capital depreciation has risen from 5a€“8% of GDP in the 19th century and early 
20th century to 10a€“13% of GDP in the late
20th and early 21st centuries, i.e. from about 1% of capital stock to about 2%a€!

Best,
Thomasa€™

Dear Professors Krusell, Smith, Hamilton:

This is not going well at alla€!.

At Pikettya€™ s reported wealth-to-annual-income ratio for France in 1910 of 700%, a 10%/year 
depreciation rate implies that capital consumption is 70% of net incomea€”41% of gross output.
Thus I have seven questions:

1. Do you believe that capital consumption was 70% of net income/41% of gross output in France in 
1910?

2. If you do so believe, how is such a remarkably high sharea€“40% of all economic activity in 
France devoted to replacing and repairing capital as it wears out and becomes obsoletea€“consistent 
with even a surface acquaintance of the structure of the French economy in 1910?

3. If you do so believe, can you point me to any sources to back up such a huge wedge between gross 
output and net income, especially since Piketty and Zucmana€™ s estimates of the wedge between 
gross output and net income tend to be in the 5a€“8% range for the nineteenth century and the 
10a€“13% range for today?

4. If not, why did you assume a deprecation rate that would lead to such an absurd picture of the 
structure of the French economy as of 1910?

5. Have you thought about what the appropriate depreciation rate should be?

6. How responsive do you believe the gross savings rate is to shifts in the wealth-to-annual-income 
ratio W/Y?

7. How much trust do you have in life-cycle models of the impact of wealth on consumption in an 
environment of extreme inequality, like that of the Belle A%opoque, or (perhaps) the mida€“21st 
century?
Sincerely yours,

Brad DeLong

Per Krusell: a€~I really did not appreciate the tone of your blogs on this matter. Because of the 
importance of the topic covered in the booka€”it is one I care greatly abouta€”and because so many 
people are interested in it, I nevertheless decided it made sense to write a short answer together 
with Tony. But, in general, on the few occasions when I write columns or guest blogs, I have a rule 
not to respond to people who do not maintain
a minimum of politeness in their questions/comments. Without this rule, it would simply be too 
emotionally draining for me, and simply not worth it. Since the tone of the email you just sent is 
still rather unpleasant, with rhetorical questions and a clear unwillingness to engage in our 
arguments, I will henceforth not responda€!a€™

And so let me give the last word to Thomas Piketty:

Thomas Piketty: a€™ Thomas Piketty: a€~There are huge variations across industries and across 
assets, and depreciation rates could be a lot higher in some sectors. Same thing for capital 
intensity. The prolemb with taking away the housing sector (a particularly capital intensive 
sector) from aggregate capital stock is that once you start to do that ita€™ s not clear where to 
stop (e.g. energy is another capital intensive sector). So we
prefer to start from an aggregate macro perspective (including housing), and here it is clear that 
10% or 5% depreciation rates do not make sensea€!a€™

<https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/brieflv-noted-for-2021-05-ll-tu>

