Subscribe now

CONDITION: John Mastodon:


Mark Frauenfelder: Mastodon users embrace columnist's funny error about a fictitious "John 
Mastodona€D: a€~Mastodon users love the platform's founder, John Mastodon. They're writing sea 
shanties about their hero, generating AI art in his likeness, and creating all manner of memes 
about the reclusive genius. The only thing is, there is no one named John Mastodon, at least not 
until Mediaite columnist Isaac Schorr accidentally conjured him out to thin air
two days ago in an opinion piece titled, "Hypocrisy and Fear All the Way Down at Twitter." Schorr 
misread the Twitter account @joinmastodon as "John Mastodon," and when Twitter's Chief Karen 
Officer Elon Musk suspended the account, Schorr wrote: a€oeThen, the platform removed John 
Mastodon, the founder of a competing social media company named after himself, for posting a link 
to the jet tracker's Mastodon accounta€la€D

Share

FOCUS: ChatGPT Is NOT Going to Replace Google!:

Here we go:

What is the best analysis of W.B. Yeats's poem “The Second Coming"?

"The Second Coming" is a poem written by W.B. Yeats that was published in rib
1919. The poem is known for its complex themes and imagery, and has been
widely analyzed by critics and scholars.

One possible analysis of the poem is that it reflects Yeats's belief that the
world was undergoing a period of significant change and instability following

thp Firct Wnrlrl War In thp nnnm YaatQ Hpcrrihpc: tha "falrnn" fa cvmhnl nf


the old order) being unable to "hear the falconer" (a symbol of the guiding
principles of the past) and being driven "on the wings of the wind" (a symbol
of     the forces of change). This suggests that the old order is being swept
away by the forces of change and that a new, as-yet-unknown order is
emerging.

The "rough beast" mentioned in the poem's famous opening line is often
interpreted as a symbol of the emerging new order, with its "shape"
representing    the unknown and potentially dangerous nature of the future.
The   reference to the beast "slouching" towards Bethlehem (a symbol of the
birthplace of Christianity) has also been interpreted as a commentary on the
perceived decline of traditional values and the rise of a more chaotic and
unpredictable world.

Overall, "The Second Coming" is a powerful and evocative poem that


reflects Yeats's concerns about the state of the world following the First
World War and the sense of uncertainty and change that was prevalent at
the time.

Not 100% wrong, but close!


rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: W.B. Yeats: a€oeThe Second Coming"

The Second Coming BY WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS Turning and turning in the widening gyre The falcon 
cannot hear the falconer; Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold; Mere anarchy is loosed upon 
tha€!
Read more

2 months ago A- Brad DeLong

My view is the Chat-GPT is being massively, massively, boosted by our default intellectual 
orientation, to assign human level intelligence and intentionality to things that have absolutely 
no clue.

This tropism to attribute human mind-level competence to systems for which that attribution is a 
major category error. There is no more a human-level mind behind each of these answers than it is 
the case that the lightning is a very large red-haired guy with a big hammer and major anger 
management problems who drives a cart with two goats. You can make the sociobiology move that such 
attribution was useful in the environment of evolutionary adaptation,
for the potential loss from assuming that something is much dumber than you can be very large. But 
whether you want to claim this tropism is a€ceadaptivea€D or not, I do believe that it is a fact.

That default intellectual orientation, plus perhaps how crummy a tool language is: how close 
language is to simply a bag-of-words each of which carries a characteristic, an action, or an item. 
Perhaps this demonstrates how much a€cereadinga€O is a€oetaking black marks on a page, and from 
them spinning-up a sub-Turing instantiation of a human mind, which we then run in a separate 
sandbox on our Wittwer and interrogated□. Perhaps this demonstrates
how enormously wide the gap can be between the mind of the author that wrote the words and the mind 
that we construct from the words.

Perhaps this demonstrates how much reading takes place between the ears. (And, of course, perhaps 
this demonstrates how much success in schoolwork evaluations comes not from learning the material, 
but rather from learning how to spread out the chicken-feed infront of the instructor, that they 
will then glom onto, and leave them to conclude that you know much much more than you in fact do.)
But perhaps there is a lesson herea€”not how close Chat-GPT comes to passing the Turing Test, but 
how close we are, in our daily life to flunking it. As somebody or other once said about a 
mailing-list discussion:

A very interesting piecea€! about training a large language model to recognize problematic 
languagea€!. But the response of everyone on the list was to start talking about stochastic 
parrots, and I thought: a€oeOh my God! All these people are acting likestochastic parrots!a€!

How much of our own thought is really thought, really understanding? How much is just that 
somewhere inside our brains is a bag of words, and a set of numbers that are correlations.

The scary thing about chat GPT is that it matches onto our conversational affordances well. That, I 
think, makes it highly likely that we will greatly overtrust it. Ita€™ s less of a tool and more of 
a cognitive distortion menace than people realize, I think.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

ONE AUDIO: Martin Wolf:

Martin Wolf on the economy in 2023: a€~The FTa€™ s chief economics commentator discusses some of 
2022a€™ s biggest storiesa€’’inflation, the war in Ukraine, climate changea€”and how they might 
impact events next yeara€!
Leave a comment


Fusion conditions:

?erature, density, and confinement
(keV s m3)


1                10                100              1000

Temperature (million degrees)

Via Exponential View

Give a gift subscription

MUST-READ: Peer Review:

Much food for thought here:

Adam Mastroianni: The rise and fall of peer review: a€~For the last 60 years or so, science has 
been running an experiment on itself. The experimental design wasna€™ t great; there was no 
randomization and no control group. Nobody was in charge, exactly, and nobody was really taking 
consistent measurements. And yet it was the most massive experiment ever run, and it included every 
scientist on Eartha€!. They called it a€repeer
review.a€D. This was a massive change. From antiquity to modernity, scientists wrote letters and 
circulated monographs, and the main barriers stopping them from communicating their findings were 
the cost of paper, postage, or a printing press, or on rare occasions, the cost of a visit from the 
Catholic Churcha€!. That all changed after World War IIa€!. Journals that previously struggled to 
fill their pages now struggled to pick which
articles   to print. Reviewing papers before publication, which was a€ requite rarea€D until the 
1960s, became much more common. Then it became universala€!. You can still write to your friends 
about your findings, but hiring committees and grant agencies act as if the only science that 
exists is the stuff published in peer-reviewed journals. This is the grand experiment wea€™ ve been 
running for six decades. The results are in. It
faileda€!

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Michael Levenson: Couple in Car Survive 300-Foot Fall Into a California Canyon: a€~Rescuers 
found Cloe Fields and Christian Zelada in the Angeles National Forest after Ms. Fieldsa€™ s iPhone 
sent a message via satellite to an emergency call center...

• Jo Freeman: The Tyranny of Structurelessness: a€~Anyone who has been involved in a 
a€~Structurelessa€™ group will be able to draw parallels with their own experiencesa€!

•  Ben Sin Nreal Air Review: Virtual Mac desktop is enticing, but it's best used as a wearable 
large screen: a€~Despite my not believing in AR, I do believe in having a virtual large screen that 
you can bring with you anywherea€!. If the Nebula Mac app improves and visuals become more stable, 
I would even wear it at coffee shops when working off my MacBooka€!

• Rory Greener: Nreal Nebula OS Now Supports Apple MacBooksa€!
Donate Subscriptions


A^S:

Zack Beauchamp: The 80-year-old book that explains Elon Musk and techa€™ s new right-wing tilt: The 
long shadow of James Burnhamd€™ s The Managerial Revolution'. a€~'a€~Published in 1941, Burnhama€™ 
s book predicted that capitalism had reached a terminal stage; the capitalist classa€™ s power 
would soon decline, giving way to the rise of the a€oemanagerial classa€Da€ ’’people who direct 
industry and the complex operations of the statea€!.
Burnhama€™ s predictions were wildly wrong, in ways that should cast significant doubt on the 
viability of his entire theory of a€oethe managerial revolution.a€D But his conceptualization of an 
unaccountable managerial class has nonetheless been extremely influential in the right-leaning tech 
world and in the broader conservative intellectual firmamenta€!. Hea€™ s the progenitor of the 
righta€™ s current cultural obsessions with so-called a€oewoke
managersa€Da€”and the godfather of the approach to politics that Musk has spent $44 billion 
advancinga€!

Jack Dorsey: a native internet protocol for social media: a€~The biggest mistake I made was 
continuing to invest in building tools for us to manage the public conversation, versus building 
tools for the people using Twitter to easily manage it for themselves. This burdened the company 
with too much power, and opened us to significant outside pressure (such as advertising budgets). I 
generally think companies have become far too powerful, and that became
completely clear to me with our suspension of Trumpa€™ s account. As Ia€™ ve said before, we did 
the right thing for the public company business at the time, but the wrong thing for the internet 
and societya€!. There was no ill intent or hidden agendas, and everyone acted according to the best 
information we had at the time. Of course mistakes were made...

John Carmack: https://daringfireball.net/misc/2022/12/carmack-facebook.text: a€~This is the end of 
my decade in VRa€!. Quest 2 is almost exactly what I wanted to see from the beginninga€!. It all 
could have happened a bit faster and been going better if different decisions had been made, but we 
built something pretty close to The Right Thinga€!. We have a ridiculous amount of people and 
resources, but we constantly self-sabotage and squander efforta€l. I
think my influence at the margins has been positive, but it has never been a prime mover. This was 
admittedly self-inflicteda€”I could have moved to Menlo Park after the Oculus acquisition and tried 
to wage battles with generations of leadership, but I was busy programming, and I assumed I would 
hate it, be bad at it, and probably lose anywaya€!. There is plenty of room for improvement. Make 
better decisions and fill your products with a€oeGive a
Damna€D!a€!


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Leave a comment
Subscribe now

