This lives at: <https://equitablegrowth.org/?s=delong>

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth

What economic policy levers can we pull to make advancing technologies complements to work or 
skills and capabilities rather than substitutes for them? We cannot count on large,
oligopolistic firms to do this job. Well they can, by the nature of their business and market 
position, capture a substantial amount of the net returns from worker-substitute
technologies,   they cannot do the same thing for worker-complement technologies. There we must 
rely on the public and the nonprofit sectors, and we need to start doing so at scale
as                                                                               soon as possible:

Equitable Growth: a€~Register for Our Event on Tuesday! a€oeA Future for All Workers: Technology & 
Worker Powera€Ohttps://equitablegrowth.org/event/a-future-for-all-
workers-technology-and-worker-power/: featuring a keynote from SEIU International President Mary 
Kay Henrya€!. Change is inevitable, but the form it takes is not. At issue are
how          workplaces implement new technologies and the impact these technologies have on 
workersa€™ lives. How these technological changes are implemented, in turn, depends on
the underlying economic and legal structures, as well as the extent to which workers are empowered 
to be full and active partners in technological adoption and integration^!

Fiscal automatic stabilizers are highly effective because they are state-dependent rather than 
time-dependent policies. We very much need to learn from and then generalize that
state-dependent feature that makes those policies so effective and cost-effective:

David Mitchell & Corey Husak: How to Replace Covid Relief Deadlines with Automatic a€~Triggersa€™ 
that Meet the Needs of the U.S. Economy
https://equitablegrowth.org/how-to-replace-covid-relief-deadlines-with-automatic-triggers-that-meet-
the-needs-of-the-u-s-economy/: a€~The next coronavirus relief bill can be
written to keep critical benefits in place until they are no longer needed. So-called off-triggers 
that depend on economic data can ensure that benefits phase out as the economy
recovers, not on a random date. There are a number of possible mechanisms that can serve as 
off-triggersa€!. What was lacking in the Great Recession, and what is needed now, is a
mechanism for ensuring that benefits remain available as long as they are necessary, with no need 
to wait for Congress to act. There are a number of solid, evidence-based ideas for
such a mechanism. In 2019, the Washington Center for Equitable Growth and The Brookings 
Institution^™ s Hamilton Project published Recession Ready, a book of essays with
comprehensive plans to strengthen automatic stabilizers, including recommendations for automatic 
triggers to activate supplemental benefits to families and state governments, and
automatic triggers to turn them offa€!

Policy mistakes and acts of malfeasance in one generation echo substantially into future history 
for very long periods of time:

Jonathan Colmer & John Voorheis: Reductions In Air Pollution Have Intergenerational Consequences 
https://equitablegrowth.org/new-research-shows-that-reductions-in-air-
pollution-have-intergenerational-consequences/: a€~It was not only the children of women who 
benefited from regulatory reductions in exposure to air pollution during pregnancy,
but              also their grandchildren. The grandchildren of women who were exposed to lower 
levels of air pollution during pregnancy were more likely to attend college and less likely to
drop out of high school 40 years later. A 10 percent reduction in prenatal exposure to particulate 
matter for individuals born around 1970 is associated with a 3.2 percentage point to

3.8 percentage point increase in the likelihood that their children attend college 40 years later. 
This corresponds to an 8 percent increase in attendance^!

Mike Konczal of the Roosevelt Institute has written a very nice book of moral philosophy and public 
policy. He investigates the question: a€oeWhy is so much of American
thinking about political economy and public policy issues in the mode of a€~the market giveth, the 
market taketh away: blessed be the name of the marketa€™ , why is it wrong,
and what can we do about it?a€D:

Brad DeLong: DeLongTODAY: Enthusiastically Reading Mike Konczal: a€ceFreedom from the 
Marketa€dhttp://delongtoday.com: a€~It was in that election that Supreme Court
Chief Justice William Rehnquist won his spurs by running a€oeballot securitya€D efforts in which 
a€oeevery Black or Mexican[-looking] person was being challenged .a€da€!

Why did Goldwater decide to throw away thata€! founding principle?a€! The answer, I think, is that 
African-American aspirationsa€’’hopes for an equal voice, and then that with
that equal voice they could ask and get a redistribution and redefinition of property to redress at 
least some of past injuries and abusesa€”made Goldwater and company extremely
uneasy. They were asking for real democracy. And real democracya€’’especially African-American 
democracya€’’for Rehnquista€! and for many othersa€! [that] touched
uncomfortably on matters of governance^!

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

I think we can now afford to forget about the risk that those vaccinated for COVID-19 will still be 
as infectious as the unvaccinated population is. The Moderna Phase III trial looks
to me to be decisive on this:

A Marm Kilpatrick: a€.~ (I think) We can now estimate the (minimum) reduction in transmission from 
the Moderna

vaccine https://twitter.com/DiseaseEcology/status/1359213744937598976. tl;dr Moderna vaccine blocks 
90% (87a€“93%) of infections and 91% (89a€“94%) of transmission^!.
The big remaining question isa€! will vaccination reduce transmission or just disease?a€! Does 
reduced symptomatic infection imply reduced infections?a€! A CRUCIAL bit of
data was shared from Moderna trial based on swabs taken on day of 2nd dosea€!. The swabs represent 
truly asymptomatic infections. This is fantastic because it indicates we
havea€! reductions of 95% in symptomatic and 61.5% in asymptomatic infectionsa€!. A very recent 
paper from Roy Kishony from Israel suggested that infections following
vaccination reduces viral loada€!. Another recent set of papers showed that lower viral loads are 
strongly correlated with lower transmission^!. I think we can estimate the
(minimum) reduction in both infection & transmission from vaccinated individuals. Minimum because 
reduction in asymptomatic infections & viral load is based on data BEFORE
2nd  dose. Efficacy should improve with 2nd dosea€! median reductions of 90% (87a€“93%) in 
infection and 91% (89a€“94%) of transmission^!

And I also I think we can now safely conclude that it is overwhelmingly the first dose in the mRNA 
vaccine protocol that does the overwhelming share of the work:

Danuta M. Skowronski & Gaston De Serres: Safety & Efficacy of the BNT162b2 mRNA Covida€“19 Vaccine 
https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2036242: a€~Polack
et al. (Dec. 31) report a vaccine efficacy of 94.8% against Covida€“19 after two doses of the 
messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccine BNT162b2 (Pfizera€“BioNTech). The authors also
report a vaccine efficacy of 52.4% from after the first dose to before the second dose, but in 
their calculation, they included data that were collected during the first 2 weeks after the
first dose, when immunity would have still been mounting. We used documents submitted to the Food 
and Drug Administration to derive the vaccine efficacy beginning from 2
weeks after the first dose to before the second dose (Table 1). Even before the second dose, 
BNT162b2 was highly efficacious, with a vaccine efficacy of 92.6%, a finding similar to
the first-dose efficacy of 92.1% reported for the mRNAa€“1273 vaccine (Moderna)a€!

The rule of thumb I was taughta€”by Olivier Blancharda€”is that one basis point of long-term 
Treasury bond rate increase offsets 0.02%-points of national incomea€™ s worth of
fiscal stimulus. A fiscal program thata€’’unlikely a€’’would notionally push us $600 billion in 
annual national income above potentiala€”3%-pointsa€”would thus be offset by a
150 basis-point increase in long Treasury rates, which standard gearing suggests would be delivered 
by a 4.5%-point increase in the federal funds rate. A world in which appropriate
monetary policy near a business-cycle peak is a 4.5% rather than a 0% federal funds rate seems to 
me vastly preferable to our current secular-stagnation zero-lower-bound Fed-out-
of-ammunition enormous-downside-risk world. It seems to me a place that we really do want to go. I 
do not understand this. I do not understand this at all:

Olivier Blanchard: In Defense of Concerns Over the $1.9 Trillion 
RgZZe/'jPZanhttps://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/defense-concerns-over-19-trill
ion-relief-
plan: a€~If inflation were to take off, there would be two scenarios: one in which the Fed would 
let inflation increase, perhaps substantially, and anothera€”more likelya€”in which
the  Fed would tighten monetary policy, perhaps again substantially. Neither of these two scenarios 
is ideal. In the first, inflation expectations would likely become deanchored,
cancelling one of the major accomplishments of monetary policy in the last 20 years and making 
monetary policy more difficult to use in the future. In the second, the increase in
interest   rates might have to be very large, leading to problems in financial markets. I would 
rather not go therea€!

Those who fear that a $15 an hour minimum wage is too risky a policy should have long since I've 
gotten behind an expansion of the Earned Income Tax Credit. In fact, those who
advocate for a $15 an hour minimum wage should also be behind an EITC expansion. That is what the 
research says:

Cynthia Miller & Lawrence F. Katz: Biden Wants to Boost the EITC for Workers without Dependent 
Childrend€”What Does the Research Say?
https://thehill.com/opinion/finance/538298-biden-wants-to-boost-the-eitc-for-workers-without-depende
nt-children-what?rl=l#.YCUykA0cLq8.twitter: a€~Many commentators
have expressed the hope that the inequalities exposed by the pandemic will lead to renewed efforts 
to address them by expanding the social safety net and by providing basic
protections for workers. An expanded EITC can be an effective part of this effort, increasing 
workersa€™ incomes (without depressing work effort) and putting them in a better
position to recover from this crisis and weather the nexta€!

The question Wall Street was consideringa€”Ryan Cohen vs. Gabriel Plotkina€”was this: GameStop now 
is a sustainable enterprise: it pays its bills. Suppose GameStop wants to
raise an extra $300 million on the equity markets to spend on reorienting itself as it tries to 
find a path forward. Should those willing to invest that $300 million get, in return, a half­
ownership of the firm? Or should they get a 20% ownership of the firm? Gabriel Plotkin believes and 
bets on the first, and Ryan Cohen believes and bets on the second. Then along
comes WallStreetBets, saying: IT SHOULDN'T BE 50%! IT SHOULD BE 2%!! GAMESTOPa€’’WORTH $20 BILLION 
!!!! And yet David Atkins of the Washington Monthly, in
some way, and for some reason, approves. Very, very, very strange indeed:


David Atkins: Hedge Funds Shouldnd€™ t Get To Decide Who Has Fundamental Value 
https://washingtonmonthly.com/2021/01/30/hedge-funds-shouldnt-get-to-decide-who-has-
fundamental-value/: a€~ [Financial firms,] most of them, would have been bankrupt multiple times 
over without assistance from the Federal Reserve.... They have become...
guaranteed     against failure. Within a modern capitalist system that is probably good 
macroeconomic policy. But crucially, that leeway has not been given to brick-and-mortar firms.

Your local chain storea€“to say nothing of your local mom-and-pop corner storea€“has not been 
provided the same assurances against failure or the same easy moneya€!.
Keynesian liquidity... gives predatory hedge funds enormous leeway to stake out short positions on 
struggling firms, devaluing them and then selling off the remains for pieces...
obliterating companies that might have survived for a long time otherwise, such as Toys R Us...

This was actually much more hopeful and positive than I thought it would be about political-economy 
and racial politics changes in the American north in the aftermath of the Great
Migration of African-Americans from the south:

Alvaro Calderon, Vasiliki Fouka, & Marco Tabellini: Racial Diversity, Electoral Preferences, & the 
Supply of Policy https ://voxeu .org/article/racial-diversity-electoral-
preferences-and-supply-policy: a€~The 1940a€“1970 Great Migration of African Americansa€!. How 
resulting changes in the racial composition of local constituencies affected
votersa€™    preferences and politiciansa€™ behavioura€!. Democrats and union members supported 
blacksa€™ struggle for racial equality, but that backlash against civil rights
erupted among Republicans and among whites who more exposed to racial mixinga€!. Politicians 
largely responded to demands of their constituencies^!. Under certain
conditions, cross-race coalitionsa€!. Changes in the composition of the electorate can polarise 
both voters and politiciansa€!

This I enthusiastically endorse: Figuring out that on Twitter you have a righta€”nay, stronger than 
a right: you have a dutya€”to not mute but block people even if all they do

is justwaste your time is essential to having a good life. Either that, or drop Twitter entirely. 
In an attention economy, grabbing your attention uselessly is a cognitive attack on your
mind. Such cognitive attacks need to be stopped:

Zeynep Tufekci: a€™I try not to block actual criticism chttps: //twitter. 
com/zeynep/status/1361680717416177664> but things Ia€™ ve started pretty much

automatically blocking to make Twitter usablea€!. a€oeOh youa€™re surprised?a€D reply guys; People 
who respond to an article I wrote with a point made in the articlea€!.
Ia€™ ve never had a useful interaction with any of the above categories, and they are just 
cluttering up my mentions especially since others then respond to them, and ita€™ s an
endless, pointless series of pings that hide any signal that may hide in my mentionsa€!. Why not 
mute? I tried. Because people reply to them (which I see) and others see them and
affects the quality of the discussion I do want to havea€!. This is an attempt to be able to hear 
real criticism and feedbacka€!

Tom Gara: a€™ We joked a lot about sending various 2020 headlines back in time to 
2005https://twitter.com/tomgara/status/1362606805470359557 to freak people out, but
a€oeCDC survival guidance for Texans considering melting snow for drinking watera€D would be a 
great one to send back to 2020a€!

