Subscribe now

I have been thinking for a while about why I nearly lost it at the a€oeDecolonizing the Syllabusa€D 
zoom seminar 
<https://grad.berkeley.edu/event/the-diverse-academy-series-decolonizing-the-syllabus/>.

I nearly lost it when the facilitator said, of the inhabitants of the medieval African city of 
Timbuktu, something like: they held learning so dear that, when attacked by a neighboring village, 
they would bury and hide their books before they went out to arm themselves. And I was
outraged. I found myself, for the first time, understanding the person who was struck from the 
Martin Skrelli jury pool for saying that he could not give Skrelli a fair trial because he had 
a€oedisrespected the Wu-Tang Clana€D.

Medieval Timbuktua€”it was not attacked by any a€oeneighboring villagea€D.

Its great Djinguereber Mosque is about the size of the Great Mosque of Cordoba, which had a 
six-figure population during at least some of the Middle Ages. Timbuktua€™ s population may also 
have reached, at some times, well into the six figures, supported by its great trades
across the Sahara, up and down the Niger River, and down to the kingdoms of the Guinea coast: 
trades in gold and salt and ivory and wood and cottons and slaves and other commodities. And 
supported by its status as a center of learning and education as well: its libraries of
hundreds of thousands of volumes, and its students in what were perhaps their tens of thousands. 
And its rulers may have been the richest princes in the world back before the industrial 
revolution.

Djinguereber Mosque, Timbuktu


Exactly how rich Kankan Musa 1280-1337, Emperor of Mali, was is unclear. His hajj to Mecca became 
the stuff of legend for centuries. He was certainly very, very rich in gold, and very very rich in 
his ability to command labor and craftwork. But, then, gold was worth little
compared to, say, salt, at the southern edge of the Sahara. Anda€”gold asidea€”the territories 
around the Niger River valley that he ruled are not overwhelmingly rich with natural resources.

Share

But I have now, after some months, recognized and realized that it was not the disrespect to the 
medieval city of Timbuktu, the city of trade and learning; and it was not the disrespect of the 
Mali Empire, or of its emperor, Kankan Musa the historical personage, that caused me to
almost lose it.

It was, after all, the disrespect I felt on behalf of the literary character Kankan Musa. For 
Kankan Musa is a character in a fantasy novel of Berkeley and of the Society for Creative 
Anachronism, Peter S. Beaglea€™ s The Folk of the Air <https ://w w w.amazon .com/Folk- Air-
Peter-S-Beagle/dp/0345346998>.

In the book, Musaa€”Mosesa€”has been ensorcelled, brought from the 1300s to the late 1900s, and 
trapped in the body of contemporary Berkeley resident Rodney Micah Willows. The novela€™ s 
viewpoint character Joe Farrell, his SO Julie, and Sia who isa€! Siaa€! first
encounter and then attempt to free him, and in the process summon the thousand-handed Japanese 
great kami of mercy Cannon, for a€oehuman beings everywhere need mercy most of alla€D. Here are the 
a€oeMansa Musaa€D pages from The Folk of the Air:

They heard the hoofbeats first, scraping deliberately on the courtyard stones, and then the 
voicea€!. Beside him Julie made a little sound like Sir Mordred when he bit himself for the first 
time. The black horseman was leaning over the hedge, looking
straight down at them. When he smiled, the faint parallel ridges rose on his cheeks, like gill 
slits.

a€oeMy kingdom is four monthsaC™ journeying long and four months wide,a€D he said. a€oeln my city, 
Timbuktu, which is the City of Wisdom, I have as many scribes and scholars as warriors and as many 
books as I have bars of gold. The throne
where I give audience is of ebony, and great elephant tusks arch above my head. Three hundred 
slaves stand behind my throne. Before me and to my right there stands a giant holding a two-handed 
sword as big as a man, and to my left my spokesman
waits with his mace of office to give my answers and my commands. To the end of my eyesight, the 
sun blazes off spears and trumpets, armor and jeweled trappings. And I sit in the center of the 
center of the world and I am not touched. Glorify the
Compassionate, the Merciful. I am not touched.a€D

As far as could be seen, he was completely naked. a€ceAnd thata€™ s the other one,a€D Farrell 
managed to say. a€oePrester John.a€D

But Julie whispered another name and ran out of the maze, leaving him to trail after her once 
again. The big horse danced heavily away from her quickness, and the black man on his back seemed 
to be dancing with him as he brought the animal to an
easy halt just out of Juliea€™ s reach. Farrell heard her call the name againa€”a€ceMicaha€Da€”but 
only the California surfing bird responded.

a€oeMansa Musa is not touched,a€D the black man chanted. Farrell saw now that he was wearing a pair 
of dark trousers, glinting and sliding with the moonlight, and nothing more. a€oeln Cairo the 
Sultan called me his brother and desired to embrace
me, as the men do there, but Allah put him away. I handle neither ivory nor gold nor salt, that 
they may not handle me. My wives come to me in darkness, that not so much as their shadows in the 
moon may touch my body. Only Allah touches Mansa
Kankan Musa.a€D

a€oelta€™ s me,a€D Julie said hopelessly. a€oeMicah, ita€™ s me.a€D A tower door opened and closed, 
sounding very far away, but the courtyard was suddenly crowded with the laughter of people starting 
home from a party. For a moment, the black
mana€™ s immense eyes were upon Farrell, brown as old rivers, deepmuddy with decaying secrets, and 
streaked by thin, luminous currents and the slow backs of crocodiles. Then he kicked bare heels 
into his mounta€™ s thick sides, and the horse
lumbered through a judicious U-turn and trotted away past the fishpond, under the spiteful faces of 
the entry way, and on out into the expensively quiet streets beyond. The clopping echoes bounced 
back and forth between the condominiums long after
the man and the horse were out of sight.

Farrell drew Julie back into the maze, for privacya€™ s sake, and let her cry...
[a€:]

Farrell and Julie came home later than they had planned, singing old rhythm-and-blues songs 
together for the first time in a long while.

Parnell Street seemed curiously still, a night beach at low tide. The tall black man, swaying in 
the crosswalk where Farrell had first seen him, looked like a winter-whipped beach umbrella in his 
dirty striped djellaba. He would undoubtedly have fallen,
even without the aid of the two shadows who were dragging him down, one almost swinging from his 
neck, the other kicking viciously at his legs. A car passed from the opposite direction, pulling 
carefully wide so as not to hit anyone.

Farrell stopped Madame Schumann-Heink where she was, and he and Julie grabbed whatever seemed 
appropriate on the way out of the bus. Micah Willowsa€™ attackers looked up to see two improbable 
figures charging down upon them, cloaks
flying, high boots rattling and snapping on the pavement, plumed hats half hiding lunatic faces, 
gauntleted hands waving tire irons and crescent wrenches. They had been having enough trouble with 
their victima€™ s African caftan, which tangled their
own hands like seaweed, and it was all suddenly more than they cared to handle, just at the moment. 
Julie fired Farrella€™ s best lug wrench into the darkness after them, and he never found it again.

Micah Willowsa€™ left cheek was scratched and bleeding, but he appeared unhurt otherwise. He lay on 
his back, not trying to get up, slapping the street with both hands in a slow, measured rhythm. 
Farrell assumed he was drunk as easily as the
muggers had, but there was no smell of liquor on him. When Julie tried to lift his head, he rose 
suddenly on one elbow, grinning with terrible triumph, as if she had stumbled helplessly into his 
trap. a€oeThe hand that touches Mansa Musa,a€D he
intoned ominously. Laughter kept him from completing the sentence. Waving his hand with a leisured, 
heedless regality, he flopped back on the sidewalk and lay snickering. a€oeYou are fucking 
doomed.Julie said his name hopelessly, over and
over.

a€oeCan you stand up?a€C Farrell asked him. a€oeSee if you can get up, all right?a€D But he was a 
giggling dead weight, unresistingly impossible to lift and no more likely to stay upright than warm 
yogurt. Julie coaxed him and wept, and Farrell
swore at them both, jealous of her concern and furious at his own jealousy. At one point, after the 
black man had collapsed for a third time, bringing Julie down hard enough to daze her momentarily, 
Farrell simply let go of him and walked away. He
turned when Julie called to him, anticipating her protest. a€oel know, I know, we cana€™ t just 
leave him. But he doesna€™ t want our help, the hell with him. Ia€™ m going to go call Triple-A or 
somebody.a€D

a€oeMicah,a€D Julie urged, a€oeis there someone you want us to call? Do you want a doctor, is there 
someone whoa€™ 11 come and help you? Rodney Micah, damn it, tell us whom to call.a€D

Micah Willows lay on his side with his eyes closed, and Farrell thought that he had fallen asleep. 
But when Julie pushed his shoulder gently, he twisted and came to his feet in a movement like the 
slow flexing of water or the deep ripple of a hunting cat.
The river-brown eyes had become windows onto a suffering that Farrell knew he had no words for, nor 
any right to see.

a€oeYoro Keita,a€D the black man whispered. a€oeYoro Keita, who commanded my horsemen. Samory, 
Askia al-Kati, Modibo Toure, who spoke for me and knew a little of my heart. Al-Haji Umar, who was 
not even of my people, but a Tukulora€”
oh, Al-Haji Umar!a€D The blank voice grew stronger, a thin, old, burning wind, shaking down the 
lost names. a€oeAlf a Hassan ibn Mahmud, much learned in the lawa€”Moussa the singer, Moussa the 
foola€”Sheik Uthman ed-Dukkali, he who spoke
to me of Mecca when I could not sleepa€”Sekou Diakite, Okoro my steward, who was a slave once and 
could play on the guimbria€”Bakary of Walata, my good captaina€”Hamani, Kango, Sangoule the 
Mossia€”a€D The names fell down around
Farrell until he fancied that Julie and he stood halfburied in a ruffling drift of the carved and 
gleaming syllables, disappearing slowly into a kinga€™ s grief.

a€oeThese are my friends,a€D Micah Willows said. a€oeThese will come for me.a€D

Farrell thought he was going to fall again, but he stood still, eyes and mouth closed, his face 
entirely sealed shut, the ribbon-thin body in its torn robe swaying slightly from the waist up. 
Farrell said quietly, a€oeMansa Kankan Musa, sir. Wea€™ 11 take
you home if we can. Tell us where you want to go.a€D

At that, Micah Willowsa€™ locked throat roiled and clicked for a moment; then there lunged out of 
it the sound that a tree makes, beginning to break in twoa€”a fathomless, shuddering no. The black 
man began to cry out a single phrase, clenching his
fists and laying his head further and further back, until Farrell could see the howl clawing 
through him, trying to tear out at elbow joints, arteries, collarbones. a€oeLady help me, Lady help 
me, Lady help me!a€D The words were drowned so deep in
rage and anguish that Farrell took them at first for Arabic. Micah Willows turned away from him and 
wandered slowly up the street, still calling and crying dreadfully, and now beating the heavy 
rhythm of his words out on his robed body, like any other
haunted and helpless prophet.

Julie said, a€cePlease.a€D Farrell went after Micah Willows and took him by the arm, turning him 
back toward Madame Schumann-Heink. With Juliea€™ s help, he half towed, half carried him to the 
bus, shoved him into the passenger seat and locked
the door. Julie climbed into the back and kneeled on the jump seat, holding Micah Willowsa€™ 
shoulders. She asked, a€oeWhere are we going?a€D

a€oel only know one Lady,a€D Farrell said.

So they drove up through the low hills to Siaa€™ s house with Micah Willows dozing between them, 
dreaming in Arabic, to judge by his occasional murmurings.

Farrell told Julie what he knew of Mansa Kankan Musa. a€oeEmperor of Mali, early fourteenth 
century. It was the richest kingdom in Africa then, and Timbuktu was the greatest city. Poets, 
philosophers, mathematicians, scientists, they came from all
over to study at Mansa Musaa€™ s court. When he made his pilgrimage to Mecca, he brought along so 
much gold the market was depressed for a generation.

a€oeSome people think the whole Prester John legend started right therea€”the black Christian 
emperor, perfect ally against the Turks, if you could just find him. Except he was a Muslim, and 
long dead by then, and his kid had already let the country go
to hell. But they kept on sending out expeditions to look for him.a€D

Julie said, a€oeMicaha€™ s League name was Prester John. He was one of the founders.a€D


Micah Willows opened his eyes, smiled at them both, whispered, a€oeFucking doomed,a€D and snuggled 
back down into extinct dreams.

a€oeYeah, I know that part,a€D Farrell said. a€oeAnd Ia€™ m guessing that Aiffe was fooling around 
one pleasant afternoon, trying to call somebody through time, anybody, and she locked onto Mansa 
Musa, pure chance. But she only got the spirit,
the soul, whatever, and it lodged in Micaha€™ s body, pure dumb chance again. Am I right so far?a€C

He could barely hear Juliea€™ s reply. a€oelt was at the Whalemas Tourney two years ago. When Garth 
was still king. Micah challenged him, and Garth fouled every way he could, but Micah was winning. 
And then she did it. She wasna€™ t just
fooling around.a€D Farrell reached back to touch her hand, but it flinched under his, clutching 
Micah Willowsa€™ shoulder tighter.

a€oeYou saw it happen,a€D he said.

Julie made a sound like heavy cloth tearing. a€oelt was a tilt for the crown, everybody saw it. 
Everybody in the League knows what happened.
a€oeAnd nobody wants to know. My specialty.a€D Julie made no response.

Farrell said, a€oeBy now it never happened at all.a€D

a€oeOh, by now he was always crazy. Ask anyone.a€D The bitterness in her voice dried Farrella€™ s 
own throat and nipped at his breath. She said, a€oeHe was never crazy, not ever; hea€™ s not crazy 
now. He took risks, he wasa€”he isa€”curious
about everything, and sometimes hea€™ d dance right on the edge of something really dumb, and Ia€™ 
d get scared and yell at him, and wea€™ d have a huge fight, the kind you and I never have.a€D

Farrell started to interrupt, but changed his mind. Julie was crying now. a€oeBut he is not crazy. 
In this whole town full of crazies, he might be the only one who isna€™ t.a€D

When they pulled up in front of the shaggy house on Scotia Street, Micah Willows descended to the 
curb without assistance, sniffing the midnight air delicately and smiling with a curious drowsy 
serenity. a€oeOh, here,a€D he said softly and moved
toward the house, floating over the grass like a giraffe, which is a creature made entirely of 
shadows. Following with Julie, Farrell thought that the door began to open just before he knocked.

She wore a brown dress, as shapeless as Farrella€™ s zoo uniform had been, and less becoming: it 
made her look thicker and shorter-legged than she actually was and slumped her breasts and belly 
into one bolster-roll of mashed potatoes. But Farrell
saw that she stood in the doorway with the still acceptance of her body that he had only known in a 
few women who had never in all their lives imagined themselves not beautiful, not even for a single 
bad moment, in pain, despairing. Micah Willows
knelt at her feet and spoke to her in medieval Arabic, and she answered him in the same tongue, 
soothing and reassuring.

But there was something astonishingly close to fear in her voice as she asked, a€oeWhy have you 
brought him to me?a€D

The question was addressed to Farrell, but it was Julie who answered. a€oeYoua€™re supposed to be a 
healer. He needs to be healed.a€D

Sia said, a€oeHe may be beyond my healing. Many things are.a€D She stooped over Micah Willows, and 
something about her creased bent neck stung Farrella€™ s heart. The twinge lasted until she lifted 
the black man effortlessly in her arms and
carried him through the doorway into her house. Without turning, she said to Farrell, a€oeJoe, call 
Briseis. You, if you care for him, come inside.a€D Julie looked at Farrell and followed her, and 
Farrell went off around the birdhouses to winkle the dog
out                                                                                                 
                of her favorite nest behind Bena€™ s compost pile.

When he returned with a more than usually apprehensive Briseis skulking behind him, Sia and Julie 
had already settled Micah Willows on a frayed rag rug before the fireplace. Julie moved around the 
living room as Sia directed her, lighting incense in
some burners and not in others. Sia herself squatted beside Micah Willows, touching his face and 
chest and his sweaty hair, while he held her free left hand, smiling at her with his eyes wide 
open. She said, a€oeStart the fire, Joe.a€D

The room felt stuffy and overheated, but Farrell arranged logs, newspaper, and kindling without 
question, tossing on equally obediently the strange spiky bundles that Sia gave him. Most of them 
smelled bad when he held them, and worse when he
added them to the firea€”and at least one wriggled in his handa€”but each changed the color of the 
flames, from yellow to blue, blue to blood-red, red to sunset-green, and from green to various 
shades of purple and gray and slug-white, such as had no
business on any hearth in any home. The last packet, and the word she spoke, made the flames turn 
black and answer her, and Sia, still crouching, turned heavily to face Farrell and Julie.

a€oeNone of this circus will help him,a€D she said. a€oeNone of this has the least bearing on 
whether or not I can free him and the one trapped within him from each other. All this is 
witch-rubbish, this is what that foolish little girl would do, but I am
no witch and it will not help.a€D She looked very tired, her cheeks glistening damply and her upper 
lip showing thin white lines, but she chuckled suddenlya€”a whispering, fiery sound itself, like 
hair being brushed. She said, a€oeThis is all to comfort
me and play for time, because I am afraid. Once I could have healed him by imagining ita€”indeed, 
once this thing that has happened to him would never have been allowed, no more than a leaf is 
allowed to jump back up to its tree. But now I am afraid
and I am delaying the moment when I must learn why I should be afraid. So if either of you knows 
some small spell of your own, we can try that one, too. I need friends, and I have no pride.a€D

She was looking straight at Julie as she spoke.

Farrell asked, a€oeWherea€™ s Ben? How come youa€™re still up this late? Did you know we were 
coming?a€D Sia ignored him completely.

Julie bridled, surprisingly flustered, fumbling sullenly for words. a€oelf I knew any damn magic 
that could make him well, he wouldna€™ t have been like this for five minutes.a€D She looked away 
from Sia, rubbing her swollen eyes.

The old woman said impatiently, a€oeOh, more people than not have some magic, they just forget 
about it. Children use it all the timea€”what do you think jump-rope rhymes are, or ball-bouncing 
games, or cata€™ s cradles? Where do you think that
girl, that Aiffe, draws her power? Because she refuses to forget, thata€™ s all it is.a€D Abruptly 
she sighed and slapped her thighs, pushing herself upright. a€oeBut this is not a matter for magic 
anymore. A vain, silly child played a jump-rope trick on
your friend, and now nothing but a miracle will help him. And that is exactly the bloody trouble 
with amateurs.a€D

She beckoned Briseis to her, commanding the reluctant dog step by step until they stood on either 
side of the silent, smiling Micah Willows. Sia said, a€oeWell, perhaps Briseis can work a miracle. 
Perhaps we can all work one together. Leta€™ s get on
with it.a€D She began to unbraid her hair.

The task seemed to take forever, as if she were unraveling mountains, towers, not hair; but with 
each strand freed and brushed out, the living room seemed to grow larger, the walls paling and 
receding, the ceiling dissolving into starlight. The black
flames crouched low, all but extinguished, but Sia loosened and loosened her hair, and the strange 
starlight filled the room, silvering faces, sparking blue in Briseisa€™ fur, making everything 
heartbreakingly bright and nothing truly clear. It clung
thickly around Sia, until she glittered like a snow-woman, and it filled Micah Willowsa€™ wide eyes 
with dawn.

Farrell had been raised in church but without religion, a compromise pleasing enough to everyone 
involved. He had never missed God or the hope of heaven, but he had dearly wanted confession to 
rest his mind, Communion to let him touch something
beyond Father Kronea€™ s dry, shaky hand, and holy water to taste like starlight. Now, with the 
room brightening toward some sure wonder, exaltingly unbearable, he managed to think, or say, or 
neither, oh, how kind, after all, how kind. Then Sia
shook her hair free upon her shoulders, and Micah Willows screamed.

Even at the moment, Farrell realized that the cry was one of fear, not pain, and that it came 
through Micah Willows, but not out of him. For all that, it raked right down all his bones, and he 
started forward as impulsively as Julie. But they would have
had to pass Sia, and they could not do that. She stood between them and Micah Willows with her back 
to them, an immense, shining silence, distorted with strength, no one they knew, no friend of 
theirs. Briseis rose up on her hind legs, huge as a tiger,
and they embraced over Micah Willowsa€™ body, crowding into each other so that Sia appeared to have 
Briseisa€™ pointed, white-laughing head in place of her own. Farrell remembered then the reflection 
he had seen within the first hour of his first
meeting with Sia, and he held Julie tightly and waited for the wonderful thing to happen, as he had 
always known it must.

But nothing did happen. Sia made no sorcerous gestures, voiced no incantations, called down no 
lightning, but stood still in one place with her doga€™ s paws propped on her shoulders and a black 
man threshing on her hearth, each howl arching his
back more dreadfully. The starlight in the room began to ebb, and what returned was not good 
darkness but hot, bustling shadows that cluttered like hamsters. A mask over the fireplace was 
rattling its bronze jaws.

a€oeAh, well, there, you see?a€D Sia pushed Briseis down and turned to face Farrell and Julie. 
a€oeFor every action, an equal and opposite reactiona€”this is true for gods and demons as well as 
rocket ships. If you bend the universe the wrong way,
even for the smallest instanta€’’which is what you would call a miraclea€”and you lose your hold, 
the universe snaps back at you, you get something you did not ask for. I was punished so once 
before.a€D Her voice remained as placidly amused as
ever.

Farrell could not remember how to speak. Micah Willowsa€™ cries were clawing the inside of his head 
bloody, and Sia was dwindling as he stared, not merely to her usual size and self, but seeming to 
lessen in texture as well, so that he thought he
could see the black flames and the yammering bronze mask through her body. She hushed the 
whimpering Briseis with a touch and knelt by Micah Willows once more, murmuring words that were 
neither English nor the old Arabic. He grew
frighteningly still, his breath scrambling and slipping in his chest. Sia whispered to him, 
a€oeForgive me.a€D

a€ceMcManus,a€D Farrell said. A shadow the size of a pig slid between his legs, then circled back, 
nuzzling him. He said, a€oeMcManus, when he came to the house with a gun. I remember what you did. 
I saw you.a€D

Siaa€™ s surprised laughter sounded like Micah Willowsa€™ breathing. a€oeThat was no miracle, that 
was only fear. It is the easiest thing in the world to make human beings afraida€”none of us could 
ever resist it. They do all the work for you, and
then they call you a god. But no one can make the universe afraid.a€D

A second mask, her favorite, from New Guinea, began to clatter its tusks and sharksa€™ teeth 
together; she waved it silent, and it spat at her contemptuously.

a€oeForgive me,a€D she said to Farrell and Julie. a€oel should never have let you in, never have 
pretended that I could do anything for your friend. That was vanity, not pity, and I am very sorry 
for it. Go now. I think you still can.a€D

The pig-shadow had been joined by others, larger, with too many legs. They pressed close around 
Farrell, pushing against him like Briseis, thick as blankets, smelling like dog food. Far away, on 
the other side of the shadows, he could hear Julie saying,
a€oeJoe, help me get Micah on his feet. We are getting out of here.a€D


afeoeiNo,a^u ne said, as loudly as ne could, afe'cewe was calling tor ner, ne Knew sne was tne only 
one wno could neip nim. YOU love nimafe a^u HIS moutn tasted as rancid as tne snadows. afece YOU 
want nim to De like tnis torever? tsven in Avicenna,

theya€™ 11 put him away and give him stuff to keep him quiet, and hea€™ 11 die. She has to try 
again, thata€™ s all.a€D

a€oeYou dona€™ t understand.a€D Sia was shaking her head violently, her hair scattering the last 
remnants of starlight that clung there. a€oeYou dona€™ t understand. I cheated you because I was 
afraid, because I knew I would fail, and I know what it
means to fail at a miracle. My strength is no more than a wish of what it was, but I did not dare 
to use even half of it just now, I did not dare. Take him and go, go quickly.a€D

Julie had bent over Micah Willows, working her hands under his shoulders. She straightened slowly, 
regarding Sia with resentful respect. She said in a low voice, a€oeBecause the universe snaps 
back.a€D

a€oeExactly as hard as you bend it.a€D Sia gestured around her at the swarming shadows and the 
hanging masks, all but one of which were clacking and whining hungrily, lunging toward her on their 
hooks. a€oeThis is nothing, because I tried nothing.
If                                                                                                  
                I put forth all the strength I have, it would still not be enough to free Mansa 
Kankan Musa from this time, but the rebound, if you like, the rebound could shake all of us into 
the middle of next week.a€D Her smile parted the darkness like a sudden
sail. a€oeYou would not like the middle of next week. I have spent some time there.a€D

Micah Willows sat up, crying softly, a€oeAl-Haji. Umar! Al-Haji Umar, I am here! Okoro, Bakary, 
Yoro Keita, here I am waiting in this place, come and find me!a€D
Julie crouched beside him, holding him as he slumped back, but he struggled weakly in her arms, 
giggling and muttering, a€oeThe hand that touches Mansa Musa.a€D

She looked silently up at Sia. The shadows made their faces dim and small; but even so, Farrell saw 
the long glance that passed between them, deeper than complicity, more candid than easy sisterhood, 
almost shy. Julie said, a€oePlease, will you try
again? Ia€™ 11 help you.a€D

a€oeYou help me?a€D Siaa€™ s answer came so briskly and decisively that Farrell believed forever 
that she had had it ready before Micah Willows ever knocked on her door. a€oeChild, no one can help 
me, no one except Briseis, and she can only do
what she can do, You are incredibly stupid and selfisha€”and very bravea€”and you should go home 
now, this minute. For some things there is no help, you just go home.a€D

Juliea€™ s voice trembled slightly when she replied, but her words were quick and clear. a€oeYou 
said that most people have at least a little magic. Mine comes from my grandmother, if I have any. 
She was born on an island called Hachijojima and she
never learned English, but I spoke Japanese with her when I was small. I didna€™ t know it was 
Japanese, it was just the way Grandma and I talked. I remember she used to drive my parents crazy, 
because shea€™ d tell me really scary stories about the
different kinds of ghostsa€”shirei and muen-botoke and the hungry ghosts, the gaki. And ikiryo, 
theya€™re the worst, theya€™re the spirits of the living, and you can send them out to kill people 
if youa€™re wicked enough. I loved the ikiryo stories.
They gave me such great nightmares.a€D

Sia was nodding, a drowsy old woman before a guttering fir. a€oeAnd the goddessesa€”Marishiten, 
Sengen of Fujiyama. Did she tell you about Sengen, your grandmother?a€D

a€ceKo-no-hana-saku-ya-hime,a€D Julie chanted softly. a€oeShe said it meant that Sengen was 
radiant, like the flowers of the trees. And Yuki-Onna, the Lady of the Snow. I thought she was 
wonderful, even if she was Death.a€D She paused, but Sia
said nothing, and Julie took a deep breath and added, a€oeAnd Kannon. Especially Kannon .a€D

a€oeKuan-Yin,a€D Sia murmured. a€oe Avalokitesvara. Elevenfaced, horse-headed, thousand-handed, 
Kannon the Merciful £€□

a€ceYes,a€D Julie said. Briseis plopped her heavy head on Farrella€™ s knee, and he petted her, 
taking a sad, spiteful comfort in her need of him. Julie said, a€oel dona€™t remember this at all, 
any of it, but somehow my grandmother consecrated me
to Kannon. A little private ceremony, just the two of us. My father walked in on it, and I guess he 
hit the roof. I dona€™ t know. I couldna€™ t have been more than five or six.a€D

The black flames had gone out almost completely; the only light in the shadow-choked room seemed to 
emanate from the angry masks and, strangely, from Micah Willowsa€™ wracked and scarred face. Julie 
went on, a€oeAll Ia€™ m sure about is that
I didna€™t get to be with Grandma so much after that age. I lost all my Japanese pretty fast; and I 
lost Grandma too. She died when I was eight. Shea€™ s buried on Hachijojima.a€D

Two shadows nipped Farrella€™ s ankles at once with icy little teeth that left no marks. He flailed 
them away, but others were moving in, shapelessly aggressive as Juliea€™ s Japanese ghosts. Sia 
asked a€oeDid you ever wonder why she did that,
joining you and Kannon?a€D

a€oel dona€™ t know. Maybe she was hoping Ia€™ d be a Buddhist nun.a€D

Sia was shaking her head again before Julie had finished. a€oeYour grandmother was very wise. She 
had no idea what gift to give you for your life in this country that was already snatching you away 
from her, but she knew that human beings
everywhere need mercy most of all.a€D

She turned to look down at Micah Willows for a long moment, then said something almost inaudible to 
him in Arabic. Farrell had no doubt that she was repeating her last few words, mercy most of all.

a€oeWell,a€n she said. In one remarkable movement she stood up, clapped her hands to drive the 
shadows back, snapped, a€oeOh, just be quiet!a€D to the masksa€”who paid her no attention 
whatsoevera€”and turned solemnly around three times,
like Briseis bedding down. Farrell and Julie gaped, and she laughed at them.

a€oeNo magic, no miracle,a€D she said. a€oeOnly an old person trying to get her doddering self 
balanced properly. What we are going to do now is absolutely insane and insanely dangerous, and I 
think we should all get our feet well under us.a€D
Julie said, a€oeJoe, youa€™ d better go. You dona€™ t have to be here.a€D

a€oePiss off, Jewel,a€D he answered, hurt and furious. His voice silenced the masks briefly, and 
Julie touched him and said, a€oela€™m sorry.a€D

a€oeUnderstand me,a€D the old woman said, and her own hoarse voice was suddenly so terrible that 
the room cleared of shadows instantly and Farrell glimpsed the distant, blessed outlines of chairs 
and chess pieces. Sia said, a€oel am not doing this
for either of you, or even really for hima€”thema€”nor out of vanity, as I told you before. I am 
doing this out of shame, because I knew what had happened the moment it happened, and I did 
nothing. I did not dare to leave my house. I could have called
him here to me, but I feared being destroyed if I tried and failed to free him. So I have done 
nothing at all for two years, until tonight.a€D

Farrell was never sure whether he had actually voiced his mild protest before she cut him off 
savagely. a€oeOf course it was my responsibility! My responsibility is to see that certain laws are 
kept, certain gates are only allowed to swing one way.
However tired or weak or frightened I am, this is still what I am for. If you insist on trying to 
help me, you do it out of ignorance, because you cannot possibly imagine what you risk. But I do 
this out of shame.a€D

Julie asked, a€oeDo you think Kannon will come? What should I do? How should I call her?a€D
a€oeNever mind Kannon,a€D Sia said. a€oeTry calling your grandmother.a€D

She meant what she had said about balance, ordering Julie and Farrell to brace themselves in the 
dark room as carefully as if it were a moving subway car. She even propped Micah Willows against 
the fireplace as best she could before she turned and
said, a€ceWell,a€D a second time. The three of them ranged themselves around Micah Willows, with 
Briseis trembling next to him and Sia keeping one hand in the doga€™ s neck fur.

Micah Willows hugged Briseisa€™ s leg, looked up at them all and said, a€oeFucking doomed. Prester 
John knows.a€D Nothing else happened for a long time.

The starlight came back first, to Farrella€™ s great joy. He had intended to watch very closely 
this time, to see whether it was truly bound up in Siaa€™ s hair or emanated from somewhere outside 
the room. But when it was there, it was simply there,
making the room float on its foundation, and Farrell too happy to do anything but whisper a welcome 
and hold Juliea€™ s hand. The scent of flowers grew warmer around them as the light 
spreada€’’plumeria, the gods smell like Hawaiian plumeriaa€”
making him think of Sengen, beautiful as blossoming trees.

Micah Willows, or the king within him, began to moan softly again with inconceivably fearful 
anticipation, and Farrell had a moment to wonder, is this how it is for Egil Eyvindsson, each time? 
Far above them all, Siaa€™ s face was rising like the
moon: golden and weary, battered into human beauty by endless stoning. Farrell could not bear to 
look to her.

Then she said something in a language like soap bubbles that could only have meant, no, damn it, 
damn it to hell, and, as if some celestial wrecking crew had gone to work, jagged pieces of night 
came plunging through the walls and ceiling of the living
room. What Aiffe and Nicholas Bonner together had failed to accomplish seemed to happen in seconds 
now, as the room ripped itself to pieces like a torn kite in a gale. But the solid old houses and 
libertine gardens of Scotia Street and the Avicenna
lights below had disappeared as well, leaving nothing beyond the shattered suggestion of Siaa€™ s 
home but a sky fanged with strange, hurrying stars and a darkness that was also moving and that 
went on forever, past any hope of morning. It was the
only vision Farrell was ever to have of raw, random space, and he could not keep his feet under 
him. He crouched down among the tumbling stars, covered his eyes and vomited, thinking absurdly, 
Ia€™ 11 never finish sanding that old Essex now, never
get home to finish that.

In a detached way, he was aware that Julie was crying out, somewhere nearby, a€oeKannon! 
Sho-Kannon, ju-ichi-men Kannon! Senju Kannon, ba-to Kannon, nyo-i-rin Kannon! Oh, Kannon, please 
be, Kannon, please! Sho-Kannon, senju Kannon!a€D
She went on and on like that, and Farrell wanted to tell her to shut up because she was giving him 
a headache. But just then the goddess Kannon came to them, so he never did.

Julie said later that she had simply stepped through a hole in space, pulling the endless, 
meaningless night apart with a hundred of her five hundred pairs of arms and letting it close 
behind her, but not before Julie had glimpsed the bluegreen shores of
heaven and the dragons.

But to Farrell, it seemed that she came slowly from a long way off and that she entered that place 
where they were through the one of Siaa€™ s masks that had never sprung to nasty life, but was 
somehow hanging in perfect serenity on no wall, over no
fireplace. It was a Kabuki mask, white as plaster; and as Farrell watched, it began gradually to 
stream with Kannon, dissolving over and over to flow into her round brown face, her flowering arms, 
cloudy robes, and long amber eyes. Her appearance
pulsed and surged constantly, bordering always on forms and sizes and sexes beyond Farrella€™ s 
imagining or containing. Farrell saw her bow slightly to Julie, saluting and acknowledging her.


She turned to look down at Micah Willows for a long moment, then said something almost inaudible to 
him in Arabic. Farrell had no doubt that she was repeating her last few words, mercy most of all.

a€ceWell,a€D she said. In one remarkable movement she stood up, clapped her hands to drive the 
shadows back, snapped, a€oeOh, just be quiet !a€D to the masksa€”who paid her no attention 
whatsoevera€”and turned solemnly around three times,
like Briseis bedding down. Farrell and Julie gaped, and she laughed at them.

a€oeNo magic, no miracle,a€D she said. a€oeOnly an old person trying to get her doddering self 
balanced properly. What we are going to do now is absolutely insane and insanely dangerous, and I 
think we should all get our feet well under us.a€C
Julie said, a€oeJoe, youa€™ d better go. You dona€™ t have to be here.a€D

a€oePiss off, Jewel,a€D he answered, hurt and furious. His voice silenced the masks briefly, and 
Julie touched him and said, a€oela€™m sorry .a€D

a€oeUnderstand me,a€D the old woman said, and her own hoarse voice was suddenly so terrible that 
the room cleared of shadows instantly and Farrell glimpsed the distant, blessed outlines of chairs 
and chess pieces. Sia said, a€oel am not doing this
for either of you, or even really for hima€”thema€”nor out of vanity, as I told you before. I am 
doing this out of shame, because I knew what had happened the moment it happened, and I did 
nothing. I did not dare to leave my house. I could have called
him here to me, but I feared being destroyed if I tried and failed to free him. So I have done 
nothing at all for two years, until tonight.a€D

Farrell was never sure whether he had actually voiced his mild protest before she cut him off 
savagely. a€oeOf course it was my responsibility! My responsibility is to see that certain laws are 
kept, certain gates are only allowed to swing one way.
However tired or weak or frightened I am, this is still what I am for. If you insist on trying to 
help me, you do it out of ignorance, because you cannot possibly imagine what you risk. But I do 
this out of shame.a€D

Julie asked, a€oeDo you think Kannon will come? What should I do? How should I call her?a€D
a€oeNever mind Kannon,a€D Sia said. a€oeTry calling your grandmother.a€D

She meant what she had said about balance, ordering Julie and Farrell to brace themselves in the 
dark room as carefully as if it were a moving subway car. She even propped Micah Willows against 
the fireplace as best she could before she turned and
said, a€oeWell,a€n a second time. The three of them ranged themselves around Micah Willows, with 
Briseis trembling next to him and Sia keeping one hand in the doga€™ s neck fur.

Micah Willows hugged Briseisa€™ s leg, looked up at them all and said, a€oeFucking doomed. Prester 
John knows.a€D Nothing else happened for a long time.

The starlight came back first, to Farrella€™ s great joy. He had intended to watch very closely 
this time, to see whether it was truly bound up in Siaa€™ s hair or emanated from somewhere outside 
the room. But when it was there, it was simply there,
making the room float on its foundation, and Farrell too happy to do anything but whisper a welcome 
and hold Juliea€™ s hand. The scent of flowers grew warmer around them as the light 
spreada€’’plumeria, the gods smell like Hawaiian plumeriaa€”
making him think of Sengen, beautiful as blossoming trees.

Micah Willows, or the king within him, began to moan softly again with inconceivably fearful 
anticipation, and Farrell had a moment to wonder, is this how it is for Egil Eyvindsson, each time? 
Far above them all, Siaa€™ s face was rising like the
moon: golden and weary, battered into human beauty by endless stoning. Farrell could not bear to 
look to her.

Then she said something in a language like soap bubbles that could only have meant, no, damn it, 
damn it to hell, and, as if some celestial wrecking crew had gone to work, jagged pieces of night 
came plunging through the walls and ceiling of the living
room. What Aiffe and Nicholas Bonner together had failed to accomplish seemed to happen in seconds 
now, as the room ripped itself to pieces like a torn kite in a gale. But the solid old houses and 
libertine gardens of Scotia Street and the Avicenna
lights below had disappeared as well, leaving nothing beyond the shattered suggestion of Siaa€™ s 
home but a sky fanged with strange, hurrying stars and a darkness that was also moving and that 
went on forever, past any hope of morning. It was the
only vision Farrell was ever to have of raw, random space, and he could not keep his feet under 
him. He crouched down among the tumbling stars, covered his eyes and vomited, thinking absurdly, 
Ia€™ 11 never finish sanding that old Essex now, never
get home to finish that.

In a detached way, he was aware that Julie was crying out, somewhere nearby, a€oeKannon! 
Sho-Kannon, ju-ichi-men Kannon! Senju Kannon, ba-to Kannon, nyo-i-rin Kannon! Oh, Kannon, please 
be, Kannon, please! Sho-Kannon, senju Kannon!a€D
She went on and on like that, and Farrell wanted to tell her to shut up because she was giving him 
a headache. But just then the goddess Kannon came to them, so he never did.

Julie said later that she had simply stepped through a hole in space, pulling the endless, 
meaningless night apart with a hundred of her five hundred pairs of arms and letting it close 
behind her, but not before Julie had glimpsed the bluegreen shores of
heaven and the dragons.

But to Farrell, it seemed that she came slowly from a long way off and that she entered that place 
where they were through the one of Siaa€™ s masks that had never sprung to nasty life, but was 
somehow hanging in perfect serenity on no wall, over no
fireplace. It was a Kabuki mask, white as plaster; and as Farrell watched, it began gradually to 
stream with Kannon, dissolving over and over to flow into her round brown face, her flowering arms, 
cloudy robes, and long amber eyes. Her appearance
pulsed and surged constantly, bordering always on forms and sizes and sexes beyond Farrella€™ s 
imagining or containing. Farrell saw her bow slightly to Julie, saluting and acknowledging her.

When she looked at him, he wiped his mouth weakly, ashamed that she should see him so, but Kannon 
smiled. Farrell wepta€”not then, but latera€’’because Kannona€™ s smile allowed him to, as it 
allowed him to forgive himself for several quite
terrible things.

He always insisted that he had heard them talking together, Kannon and Sia, in the soap-bubble 
language, and that he had understood every word.
a€”Old frienda€”.

a€”Old frienda€”.

a€”I cannot help him. I am too tireda€”.
a€”I will help hima€”.

a€”You are younger than I and more powerful. You have many worshipers, I have nonea€”.
a€’’Illusion. We do not exista€”.

a€”Perhaps. But the child called you, and you camea€”.
a€”Of course. How not? I know her grandmothera€”.
a€”Yes. Thank you, old frienda€”.

But Sia swore that they had never spoken at all, that there could be no need for speech between 
them; and Julie drove him wild by describing how Kannon had leaned down to Micah Willows and 
touched his eyes, actually touched them, and how he
blinked and said, a€ceJulie,a€D in a voice she remembered, and promptly fainted. Farrell missed 
that part altogether, having realized that Ben was hanging far off in the night like Siaa€™ s 
Kabuki mask, peering drowsily across unhealed space at the
scene below.

Then Kannon bowed again to Juliea€”who was too busy with the still-unconscious Micah Willows to 
noticea€”and bowed low to Sia like the Northern Lights, and went away with the starlight, and Ben 
came on down restored stairs and crossed the
creaky living room floor to Sia. He put his arms around her and held her as tightly as he could.

Micah Willows opened his eyes and said, a€oeJulie? Man, who are these people?a€D

Farrell stood quietly where he was, listening to the first birds, and to the sprinklers coming on 
at the house next door, and thinking entirely about Kannona€™ s smilea€!

And, of course, I do not believe the facilitator intended any disrespect. I do not think she had 
ever heard of Peter Beagle, or The Folk of the Air, or its literary character, the ruler of Mali 
Mansa Kankan Musaa€!
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


When she looked at him, he wiped his mouth weakly, ashamed that she should see him so, but Kannon 
smiled. Farrell wepta€”not then, but latera€’’because Kannona€™ s smile allowed him to, as it 
allowed him to forgive himself for several quite
terrible things.

He always insisted that he had heard them talking together, Kannon and Sia, in the soap-bubble 
language, and that he had understood every word.
a€”Old frienda€”.

a€”Old frienda€”.

a€”I cannot help him. I am too tireda€”.
a€”I will help hima€”.

a€”You are younger than I and more powerful. You have many worshipers, I have nonea€”.
a€’’Illusion. We do not exista€”.

a€”Perhaps. But the child called you, and you camea€”.
a€”Of course. How not? I know her grandmothera€”.
a€”Yes. Thank you, old frienda€”.

But Sia swore that they had never spoken at all, that there could be no need for speech between 
them; and Julie drove him wild by describing how Kannon had leaned down to Micah Willows and 
touched his eyes, actually touched them, and how he
blinked and said, a€ceJulie,a€D in a voice she remembered, and promptly fainted. Farrell missed 
that part altogether, having realized that Ben was hanging far off in the night like Siaa€™ s 
Kabuki mask, peering drowsily across unhealed space at the
scene below.

Then Kannon bowed again to Juliea€”who was too busy with the still-unconscious Micah Willows to 
noticea€”and bowed low to Sia like the Northern Lights, and went away with the starlight, and Ben 
came on down restored stairs and crossed the
creaky living room floor to Sia. He put his arms around her and held her as tightly as he could.

Micah Willows opened his eyes and said, a€oeJulie? Man, who are these people?a€D

Farrell stood quietly where he was, listening to the first birds, and to the sprinklers coming on 
at the house next door, and thinking entirely about Kannona€™ s smilea€!

And, of course, I do not believe the facilitator intended any disrespect. I do not think she had 
ever heard of Peter Beagle, or The Folk of the Air, or its literary character, the ruler of Mali 
Mansa Kankan Musaa€!
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

