Subscribe to get this a€~Stack in your inbox. &/or become a paid subscriber supporting my hiring an 
RA for this, & to get the DirectoraC™ s Cuta€!

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: Inflation & Structural Adjustment:

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

3.0

2.5

2.0

OJ

O  1.5

O

1.0

0.5

0.0

2004         2006         2008         2010         2012          2014         2016         2018    
     2020         2022

I confess to being dismayed about how little of the discussion around inflation even mentions two 
important points:

•  First, a central bank works to build credibility precisely so that it has enormous freedom of 
action to follow the policies in the short run that are best for the economy, even if that means it 
does not hit its long-run inflation target in the short run.

•  Second, as a result of the plague, and of the economic transformations the plague has set in 
motion, we face a period of structural adjustment that it would be very good to complete as fast as 
possible. But this is in part my fault.
I am part of the problem: I did not stress those two points heavily enough in my email exchange 
with John Cassidy:

John Cassidy: Over the weekend, I published a piece taking a closer look at Larry Summersa€™ 
argument that Bidena€™ s American Rescue Plan was largely to blame for the inflation surge and the 
Fed botched its responsea€!. Much of the piece revolves around whether demand (stimulus/Fed) or 
supply (pandemic) is primarily driving inflationa€!.

Brad DeLong: d€™I am not sure that the supply/demand division framing makes a lot of sense. 
Inflation is the result of a supply/demand mismatch. This mismatch could be transient and 
healthya€”a side effect of the good things of rapidly rejoining highway traffic at speed and 
wheeling the economy toward a more goods- and deliverator-heavy configuration. This mismatch could 
be long-lasting and unhealthy. The question is which. And the answer to that
question turns on whether the economy has lost its expectational inflation anchor: Do people still 
expect inflation to be about 2%? Or do people think inflation is up-for-grabs and recent past 
inflation (or recent past plus a little more) is your best guess for what inflation will be in the 
future? My bet is that the 5/5 series from FRED is our best guide to what the relevant people are 
thinking. & the 5/5 has not (yet) movedaCI

LINK: <https://threadreaderapp.com/convos/1513507454033797126>
Share Rrad DeLon^'s Grasninp Realitv


FIRST: SubStack:

I kinda think that one should not read Tiffany Hsu of the New York Times on SubStack. There are so 
many people who are not trying hard to bullshit you, that it is difficult to justify reading 
anybody who is. But Noah Smith reads it:

Noah Smith: Is Substack Good for the World? Is Substack Worth It for Writers?'. a€~Tiffany Hsu of 
the New York Timesa€.\ shady that the NYT article talked of an a€ceexodusa€D from Substack, while 
quietly noting lower down in the article that the platform is actually growing by leaps and 
boundsa€!

Noahpinion

Is Substack good for the world? Is Substack worth it for writers?

Tiffany Hsu of the New York Times recently wrote an article about Substack. People love to argue 
about everything the New York Times says, so naturally it generated a fair share of controversy. 
The cynical take, of course, would be that the NYT is choosing to highlight criticisms of a 
competitor because it doesna€™ t want the competition (and especially doesna€™ t want its best 
writers leaving to strike out on their own). Ita€™ s
certainly plausible, I suppose a€” the online media space has certainly become a more cutthroat 
space as new entrants have flooded the market, and the proliferation of independent newsletters 
just adds to the pressure. It was certainly a bit shady that the NYT article talked of an 
a€ceexodusa€D from Substack, while quietly noting lower down in the article that the platform isa€!

Read more

10 months ago A- 25 likes A- 34 comments A- Noah Smith
And he has reactions:

Noah Smith: Is Substack Good for the World? Is Substack Worth It for Writers?'. a€~Twittera€! 
strong network effectsa€!. The fact that there can be only one Twitter gives the platform a degree 
of social responsibility that it would not otherwise have. Its content decisionsa€! necessarily 
exercise huge swaya€!. Twitter is one of societya€™ s mezzanine institutions, whose micro-actions 
carry macro importance^!. Clones of Substack are
proliferating quickly. These platforms are really more like newsstands than public squaresa€!. 
Although I really really really do not like antivaxxers, I dona€™t get mad that Substack still 
allows them on its platform. Substack isna€™t making the world worsea€!.

The more distinctive your voice and your perspective is, the more you should take a look at 
Substacka€!. Writing for a living is not a good careera€”if you want a good salary, follow the 
clichA© and learn to code. Or go work for private equity. But if you really just love to write, and 
youa€™ d like to get paid a bit more than your job is paying you, and if youa€™re confident that 
you have an audience who likes you a lot more than they
like the average writer, then Substack is a pretty darn good deala€!

My view is that the red line for a platform should be: does it have an algorithm that up-votes 
misinformation as it chases clickbait in an attempt to make money? The things that a platform 
should direct its readers to our things that (a) are true, (b) that the readers want to see and 
enjoy seeing, and (c) make them happier and better people afterwards. That will not be what 
maximizes ad revenue. So we all have a duty to deprive platforms with algorithms that up­
vote misinformation of revenue, and of attention-oxygen.

Things could change. But at the moment a€~Stack is, as Chad Orzell says, a€cea really convenient 
and user-friendly platformaCI. Substack being set up as a bunch of largely self-contained 
individual sites makes it less troubling to me that they also host Bad People. Theya€™re not run 
like a magazine thata€™ s attempting to have or suggest a coherent editorial voicea€!a€D



One Picture: The Yuxi Ellipse:

More than half the world lives in the Yuxi Ellipse

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Paul Campos: A Coup in Search of a Legal Theory. a€~The first step in combating whata€™ s 
actually going on is to recognize it for what it is. Then you can fight it without the 
disadvantages ofa€l eyes wide shut predilectionsa€! 
<https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2022/04/a-coup-in-search-of-a-legal-theory>

• Bartleby: How to Make Hybrid Work a Success 
<https://www.economist.com/business/2022/04/09/how-to-make-hybrid-work-a-success>

•  Cheryl Rofer: Reading Material on PutinaC™s War. a€~Masha Gessen talks about how 
authoritarianism works in Russiaa€l. An interview of Timothy Snyder by Ezra Kleina€l. As an added 
bonus, reread my summary of Vladimir Putina€™ s own wordsa€l 
https://nucleardiner.wordpress.com/2022/04/06/reading-material-on-putins-war/

•  Paul Krugman: Inflation Is About to Come Downa€”But Dona€™ t Get too Excited’. a€~Rising 
wagesa€l gooda€l but right now theya€™ re rising at an unsustainable pacea€l. The good news is that 
therea€™ s still no sign that expectations of high inflation are getting entrenched the way there 
were in, say, 1980a€! <https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nvtimes.com/template/oakv2?
CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit_pk_20220412&instance_id=58273&nl=paul-krugman&productCode=PK&regi_id=646752
25&segment_id=88220&te=l&uri=nvt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2F3b9c05e5-2b34-590d-b927-d5b84e484bab&user_id=8
a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>


•  Yuzuru Kumon: How Landownership Equality Created a Low Wage Society: Pre-industrial Japan, 
1600a€ “1870'. a€™ Ifa€! high wages in western Europe explain the onset of the Industrial 
Revolution^! Japana€™ s failure to industrialize first could have been shaped by its unusual 
pre-industrial equalitya€l <http://publications.ut-capitole.fr/45112/1/wp iast_l38 .pdf>

Twitter & Stack:

•  Will Stancil: a€™ The reason conservative men dona€™ t feel like they fit in modern America is 
because they DONa€™Ta€!. Theya€™re a minority! The problem is that theya€™re accustomed to having 
near-hegemonic control of society anywaya€!

Will Stancil @whstancil

The reason conservative men dona€™t feel like they fit in modern America is because they D0Na€™T 
fit in. Theya€™re a minority! The problem is that theya€™re accustomed to having near-hegemonic 
control of society anyway and any loss of influence or respect feels like marginalization.

OPINION
AMERICA IN FOCUS

These Men Think You Won’t
Like Their Views. But They
Want to Feel Free to Express
Them.

April 12, 2022, 12:02 a.m. ET

The men didn’t see themselves fitting
into American society today. They didn’t
feel free to be themselves in the culture.


Seven ot them said they telt like a

stranger in their own country. At a time
when democratic institutions are under
pressure — and even under attack — and
the United States feels so ununited, what
causes these Americans to feel so
alienated from America?

12:42 PM r™ Apr 12,2022

2,379Likes436Retweets

•  David French: How Twitter Beclowns the American Elite’. a€~The question we have now is whether 
we can adapt to social media before it facilitates a cultural calamity on the scale of the 
industrial revolutiona€™ s two world warsa€!


The French Press

How Twitter Beclowns the American Elite

Yesterday my friend Jonathan Haidt published an essay that defines the term a€oemust read.a€D 
Called a€oeWhy the past 10 years of American life have been uniquely stupid,a€D it traces social 
mediaa€™ s influence on the decline and fall of American institutions. I dona€™ t want to spend too 
much time summarizing his argument (it might prevent you froma€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 263 likes A- 205 comments A- David French
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a paid subscriber! But if you dona€™t want to become a paid subscriber to this a€~Stack, 
please, become a paid subscriber to some other a€~Stack. SubStack is working hard and deserves more 
money: their ability to satisfy their VC wolves with raw meat would, in the long run, help create a 
much better public sphere, I think...

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

Whether any one entrepreneur devotes one's energy to figuring out how to hire and boss workers or 
how to invent and deploy machines is highly likely to depend substantially on how expensive it is 
to hire workers. Here we have an ingenious explanation for why it was that Japan marketized, but 
did not machinize:

Yuzuru Kumon: How Landownership Equality Created a Low Wage Society: Pre-industrial Japan, 1600a€ 
“1870: a€™ Despite its sophistication, Early Modern Japan, 1600a€“1868, had among the lowest real 
wage levels ever recorded, half of those in pre-industrial Englanda€!. Considera€! the more equal 
landownership distribution in Japan relative to Europea€!. Mst of the rural population were 
landless in England but only 16% in
Japan circa 1800. Using a Malthusian model, I show landownership equality in Japan paradoxically 
generated lower wages and GDP per capitaa€! greater equality generating greater population 
pressuresa€!. If, as many historians believe, high wages in western Europe explain the onset of the 
Industrial Revolution, then Japana€™ s failure to industrialize first could have been shaped by its 
unusual pre-industrial equalitya€!

LINK: chttp://publications .ut-capitole Tr/45112/1 /wp iast_ 138 .pdf>

But this is really, really not how bosses roll. Can they be taught to?:

Bartleby: How to Make Hybrid Work a Success: a€~Office time is best spent in a whirlwind of 
collaborative brainstorming and socialising, home days are logically the time when solo and focused 
work should get done. That requires bosses to do what comes unnaturally to them, by resisting the 
temptation to interrupt at willa€!. Being explicit when a reply is needed on an email saves 
everyone scurrying around in a desperate bid to
answer the boss firsta€!. Burnout is as much of a risk as slackinga€!. a€oeManaging outputs, not 
inputsa€Da€!

LINK: <https://www.economist.eom/business/2022/04/09/how-to-make-hybrid-work-a-success>

All this is from Hubler and Cowan is missing is the a€oeand Jared and Ivanka are still diligently 
working to save us all!a€D paragraph:

Steve M.: Wea€™re Sorting Ourselves Into Two Americas, One of Which (Guess Which One) Is More 
Troubling: a€~In The New York Times, Shawn Hubler and Jill Cowan tell us that polarization is 
sorting us into two nations, state by statea€!. Republicans are doing some seriously partisan 
things, Hubler and Cowan tell usa€!. Sounds bad. But Hubler and Cowan assure us that a lot of this 
is probably theater, so I guess we should all just
stop worryinga€!. And wea€™re also told that Newsom is being unpleasantly non-centrist: 
a€oeConservatives in and outside California have criticized the governor for stoking division 
.a€da€! Also, California has high housing costs, therefore what Newsom is doing is bada€!. [Jon] 
Michaels, [a] U.C.L.A. professora€!. a€oelta€™ s easy for Governor Newsom to tell struggling 
Alabamians, a€~I feel your pain,a€™ but then what?
a€~Come rent a studio apartment in San Francisco for $4,000 a month?a€™a€D So I guess if youa€™re a 
governor and real estate prices surpass a certain level in your state, youa€™re not allowed to take 
a position on cultural issues. We end with the mother of a trans child from Dallas who raised 
$23,000 on GoFundMe to get her kid the hell out of Texas. She recently visited Los Angeles. a€oeThe 
city itself just felt like a safe
haven,a€D   Ms. Augustine said. But, she added, her $60,000 salary, which allows her to rent a 
house in Texas, would scarcely cover a California apartment: a€oeWea€™re going to have to 
downsize.a€DThe money aspect of this sucks. But it also sucks that shea€™ s terrified for her kid 
if she stays in Texas, even in a liberal city. Maybe that should be whata€™ s emphasized here?a€!

LINK: <https://nomoremister.blogspot.eom/2022/04/were-sorting-ourselves-into-two.html>

Very nicely put by the wise and learned Chad Orzel:

Chad Orzel: All-Purpose College Advice: a€~Education is not a thing that a college or university 
does to you, ita€™ s a thing that they provide you the resources to do for yourselfa€!. Reading and 
engaging with books and performances and artwork, grinding through labs and problem sets and exams, 
interacting with peers and mentor sa€!playing games and putting on shows and volunteering and 
bullshittinga€! and all the rest of the
vast spectrum of extracurricular activitiesa€!. All of those play a role in turning students from 
the people they were in high school to the people they will be after graduation, and in every one 
of them, the role of the student is paramount. And in every one of those activities, the 
institution and its faculty and staff play a support rolea€!. The most critical advice for a 
college-bound student is just to remember that education is ultimately a
thing you do for yourself with resources provided by the institution, and take an active and 
engaged role in that processa€!. Choose classes that are interesting and challenging, and do the 
worka€!. Seek out opportunities beyond the classrooma€!. Get out and meet peoplea€!. You need to be 
there, and engaged in the process. Recognize that youa€™re being given an opportunity, and take 
advantage of that opportunity in ways that suit
your interests and skills. Or help you identify your interests and skills. Or even identify things 
you dona€™t want to doa€!. What wea€™re selling [at Uiom College] is a high-touch environment where 
undergraduates and faculty interact much more closely, and thata€™ s its own kind of opportunity. 
At the same time, though, there are people who would find that high-touch environment very 
off-putting, who might very well be better
served by a different type of institution^!. As long as you go in knowing that ita€™ s on you to do 
that work, youa€™ 11 be fine in the enda€!

LINK:


served by a different type of institutiona€L As long as you go in knowing that ita€™ s on you to do 
that work, youa€™ 11 be fine in the enda€!
LINK:

AW


All-Purpose College Advice

Counting Atoms

Ia€™ ve spent a bunch of time over the last several days trying to convince high school seniors 
(and their families) who have been accepted to Union College to come here (and give us significant 
sums of money). I did a simulated class on Saturday, then lunch with families, then a reception and 
dinner on Sunday night, then a panel on a€oeimmersive experiencesa€l
Read more

10 months ago A- 3 likes A- 2 comments A- Chad Orzel


Counting Atoms

All-Purpose College Advice

Ia€™ ve spent a bunch of time over the last several days trying to convince high school seniors 
(and their families) who have been accepted to Union College to come here (and give us significant 
sums of money). I did a simulated class on Saturday, then lunch with families, then a reception and 
dinner on Sunday night, then a panel on aCceimmersive experiencesa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 3 likes A- 2 comments A- Chad Orzel

