Share

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Conor Dougherty: How a Single Family Home From the 1950s Is a Vision of Californiaa€™ s Future: 
a€~A single-family home from the 1950s is now a rental complex and a vision of Californiaa€™ s 
futurea€! chttps://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/08/business/economy/california-housing,html>

• Jonathan Fisher & al.: Estimating the Marginal Propensity to Consume using the Distributions of 
Income, Consumption, & Wealth: a€~We examine the conjoint distributionsa€! find that the overall 
marginal propensity to consume (MPC) is 0.10a€! 0.15 for the lowesta€! and 0.06 for the highest 
quintilea€! LINK: chttps: //equitablegrowth .org/working-papers/marginal-propensity-
consume/>

• Wikipedia: Old Shatterhand: a€~Karl Maya€! chttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Old Shatterhand>

• Jordan Schneider: Invisible China: How the Urban-Rural Divide Threatens Chinaa€™ s Rise: a€~Ita€™ 
s a lot easier to solve poverty for 20 million people than it is to solve the low-income problem 
for 900 million peoplea€!


ChinaTalk

Invisible China: How the Urban-Rural Divide Threatens China's Rise

Welcome to the 37 new people who have joined us since last Monday! If you arena€™ t subscribed, 
join 7,047 smart China-curious folks by subscribing here: Scott Rozelle (Stanford professor, 
co-director of the Stanford Center on China's Economy and Institutions, all-around legenda€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 7 likes A- Jordan Schneider
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Paragraphs:

Chye-Ching Huang & Nathaniel Frentz (2014): What Really Is the Evidence on Taxes and Growth? I 
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities: a€~A 2012 Tax Foundation report asserting] that a€oenearly 
every empirical study of taxes and economic growth published in a peer-reviewed academic journal 
finds that tax increases harm economic growtha€Da€! mischaracterized, exaggerated, or
selectively described the findings of six ofa€! 19 [studies]. When one adds to these six studies 
the three state-level studies that the Tax Foundation misrepresented and the three studies that the 
Tax Foundation correctly identified as showing a a€oeneutrala€D effect of taxes on growth, 12 of 
the 26 studies that the Tax Foundation cites do not support its flat assertion that tax increases 
harm

growth. The Tax Foundation^™ s review omitted dozens of relevant studies published in major 
journals or edited compilations since 2000, many of which conclude that levels of taxation have 
little if any impact on economic growth or that adverse impacts are limited to particular taxes or 
time periods. The Tax Foundation^™ s assertion of a growing a€oeconsensus among expertsa€D that
taxes harm growth is falsea€!

LINK: <https://www.cbpp.org/research/what-really-is-the-evidence-on-taxes-and-growth>

Alan M. Jacobs & al.: Whose News? Class-Biased Economic Reporting in the United States: a€~The tone 
of the economic news strongly and disproportionately tracks the fortunes of the richest 
householdsa€!. This a€oeclass biasa€D emergesa€! from the interaction of the mediaa€™ s focus on 
economic aggregates with structural features of the relationship between economic growth and
distribution. The findings yield a novel explanation of distributionally perverse electoral 
patternsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/whose-news-class-biased-economic-reporting-in-the-united
-states/>

Matthew O. Jackson: InequalityaC™ s Economic & Social Roots: The Role of Social Networks & 
Homophily: a€™ The entanglement of peoplea€™ s information, opportunities, and behaviors with those 
of their peers and communities leads to persistent differences in outcomes across groups in 
education, employment, health, income and wealtha€!. A network perspective^™ s policy
implicationsa€! [suggest] the importance of a€oepolicy cocktailsa€D that include aspects that are 
aimed at both the economic and social forces driving inequalitya€!

LINK: <https://papers .ssrn.com/sol3/papers .cfm?abstract_id=3795626>

Edward Chancellor: Evergrande Is All Chinaa€™ s Woes In One: a€~Former Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao 
called Chinaa€™ s economy a€oeunstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated and unsustainablea€D 14 years 
ago. Whether he foresaw that China would one day be beset by a massive real estate bubble, 
over-investment, excessive buildup of debt and a wobbly credit system is not knowna€”but
it has come to fruitiona€!. China is becoming a more dangerous place for foreign investorsa€!. Xi 
talks about the a€oeChinese Dreama€D, a collectivist project that exalts the nation state and 
places the party he leads in total control. Socialism with Chinese Characteristics is starting to 
look a lot like old-fashioned communism. Except this time, its technology is more advanceda€!

LINK: <https://www.renters .com/breakingviews/chancellor-evergrande-is-all-chinas-woes-one-2021 
-09-30/>

Noah Smith: What Does China Have to Lose From a Real Estate Crash?: a€~Even if the company manages 
to bamboozle bondholders into thinking theya€™re going to get repaid for another week or another 
two months, global uncertainty about the Chinese property market and its related industries is 
already on the rise, Chinese growth forecasts are being downgraded, Chinese and global
asset markets are reacting negatively, and the Chinese government is already in crisis management 
modea€!. Which does NOT mean there will actually be a real estate collapse in China. MacroPolo 
analyst Houze Song believes that the government will do what it takes to sustain the property 
sector, at least for a while longera€!. China, unlike America in the 2000s or Japan in the 1990s, 
has a
state-controlled banking system that will not collapse if the government does not allow it to 
collapse. China can bail out the banks, or simply ignore their solvency and tell them to keep 
lending. And those loans will sustain the economya€!. But that doesna€™ t change the fact that 
China is in great danger from a real estate crasha€!. Here are four of the ways I think China will 
suffer from a real
estate crasha€”even if therea€™ s no severe recession. Danger #1: A shift toward even less 
productive assetsa€!. Danger #2: Loss of stabilization policya€!. Danger #3: Household wealth 
destruction^!. Danger #4: Local government financing crisisa€!. The dangera€! long-term [is] a 
slow-motion collapse of the growth modela€!. That model has already undergone significant 
evolution, with a
transition from export-led growth in the 90s and early 00s to domestic investment-led growth in the 
late 00s and 10sa€!. To transition from fast growth to slow growth without a devastating recession 
is quite an accomplishment. But a recession isna€™ t the only kind of scar that the transition can 
leavea€!

This is part of an ongoing series about developments in Chinaa€™ s real estate market. Previous 
installments in the series: Chinaa€™ s real estate trilemma (subscribers only) Hexapodia XXVII: 
Evergrande (podcast with Brad DeLong) Why China's Evergrande Crisis Could Be Worse Than the U.S. 
Crasha€!

Read more

a year ago A- 20 likes A- 14 comments A- Noah Smith

Jeet Heer: Ostracise John Eastman: a€~The scenario Eastman advocated is all the more shocking 
because it was based on a knowing lie from the Trump administration^!. He was very much part of a 
larger project with many forces at work converging to execute a coupa€!. The campaign wing made 
claims they knew to be false; these false claims were spread far and wide by the media wing
(led by Tucker Carlson); the legal wing (with which Eastman was most involved) prepared theoretical 
arguments to justify overturning the election; the congressional wing (notably Senators like Chuck 
Grassley and Ted Cruz) signalled they would go along with the plan; and the extra-legal wing (the 
rioters of January 6) provided musclea€!. The plan of course, fell apart, largely because counsel
other than Eastman convinced Vice President Mike Pence that he had no right to deny certification. 
But it came perilously close to fruition and could provide a model for future coup attemptsa€!. 
Letting Eastman get away scot-free is the equivalent of jailing low level mobsters while ignoring 
the people whispering in the Godfathera€™ s ears. One viable solution is social ostracisma€!. He
currently has ties toa€! Chapman Universitya€! and University of Colorado Bouldera€!. Although both 
schools said they cannot fire him without violating policies protecting academic freedom, their 
leaders vocally denounced his actions. Daniele Struppa, the president of Chapman, said in a 
statement that a€oeEastmana€™ s actions are in direct opposition to the values and beliefs of our
institution.a€D He added that he had brought a€oehumiliationa€n upon the school. A letter signed by 
169 Chapman faculty and members of the Board of Trustees called on the university to discipline 
Eastman for his role in the insurrection. Eastman subsequently resigned from Chapmana€!. [But] 
a€oeEastman is not only a member of the Federalist Society, the network of conservative

attorneys that provided the legal scaffolding for Trumpism. He is the chairman of the 
organization^™ s Federalism & Separation of Powers Practice Group and a frequent participant in its 
public events. The Federalist Societya€™ s refusal to expel, condemn, or distance itself from 
Eastman in any way indicates that the organization is untroubled by the subversion of American 
democracy.a€D


gangedA his S^ws

AC^V

AascVe^e

„ advoca^ aS

nf*eW


The Time of Monsters
Ostracise John Eastman

John Eastman, as wea€™ ve known for some time, served as consigliere to Donald Trump when the 
now-former president tried to overturn the 2020 election. More recently, the release of two memos 
Eastman prepared for Trump during this period (found here anda€l
Read more

a year ago A- 11 likes A- 1 comment A- Jeet Heer

Corey Husak: a€™Lots of talk about how investment could be affected by Build-Back-Better tax 
increasesa€l. Note that when the Trump tax cuts passed, corporate investment (which was growing 
before the cuts) quickly stalled out (the opposite of what boosters promised)a€l

Corey Husak @CoreyHusak

Lots of talk about how investment could be affected by #BBB #tax increases. Its important to note 
that when the Trump tax cuts passed, corporate investment (which was growing before the cuts) 
quickly stalled out (the opposite of what boosters promised)

Tax Cuts and Jobs Act decreased tax revenue, but corporate
investment trends were unchanged in 2018 and slowed in 2019

Cumulative growth since 2012 in U.S. corporate tax revenue and U.S. corporate fixed
investment

+45%

30

15


Corey Husak @ CoreyHusak

Lots of talk about how investment could be affected by #BBB #tax increases. Its important to note 
that when the Trump tax cuts passed, corporate investment (which was growing before the cuts)    
stalled out (the opposite of what boosters promised)

Tax Cuts and Jobs Act decreased tax revenue, but corporate
investment trends were unchanged in 2018 and slowed in 2019

Cumulative growth since 2012 in U.S. corporate tax revenue and U.S. corporate fixed
investment

Source: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, retrieved from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 
‘Federal government current tax
receipts: Taxes on corporate income' (n.d.], available at 
https://fred.stlouisfed.org/graph/7g-EAEh; Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, retrieved from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, 'Nonfinancial Corporate 
Business; Gross Fixed
Investment, Flow' (n.d), available at https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/BOGZlFAlO5O19OO5Q.

Q Equitable Growth

7:43 PM r™ Oct 6,2021

4Likes3Retweets
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

