Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: I Will Never Understand British Dialecta€!

Ian Dunt: a€™ Newsletter going out shortly, you lucky cunts. Today, it is full of the joys of life, 
in the form of a government collapsing in on itself. Sign up herea€l chttps://t.co/yLs 11 f8uOC>a€!

Newsletter going out shortly, you lucky cunts. Today, it is full of the joys of life, in the form 
of a government collapsing in on itself. Sign up here...
10:55 AM r™ Feb 4,2022~~’

253Likes9Re tweets

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth readinga€!
Share

First: Red-State Successful Industrial Policy as Oxymoron


I can feel Debby Wu here trying to restrain herself:

Debby Wu: Chipmakers Are Outspending Governments'. a€~Florida unveiled a $9.7 million program to 
boost state infrastructure and train future semiconductor engineersa€! off by a few orders of 
magnitudea€!. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. is set to spend over $40 billion on capex this 
year alone. Intela€! more than $25 billion in 2022a€!. Samsunga€! is on a
multiyear spending spree totaling more than $100 billiona€!. Japan is offering $6.8 billion in 
incentives to lure global chipmakers to the country and India is allocating $10 billion over six 
years for the development of a local semiconductor industry. The U.S. maya€! come up with a more 
bountiful $52 billiona€! but the Biden administration is still struggling to get that
approveda€!. 70% of TSMCa€™ s massive spending in 2022 is devoted to cutting-edge fabrication and 
capacity, meaning the majority of the budget will be used to improve facilities at home in Taiwan, 
where the company still makes the most advanced chipsa€!

LINK: 
chttps://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-18/chipmakers-are-outspending-governments-fully-
charged?cmpid=BBD011822 TECH>
Not just not in the game. Not having a clue as to where the game even might be played.

It is not as though Republican politicians do not have people willing to work for them who could 
point them to where the game is. Consider Columbiaa€™ s Glenn Hubbard 
<https://www.amazon.eom/Wall-Bridge-Fear-Opportunitv-Disruptions/dp/0300259085/>:

Since September 1977a€! technological change and globalization have magnified the market value of 
my skills anda€! [other] professionals. Meanwhile, the closure of Youngstowna€™ s integrated steel 
mills did not lead to moon-shot efforts toward the preparation and reconnection of many workers and 
communitiesa€!. Imagine if bold support for community colleges and
training would match the preparation and reconnection of the G.I. Bill as America was encouraging 
global integration^! bridge ideasa€! economic participation^!, that generates an ever-increasing 
wealth of the nation.

Imagine mass flourishing.

Now it is true that when Glenn writes a€oewe economists have let the public debate drift to the 
opposite extremes of building walls and a laissez-faire optimism about change and markets making 
everything OKa€D, my immediate reaction is that of Tonto to the Lone Ranger in the old joke: 
a€oewhat is this a€~wea€™ , kemosabe?a€D But that I regard Glenn and company as late to the party 
does not
mean that they are not capable of bringing plenty of refreshments with them.

However, what does he have to offer other than a€oebold support for community colleges and 
traininga€U? That, plus tax cuts for the rich. Oh, and the political forces Glenn and company have 
allied themselves with always favor a cutting-back of broad-based social insurance because such 
egalitarian policies mean that somebody who their core voters regard as unequal to them might 
receive an equal
amount of money.

There are huge, huge problems in running a successful economic developmental state in the modern 
world. The United States managed, somewhat, back when we were under the gun of sputnik and 
conservatives put maintaining social order and privilege behind gaining the economic and military 
strength to combat what they viewed as an existential threat. The countries of East Asia have 
manageda€”
although I have questions about whether China's interior is managing. The club of post-World War II 
Marshall-Plan aid recipients, under the gun of Paul Hoffman's urging them to adopt policies that 
made his heavy lift of congressional approval for the next year's Marshall Plan funds possible, 
managed. But that is pretty much it in the modern world.

This I do not have a lot of confidence that my faction in American politics could do the job, even 
if its elbow were not being joggled constantly. Is there any reason to think that those to my right 
are not in much worse shape? I think the answer is a€cenoa€d. And that is why they kept 
doubling-down on right-neoliberalism, even though neither Reagan nor Bushes had any effective 
policies to boost
growth. Up until 2007, perhaps, they could argue that if their neoliberal bet had not paid off, at 
least it had not crapped out: Hyperglobalization and neoliberalism looked to have been superior to 
too much state-led development led by an anti-developmental state. And the high income and wealth 
inequality of the Second Gilded Age could be sold as a feature rather than a bug that would pay off
eventually. But now it is clear, to Glenn at least, that something different is needed.

On the other hand, it can be done. I still think that Botswana is remarkable, and a sign that there 
should be considerable hope everywhere: Botswana, with an annual real income per capita estimated 
at $900 in 1960 and $14,000 in 2010, and the highest Human Development Index in sub-Saharan Africa, 
despite being landlocked, despite being severely affected by HIV/ AIDS, and being in a very bad
regional neighborhood growth-wise. Consider that neighbor Zambiaa€™ s income per capita went from 
$2,800 in 1960 to $3,500 in 2010, from three times Botswanaa€™ s to one-fourth of Botswanaa€™ s.

In Botswana, an independent and uncorrupt judicial system, a lack of tariffs on machinery imports 
(to encourage technology transfer), a banking system that encouraged savings, and a policy of 
plowing back government revenues into infrastructure investment all helped. So did the luck and the 
skill of the Tswana chiefs in the late 1800s in managing to guide the British Empire into ruling 
with a very
light hand, which made post-independence state-building very easy. And the fact that Botswanaa€™ s 
population was about 80 percent Tswana, as was the leader of the independence movement and the 
first president of independent Botswana (1966a€“1980), Seretse Khama, kgosi (a€oekinga€n or 
a€cechiefa€D) of the Ngwato, one of the eight principal Tswana chieftaincies.

Not to mention that Botswana negotiated a 50 percent ownership interest in the countrya€™ s De 
Beers mining subsidiary, plus a 15 percent ownership stake in the overall De Beers corporation.
Nevertheless, any country, anywhere, any when, could have done it, if Botswana managed to do it.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Audio:

Sonia Purnell & al.: OH GOD, WHAT NOW? Formerly Remainiacs: a€™ As Sue Graya€™ s report_ comes out, 
how tenable is the PMa€™ s position? And how does Russian money influence our politics? Boris 
Johnson biographer Sonia Purnell joinsa€!

OH GOD*

■WHAT

OH GOD, WHAT NOW? Formerly Remainiacs @OhGodWhatNowPod

PODCAST: As Sue Gray's report comes out, how tenable is the PM's position? And how does Russian 
money influence our politics? Boris Johnson biographer @soniapurnell joins @Dorianlynskev 
@rosamundmtaylor & @IanDunt on the show this week. Listen: kite.link/OG04Q2Boris

BLAME

IAND =


southpaw

@nycsouthpaw

NYT May 24, 2020: U.S. Deaths Near 100,000, An

Incalculable Loss

NYT February 5, 2022: 900,000 Dead, but Many Americans
Move On


That’• Fit to      S I) e jXelu J) ork (times

— Six iNcUiljork Simes gig


VOUCLX1X- NoM-TOJ

NLW YORK SUNDAY. MAY 24. 2020

WLCUUU No MB — ~ r -t              NLYb YO«K SAYVBUAY IIMVAMY Y 200


U.S. DEATHS NEAR 100,000, AN INCALCULABLE LOSS

The) Were Nut Sim pls
Name* an a I Jal.

They Were Ui.

AMID COVID WAVE,

Mm(nn


Ghmcr ABT finira to Report Aor Jb BCM n
SfeA f^e 5brrufn«   Drfat


Power Games

On First Day
Of Olympics

G.O.P Calls Riot ‘Legitimate Political Discourse'

***♦ t* Mwt MMIB

6:39 AM ■ Feb 5, 2022

Very Briefly Noted:

• Melody Schreiber: Vastly Unequal Us Has Worlda€™ s Highest Covid Death Toll: a€~Ita€™ s no 
coincidence. As the US nears 900,000 Covid deaths, much of the blame has fallen on individuals 
despite vast income inequality and vaccine accessibility issuesa€! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2022/feb/06/us-covid-death-rate-vaccines>

• Matthew Yglesias: Bidena€™ s Diversity Efforts Work Best When Quiet: a€™ A Black woman will join 
the Federal Reserve board before one sits on the Supreme Courta€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-02-06/biden-s-diversity-efforts-work-best-when-quie
t?cmpid%3D=socialflow-twitter-economics>

• Benjamin Y. Fong & Dustin Guastella: The Siren Song of d€(ePro-Workerd€dConservatism: a€~Some 
a€ceanti-elitistsa€D on the Right say they want the GOP to be the party of the working class. But 
what theya€™re really offering is a PR campaign that wona€™ t fundamentally change the lives of 
workersa€! <https://www.jacobinmag.com/2020/12/pro-worker-conservatism-right-
wing-labor>

•  James Baldwin: a€™It took me many years of vomiting up all the filth Ia€™ d been taught about 
myself, and half-believed, before I was able to walk on the earth as though I had a right to be 
herea€!

Adrian Ernesto Cepeda @PoetNotRockStar

a€celt took me      of vomiting up all the filth Ia€™ d been taught about myself, and 
half-believed, before I was able to walk on the earth as though I had a right to be here.a€D a€” 
James Baldwin,    Cana€™ t Turn Back


4:54 PM r™ Feb 5,2022

64Likes21 Retweets

•  Jonathan Ichikawa: a€™ Maybe this is a hot take? Self-identified liberals who bemoan the lack of 
a€ treasonable conservativesa€d: the world will make a lot more sense when you stop trying to 
rehabilitate fascism and come to terms with the fact that ita€™ s you. You are the reasonable 
conservatives^!

Jonathan Ichikawa @jichikawa

maybe this is a hot take? self-identified liberals who bemoan the lack of "reasonable 
conservatives": the world will make a lot more sense when you stop trying to rehabilitate fascism 
and come to terms with the fact that it's you, you are the reasonable conservatives
5:54 PM r™ Jan 18,2022

1,261Likes284Retweets

•  Donald J. Trump: a€™ Just saw Mike Pencea€™ s statement on the fact that he had no right to do 
anything with respect to the Electoral Vote Count, other than being an automatic conveyor belt for 
the Old Crow Mitch McConnell to get Biden elected President as quicklya€! <

Liz Harrington @realLizUSA

NEW! President Donald J. Trump: "Just saw Mike Pencea€™ s statement on the fact that he had no 
right to do anything with respect to the Electoral Vote Count, other than being an automatic 
conveyor belt for the Old Crow Mitch McConnell to get Biden elected President as quickly...


PRESIDENT DONALD J. TRUMP

- February 4,2022 -

Statement by Donald J. Trump, 45th President of the
United States of America

Just saw Mike Pence’s statement on the fact that he had no right to do anything
with respect to the Electoral Vote Count, other than being an automatic
conveyor belt for the Old Crow Mitch McConnell to get Biden elected President
as quickly as possible. Well, the Vice President’s position is not an automatic
conveyor if obvious signs of voter fraud or irregularities exist. That’s why the
Democrats and RINOs are working feverishly together to change the very law
that   Mike Pence and his unwitting advisors used on January 6 to say he had no
choice. The reason they want it changed is because they now say they don’t
want   the Vice President to have the right to ensure an honest vote. In other
words,  I was right and everyone knows it. If there is fraud or large scale
irregularities, it would have been appropriate to send those votes back to the
legislatures   to figure it out. The Dems and RINOs want to take that right away.
A    great opportunity lost, but not forever, in the meantime our Country is going
to hell!

3:01 AM r™ Feb 5,2022

2,098Likes846Retweets

Paragraphs:

Mr. Justice McREYNOLDS (1937): NLRB v. Jones & Laughlin Steel Dissent’. a€~delivered the following 
dissenting opiniona€!. Consideringa€! the departure from whata€! has been consistently ruled 
herea€! the obligation to present our views becomes plaina€!. Every consideration brought forward 
to uphold the act before us was applicable to support the acts held unconstitutional in causes 
decided
within two years. And the lower courts rightly deemed them controlling^!

LINK: chttps://web .archive.org/web/20060912221921/http://www.michaelariens 
.com/ConLaw/cases/joneslaughlin.htm>

Park MacDougald: The Battle on the New Right for the Soul of Trumpa€™ s America: a€~The new 
millennial right is as much a sensibility as a coherent intellectual movementa€!. The best way to 
think of them may be as something akin to a less heavily tattooed, right-wing version of the 
millennial New York socialistsa€! young people connected by overlapping social and professional 
ties and
frustrated with the politics of their eldersa€!. One frequently cited influence is the historian 
Christopher Lascha€! [who] argued that the a€cemeritocracya€D that had emerged from the social 
convulsions of the 1960s was a sham, producing an insular, culturally radical elite alienated from 
and contemptuous of the supposedly bigoted and backward country that it governed. This critique 
echoed
neoconservative attacks on the liberal a€oenew classa€D of academics and bureaucrats, but Lasch, 
ever the old Marxist, sought to tie the cultural obsessions of this elite to an increasingly 
globalized capitalism that had made it possible for them to break the economic, social, and 
cultural power of the middle and working classesa€!

LINK: <https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/news/articles/the-new-millennial-american-right>

Eric Topel: How to Misinterpret Clinical Outcome Data in Populations by Age Subgroups: a€~A 
headline in the New York Times was a€oeYounger People Benefit Less From Boosters Than Oldera€D. Of 
course they do, as risk of nearly any intervention in medicine along with its absolute benefit are 
less with younger age. But to imply that boosters dona€™ t help younger people is a flawed
interpretation^!. Dataa€! for vaccinations and boostersa€! indicates a highly consistent risk 
reductiona€! 96.5% efficacy for age 16 to 55 and 93.1% for age 55+a€!

LINK:


Ground Truths

How to misinterpret clinical outcome data in populations by age subgroups

Recently a headline in the New York Times was a€oeYounger People Benefit Less From Boosters Than 
Oldera€D. Of course they do, as risk of nearly any intervention in medicine along with its absolute 
benefit are less with younger age. But to imply that boosters dona€™ t help younger people is a 
flawed interpretation^!

Read more

a year ago A- Eric Topol
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

The initial handshaking on zoom has not gotten better over the past two years:

Speaker #1: Yes

Speaker #2: Hello

Speaker #1: Can you hear me?

Speaker #2:1 cannot hear you for some reason. Do I have any sound turned off?

Speaker #1: No, I don't.
Speaker #2: Are you muted?
Speaker #1: No.

Speaker #2: Oh, now I can hear you. Am I muted? No, I am not muted. However you're not a dog.

Speaker #2: That is awesome. Can you see how that dog appears?

Speaker #1: Yes! It's a strange mysterious Ghost Dog!

Speaker #2:1 love it. I love the Ghost Dog. Hold on, let mea€! no, I don't need to make myself more 
visible, I don't need to turn on front lighting, because we're not recording video. So who cares? 
Do you mind if I if I look like I'm in a cave? That's fine. After all, you are in a cave, aren't 
you? I mean, yes. And manmade sort of rectilinear cave.

Speaker #1: Is this working?

Speaker #1: Are we recording this afternoon? I just got a email asking this. But we are recording, 
like, right now.


Ground Truths

How to misinterpret clinical outcome data in populations by age subgroups

Recently a headline in the New York Times was a€oe Younger People Benefit Less From Boosters Than 
Oldera€D. Of course they do, as risk of nearly any intervention in medicine along with its absolute 
benefit are less with younger age. But to imply that boosters dona€™ t help younger people is a 
flawed interpretation^!

Read more

a year ago A- Eric Topol
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

The initial handshaking on zoom has not gotten better over the past two years:

Speaker #1: Yes

Speaker #2: Hello

Speaker #1: Can you hear me?

Speaker #2:1 cannot hear you for some reason. Do I have any sound turned off?

Speaker #1: No, I don't.
Speaker #2: Are you muted?
Speaker #1: No.

Speaker #2: Oh, now I can hear you. Am I muted? No, I am not muted. However you're not a dog.

Speaker #2: That is awesome. Can you see how that dog appears?

Speaker #1: Yes! It's a strange mysterious Ghost Dog!

Speaker #2:1 love it. I love the Ghost Dog. Hold on, let mea€! no, I don't need to make myself more 
visible, I don't need to turn on front lighting, because we're not recording video. So who cares? 
Do you mind if I if I look like I'm in a cave? That's fine. After all, you are in a cave, aren't 
you? I mean, yes. And manmade sort of rectilinear cave.

Speaker #1: Is this working?

Speaker #1: Are we recording this afternoon? I just got a email asking this. But we are recording, 
like, right now.

Speaker #2: Yes.

Speaker #1: This is recording time. Good. Wella€!

