Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)

2)

3)

4) Brad DeLong (1997): The Corporation as a Command Economy. a€~We were all told, back when the 
Soviet Union collapsed, that hierarchical organizations simply did not
work as modes of organizing economic lifea€”that you needed a market in order to achieve anything 
better than low-productivity, bureaucracy-ridden economic stagnation.

What, then, are all these large corporationsa€”ATT and IBM, General Motors and Toyota, Microsoft 
and USXa€”doing? What methods of corporate control have saved them from
turning into smaller versions of the unproductive Soviet economy?

That our economy is populated by large corporations shapes how we live. Our social being cannot but 
be shaped by the one-third of our waking lives spent at work. Our politics
would be very different without corporations both as sources of pressure an influence on 
politicians and as intermediaries serving the purposes of politicians. It should not be
surprising that the continued existence and, indeed, economic dominance of large corporations is 
due to a number of different forces. Very, very few things in this world have a
single causea€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2013/05/brad-delong-1997-the-corporation-as-a-command-economy.html>


Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)Martin Sandbu: US Stimulus Package Leaves Europe Standing in the Dust’. a€~Europe and the US will 
loom less large in the global economy as emerging countries outperform
their growth. That is inevitable. What we do not know is how fast that US and European dominance 
will be whittled awaya€!. US president Joe Biden has delayed his countrya€™ s
relative decline. EU leaders, however, look set to accelerate theirs. Bidena€™ s $1.9tn fiscal 
stimulus package, passed last week, may not be literally visible from space, but it is
certainly                                                                                of 
planetary scale. In the OECDa€™ s March update to its forecasts, the organisation estimated that 
the US stimulus will add one whole percentage point to projected
global growth. It more than doubled its 2021 growth forecast for the US itself, from 3.3 to 6.5 per 
cent. Bidena€™ s own administration foresees US output returning to its potential
three to four years faster because of the stimulusa€! LINK: 
<https://amp.ft.com/content/20096b0a-8a94-453d-8788-c3b 15dc1704c>

2) Bates Gill: Endorsing a€oeSelf-Reliancea€C\ Beijing Raises the Geopolitical Stakes’. a€~The 
a€oedual circulation^ □ strategy announced at the National Peoplea€™ s
Congressa€! a framework first coined by Xi Jinping last yeara€!. Greater reliance on Chinaa€™ s 
enormous internal market (a€oedomestic circulationa€D) for growth and
technological innovation, rather than on capital-intensive growth, low-value exports and imported 
technology which spurred the country a€™ s economic success in the past. The
other   half of the strategy, a€oeinternational circulation^□, will double down on Chinaa€™ s 
long-standing effort known as a€oeMade in China 2025a€D (MIC 2025)a€! to
upgrade its manufacturing base through the integration of information technology to improve 
productivity, increase the indigenous content of higher-end technology products,
reduce reliance on foreign inputs and become more self-sufficient technologicallya€! position China 
as the leading source of critical technologies and industrial outputs of the future
across the value chaina€”in design, manufacturing processes, technology and material inputs, and 
finished productsa€”in high-priority sectors including next-generation
information technology, robotics, aerospace, high-speed rail, green energy, biopharma and new 
materialsa€!. The NPC is not a deliberative body, but rather a political pageant to
formalise decisions already made by party higher-ups. As such, the announcements last week signal a 
profound rethinking in Beijinga€! LINK: <https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-
interpreter/endorsing-self-reliance-beijing-raises-geopolitical-stakes>

3) Boris Johnson has set his credibility on fire, and has no potential allies anywhere in the world 
for whatever he wants to do on international diplomacy or economic policy. But
thata€™ s probably fine with him, since he does not want to accomplish anything other than become 
Prime Minister:

Philip Stephens: Squandering Trust Is No Route to a a€~Global Britaina€™: a€™ By seeking to renege 
on his Brexit commitments, Boris Johnson has made the UK an unreliable
allya€!. Middle-ranking and smaller states seeka€! sheltering behind alliances, coalitions of the 
like-minded and multilateral rules. Along-promised foreign, diplomatic and
intelligence strategy soon to be unveiled by Boris Johnsona€™ s government must start from this 
simple premisea€!. International networks rest on mutual trust. Nations, like
individuals, abide by the rules to the extent that others also act in good faith. Unreliable 
partners do not get to act as conveners. Which renders all the more inexplicable
Johnsona€™     s efforts to renege on the Brexit agreement he signed with the EU. The governments™ 
s move to delay implementation of agreed new checks on trade between
Britain    and Northern Ireland recalls a threat last year to repudiate the customs arrangements 
designed to avoid a border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Irelanda€!.

Such things are noticed. Witness the remarks of Brendan Boyle, a congressional ally of US president 
Joe Biden. This was the second time, Boyle told BBC televisions™ s
Newsnight, Soethat this UK government has signed up to an international agreement and then 
immediately decided to go back on what it agreed toSD. The move carried Soeall
sorts   of ramificationsSD. One of which could be a serious falling out with Washington. Biden has 
signalled he expects Johnson fully to uphold the Irish protocols! LINK:

<https://www.ft.com/content/10ec8895-c84f-479e-9fc7-9dde0706dca3>

4) One of the major pedagogical and intellectual-presentational revolutions of our time:

Matt Asay: Jupyter Has Revolutionized Data Science, & It Started with a Chance Meeting Between Two 
Students’. S~If you want to do data science, youS™re going to have to
become familiar with JupyterS! best known for Jupyter Notebooks, a web application that allows data 
scientists to create and share documents that contain live code, equations,
visualizations and narrative text. This proves to be a great way to extract data with code and 
collaborates!. It started with a friendship. Fernando PA©rez and Brian Granger met
the first day they started graduate school at University of Colorado Boulder. Years later in 2004, 
they discussed the idea of creating a web-based notebook interface for IPython,
which PA©rez had started in 2001. This became Jupyter, but even then, they had no idea how much of 
an impact it would have within academia and beyondS! LINK:

<https://www.techrepublic.com/article/jupyter-has-revolutionized-data-science-and-it-started-with-a-
chance-meeting-between-two-students/>

5) Noah Smith: Checking in on the Global South: S~To some, the idea of a Global South means that 
history is destinyS”that the dead hand of colonialism, or the living hand of
neocolonialism, is holding down the developing world. To others, ita€™ s an expression of the idea 
that poor countries just dona€™ t have what it takes to get rich. Either way,
ita€™ s a form of implicit defeatisma€ ”a belief that historical and/or cultural forces are 
stronger than economic forces. Southeast Asia hasna€™ t yet broken these ideas on the
wheel of hard data, but it might not take much longer to do so. Bangladesha€™ s similar 
performance, meanwhile, suggests that South Asia might not be far behinda€! LINK:

<https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/checking-in-on-the-global-south>

6) A very, very nice talka€”the intellectual grandchild of Ragnar Nurkse, by way of Nicola 
Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer:

Ivan Werning: Taming a Minsky Cycle <https://www.youtube,com/watch?v=mzfqTWJ4JhU>:

7) James Robinson is scared at the large-scale soft treason of Republican actual and wannabee 
office holders, but I do not think he is scared enough.

It is not at all clear to me that Trumpian populism has failed. Trump has failed. But neofascism 
remains a mighty powerful force. If James Robinson would talk to Trumpists, he
would recognize that Trump did a€oedeliver the goodsa€Da€”they imagine that, before the coming of 
the plague, they were enjoying an unparalleled economic boom; and they are
not mistaken to think that Trump delivered the hate he had promised against immigrants, against 
uppity Blacks who did not know and stay in what Trumpists continue to think is
their proper place, and against rootless cosmopolites. The only problem is that the center of the 
electorate is nota€”or is not yeta€’’Trumpian. And, for some reason, the knives that
actors from James Comey to Dean Baquet used to stab Hillary Rodham Clinton in the back failed to 
hit Joe Bidena€™ s back this time, for lots of reasons:

James A. Robinson: Why Trumpian Populism Failed: a€~US democracy remains vulnerablea€! owing to 
many Americansa€™ lack of commitment to democratic institutions.
While Trump worked to de-institutionalize America and enrich himself while in office, the 
Republican Party either sat on its hands or in some cases applaudeda€!. At the end of the


aay, irumpa^-' s a^ce America rirsia^u was mosuy posturing, Decause ne couiuna^* " i deliver real 
improvements in me lives oi ms case, AH successiui autocratsa^ iiKe torrner

Venezuelan President Hugo ChAjvez, postwar Argentine President Juan PerA3n, or current Ugandan 
President Yoweri Musevenia€’’somehow a€oedeliver the goodsa€D for their
core constituencies. Trump delivered, but only to the rich, by cutting taxes and regulations. His 
symbolic gestures wona€™t endure, and his a€oeMake America Great Againa€D
slogan is destined for burial at the back of millions of American closets.

Republicans would be wise to consider this. Instead, much of the party, both in Congress and at the 
state and local level, still clings to the false narrative of election fraud and
support for the insurrectionists, or advances the notion that the storming of the Capitol was 
staged to undermine Trump. This is deeply concerning. PerA3n was able to rule as he did
after World War II because increased presidential meddling in Argentinaa€™ s Supreme Court and 
political institutions had eroded these bodies over the previous 15 years. Most
Americans do not want to go down this path, even if many of their elected political leaders doa€! 
LINK: <https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/us-democratic-
institutions-prevailed-over-trump-this-time-by-james-a-robinson-2021-03>

8) Figuring out how to do antitrust in the age of the attention economy is really, really hard:

Ben Thompson: The FTCa€™ s Google Documents, the Staff Memo, the Economists Memo'. a€~The 
fundamental premise of the Politico article, along with much of the antitrust
chatter in Washington, misses the point: Google is dominant because consumers like it. That 
doesnaC™ t mean the company didna€™ t act anticompetitively, or that we
shouldna€™  t think seriously about acquisitions or contracts or advertising. Such thinking, 
though, has to start with a certain degree of humility about the fundamentally different
nature                                                                                of the 
Internet and how it is leading to these Aggregator-type outcomes. It really might be different this 
timea€! LINK: <https://stratechery.com/2021/the-ftcs-google-
documents-the-staff-memo-the-economists-memo/>

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

