I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish
to join the group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: Mindscape Podcast with Sean Carroll

209 I Brad DeLong on Why the 20th Century Fell Short of Utopia

a€oeBack in the 1990s, I decided that someone really ought to write an economic history of the 
world, but one that started not witha€! pushing pieces of flint against each other to get sharp 
edges, or with the Industrial Revolution^!. Up until 1870a€! technology was advancing slowlya€! 
[but] in nearly all human societies if youa€™re a womana€! the only way you
have any social power in your old age is if you have surviving sonsa€!. Irresistible Malthusian 
pressures to keep trying to have kids in the hope that one of the sons will survivea€!. Technology 
advances, but population advances as wella€!. People with better technology across the centuries 
farming smaller and smaller plotsa€! the worldwide standard of living in
1870 was not that different from what it was in -6000. Much, much better technologies on the one 
hand, but much, much smaller average farm sizes on the othera€!. 1870 stands out like a sore 
thumba€! [as] the point where things change, and where, whatever history was beforehand, it looks 
very different afterwardsa€!a€D

Share

1870 as the hinge of history, and thus 1870 as the moment at which to start a history booka€”in 
Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> I make maximalist claims to that effect.

But I could have written the book without making those claims: I could have just said that the 
processes of 1900 to 1914 were continuous with those of 1872 1900, and thus that it was convenient 
to take the period as a whole and include it in the long 20th century.
But making the maximalist claim is (a) true, and (b) helps people see both why the history of the 
long 20th century is important, and why the history of the long 20th century is so different from 
the history of earlier epochs.

At my third pre-launch dry-run academic book talk, my discussant the brilliant Robert Brennera€”I 
remember being 20, and my teacher David Landes saying a€oeyou have to read Brennera€da€” strongly 
disputed this maximalist claim of mine. It was a talk for the N2PEa€”the Network for a New 
Political Economy chttps://n2pe.berkeley.edu/>a€’’and the
Berkeley Social Science Matrix chttps://matrix.berkeley.edu/> on the very top floor of the 
U.C.Berkeley Social Sciences Building on SouthSide. The N2PE will get the video up on its website 
soon 
<https://n2pe.berkelev.edu/events/slouching-towards-utopia-an-economic-historv-of-the-twentieth-cent
urv/>.

Robert Brenner is Director of the Center for Comparative History and Social Theory at UCLA. Most 
people would be happy being director of either a Center for Comparative History or a Center for 
Social Theory. Bob, however, wants both.

The overwhelming thrust of Brennera€™ s discussion was that, in my book, I am mischaracterizing the 
economies that lay within the Dover Circlea€”the 300 mile-radius circle centered on the port of 
Dover at the southeast corner of England. I see them as much closer to the other economies of 
1500-1870a€’’gunpowder-empire social formations that are still largely
a€oeMalthusiana€D in charactera€”than to the economies of modern economic growth that emerge after 
1870. Brenner thinks that that is very wrong: the replacement of peasants by laborers and farmers 
in the countryside, the extraordinary growth of rural and urban industry, and the coming of 
merchant and non-agricultural producer classes to challenge landlords
for political power and cultural hegemony make him see the classic industrial revolution period, 
and even the early modern period, to be closer to what came after 1870 than to what had come before 
1500, or what existed outside the Dover Circle over 1500-1870.

At least, he thinks, that was true for the Netherlandish and English sub-components of the Dover 
Circle.

I will have to think more about how to figure out which one of us is right. In my book I rely on 
the authority of John Stuart Mill, publishing in the 1870s:

That is not sufficient.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Slouching: Responding to Critics I:

The substantive critics of the book are beginning to show up. Critical comment A:

Relatively marginal to the argumenta€!. you are right to emphasize the world-changing importance of 
the corporate research laboratory. However, I think there is a lot of evidence that the corporate 
research labs have declined dramatically in significance over the last half century. Some of this 
is short-termism where corporations dona€™ t
want to spend on anything that will not improve the bottom line in the next two or three quarters. 
But far more significant is the greater technological complexity of current innovationa€!

No, that is not a quibble, and that is not marginala€”that is, I think, a very important point and 
a key part of how the neoliberal era has been such a disappointment to all in the Global North, 
save the plutocrats. The Fordist-R&D structures of Bell Labs, Xerox PARC, and such were of immense 
value for human society, and you are right to note their sharp decline over
the past half century.

And I do think you are right in extending GerschenkronaC™ s a€oeEconomic BackwardnessaCD argument 
from finance and investment to research and development. Gerschenkron claimed that while the 
individual entrepreneur could do the job of finance and investment in the first generation of 
industrializers, you needed the support of universal banks for the second
and of the state for the third. But the scale-of-R&D dimension may well be more important. And just 
how have Apple and TSMC managed ita€’’financing the hardware node construction, gaining the 
engineering knowledge, and also writing the software to take advantage of what they make? I thought 
I understood Intel-Microsoft back in The Day. But I do not
understand TSMC-Apple today.

And of course you are right that we are failing to distribute or to make proper use of our 
wealtha€”and that is potentially truly catastrophic. Marx and Lenin and so many others way back 
whena€”now more than a century agoa€’’could say that while the problem of production was hard, the 
problems of distribution and utilization would be easy. It would be easy and
naturala€’’requiring merely a rotation of administrative tasks among those who could add, subtract, 
multiply, divide, and issue receiptsa€”once we were out the kingdom of necessity, in which the 
principal focus of those who controlled the levers of power in human society faced was how to 
exploit so that they, at least, could get enough.

But they were wrong. We here and now cannot say that.
Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Noah Smith: American Workers Need Lots and Lots of Robots: a€~With the power of automation, our 
workers can win. Without it, they're in troublea€!

•  Michael Slaby: Augmentation over Replacement: a€~If we continue to talk about the future only in 
the darkest, most post-apocalyptic terms, no one is going to want to go there. And we may miss an 
opportunity to make it amazinga€!

•  Joseph Politano: Understanding Inflation Expectations: a€~Householdsa€™ inflation expectations 
were not that well-anchored even during the Great Moderation, people are not as rational as much of 
the theory suggests, and the causal mechanisms that transmit higher household inflation 
expectations to higher inflation can be messya€!

• Annie Lowrey: American Motherhood: a€~My pregnancies could have killed me, but at least I chose 
thema€!

•  Annie Lowrey: A Crisis Historian Has Some Bad News for Us: a€~Adam Tooze, a historian of 
economic disaster, sees a combination of worrisome signsa€!

• Andrew Collier: Chinaa€™ s Technology War: Why Beijing Took Down Its Tech Giants

•  Michael Tomasky: The Middle Out: The Rise of Progressive Economics and a Return to Shared 
Prosperity: a€~Politics and Prose; Saturday, September 17 5 p.m. E.Ta€!

•  Tracy Alloway & Joe Weisenthal: Soft Landing in Practice. But What About in Theory?: a€~This is 
not to say that a soft landing has been achieveda€!. [But] if we were coasting to a soft landing 
(by which I mean inflation is defeated without a major recession), it would probably look like what 
wea€™ ve seen over the last few monthsa€!

•  Brad DeLong: 'Ross Douthat says: a€oela€™ 11 vote for Trump unless you give me policy wins X, Y, 
Z, & W! What, you wona€™ t? Then it is **your** fault I am voting for Trump!"

Ross Douthat @DouthatNYT

... namely the sense that voters to the right of center are being asked to sacrifice various 
commitments or interests to defeat Trumpism, even as their would-be leaders or partners to the left 
give up none of their partisanship and indeed become ever-more ideologically purist.


149Likes 11 Retweets
Right...

•  Neal Katyal: a€~This special master opinion is so bad ita€™ s hard to know where to begin: 1. 
She says Biden hasna€™ t weighed in on whether docs protected by Exec Privilege. Nonsense. The 
archives letter (which DOJ submitted to the Judge) makes it clear current President thinks none of 
this is...

•  Stephan Rahmsdorf: a€~So why do we see such crazy heat extremes after a€oeonlya€D 1.3 degrees C 
of Global Warming?a€! Land areas have warmed much more than ocean, and the global average 
temperature consists of 70% ocean surfacea€! <https://t.co/FZVlkQmuJO https :Z/t.co/MQx0itmA9s>a€!

•  Michael Pettis: a€~The longer it takes for global creditors to recognize that much 
developing-country debt can never be serviced, the longer will it take for them to restructure debt 
with meaningful forbearance, and the worse off both they and the borrowers will be 
chttps://t.co/uWS2wot6by>a€!

Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

