Subscribe now

FOCUS: Republicans Say: Democrats Must Be Responsible, & So Give Us an Advantageous Campaign 
Issue!:

I am tired of this game. It is not a good game. Republican Michael Strain writes:

Michael Strain: Averting a Debt-Ceiling Disaster: a€~House firebrandsa€! arena€™t bluffing. Biden 
and congressional Democrats need to accept this realitya€! acknowledge the more widely shared 
Republican argument that federal spending has reached problematic levelsa€!. find some spending 
that can be cuta€!. Responsible members of Congressa€! [might write] a discharge petitiona€!. 
McCarthy could bring a debt-ceiling
increasea€! over the objections of the rabble-rousers, knowing that it would likely cost him his 
speakershipa€!. Put the countrya€™ s welfare first. All responsible politicians must get to work 
immediatelya€!

The meta-game here is:

1. Republicans demand that Democrats be a€ceresponsiblea€D with respect to the debt-ceiling.

2. Democrats offer policy concessions.

3. In exchange, the Republicans allow a debt-ceiling increase to pass with only a few Republican 
votes attached to it.

4. Republicans point to the debt-ceiling increase as evidence Democrats are always borrow-and-spend

5. The press repeats the Republican talking point.

6. Republicans solidify their base, attract a few low-information undecideds, and win a few more 
elections
This does not seem to me to be a very good game for the country.

Michael Strain wants this game to continue. In order to avoid a debt-ceiling crisis triggering 
partial government default, Michael Strain asks:


1. Democrats to put the country first and offer policy concessions,

2. Kevin McCarthy to put the country first and risk losing his Speakership, and

3. non-Handmaid Caucus Republican members of the House toa€! what? a€oeBe responsiblea€D. What does 
a€ceresponsibilitya€D entail? Michael does not say.
Herea€™ s my take on what a€oeresponsibilitya€D entails here:

• Democrats in the Senate lead on passing a clean debt-ceiling bill.

•  Biden announces he will sign a clean debt-ceiling bill, but veto anything with riders attached 
and, instead, either sell high-yield bonds, mint the coin, or let some Social Security checks 
bounce, depending on what looks like the least-bad option when the crisis comes.

•  150 Republican House members write and sign a discharge petition for a clean debt-ceiling bill.

• A major, major financial effort by Republican donors to find and fund attractive candidates so 
that all Handmaid Caucus members lose their next primaries.
Michael envisions, instead, a discharge petitition signed by 212 Democrats and 10 Republicans, or a 
replacement of McCarthy as Speaker by Scalise.

Please forgive me for not being impressed.
Share

ONE IMAGE: Alternate Brads:


Now I need a caption for each onea€!
Leave a comment

BRIEFLY NOTED:

Very Briefly Noted:

• Tyler Cowen: China is one of the hardest countries to predict: a€~You periodically get these very 
major sudden flips that most observers are not predicting. I'll just predict that China will stay 
hard to predicta€! A very safe prediction indeed.

• James Fallows: OK, There Was Something Positive in the Speaker-Vote Debacle: a€~What Hakeem 
Jeffries said was notablea€!. Jeffries built from his own story of opportunity to a a€cethis we 
believe !a€D credo for the Democratsa€!. Out of many, we are one. That's what makesAmerica a great 
countrya€l Damned if I canunderstand why anyone looks at Hakeem Jeffries and looks at Kevin 
McCarthy and has any problem figuring out who
would be a better Speaker for America.

•  Mark Gurman: Apple Is Working on Adding Touch Screens to Macs in Major Turnabout: a€~Steve Jobs 
famously decried idea of touch displays for laptops. MacBook Pro with OLED poised to be the first 
touch-screen Maca€! I am fearful of thequest for one singleinterface between our  eyes, our 
fingers, and our machines.

• Suresh Naidu: a€oeLooking forward to our inaugural "economists write books" talk series with the 
great Leah Boustana€! This will be extremely enlightening!

•  Madeleine Neighly: a€~Learn from Leah Boustan as she discusses her book Streets of Gold with 
Columbia Professor Mae Ngai on Thursday, Jan. 19. Register at <https: //t ,co/F9ZkcDEg wi>a€! As I 
saida€\

•  Robert Shrimsley: British politics is still suffering from a€~long populisma€™: a€~Sunak is 
refusing to confront reality, just like his predecessorsa€! Damned if I can understand why anyone 
looks at Starmer and at the clown show and has any problem figuring out who would be a better Prime 
Minister for Britain.

•  Barry Eichengreen: Sympathy for the Algorithm: a€~The release of ChatGPT, a new 
artificial-intelligence chatbot, is forcing us to rethink what tasks can be carried out with 
minimal human intervention. If an AI is capable of passing the bar exam, is there any reason it 
cana€™t give sound legal advice?a€! How worried shouldwe be? Type a€oe Write an  800-word 
commentary on AI for Project Syndicate^d into ChatGPT and judge for
yourselfa€! I have swing around the team: not at all worrieda€”for now.

•  Dan Moren: Tapbots shares road map for Mastodon client Ivorya€™ s development: a€~a€oeMan, they 
opened like two thousand new testing slots for the Ivory beta and they were all gone within five 
seconds !a€Da€ I. Tapbots has gone ahead and posted a road map for the appa€! I really, really want 
this program.

• Duncan Black: Chaos Agents: a€~The Tea Party-era nuttersa€l mostly just enjoyed the attentiona€l 
[of being] the main characters of reality. But when the right people called them up and said "don't 
blow up the economy," they listened. I'm not sure the current crew will. They like showing off for 
the teevee, and they also like burning things downa€! it is  not the 20 members of the Handmaid 
caucus. We really haveto worry about. It isall their
enablers a€“ the other 200 Republican House members, the other Republican politicians, and there 
are useful idiots in the press.

Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Well, yes: my brain can't concentrate on very few things, and can remember only a few more. I 
desperately need external aids to remind me of what I know and direct to my attention. I could 
barely think at all without thema€”and I am supposed to have a pretty good memory, and to have a 
very good ability to focus:

Larissa MacFarquhar: The Mind-Expanding Ideas of Andy Clark: a€~The tools we use to help us 
thinka€”from language to smartphonesa€”may be part of thought itselfa€!. Any human who uses 
language to think with has already incorporated an external device into his most intimate self, and 
the connections only proliferate from there. In Clarka€™ s opinion, this is an excellent thing. The 
more devices and objects there are
available to foster better ways of thinking, the happier he is. He loves, for instance, the uncanny 
cleverness of online-shopping algorithms that propose future purchases. He was the last fan of 
Google Glassa€!. One day, he lost his laptop, and felt so disoriented and enfeebled that it was as 
if hea€™ d had a stroke. But this didna€™ t make him regret his reliance on devices, any more than 
he regretted having a frontal lobe because it could
possibly be damaged. The idea of an extended mind has itself extended far beyond philosophy, which 
is why Clark is now, in his early sixties, one of the most-cited philosophers alivea€!

I wish I had some hope for a secular, center joint Palestinian Israeli political movement. It would 
be a good idea:

Michael Manekin: Are Demographics Destiny?: a€~I share Halkina€™ s fear of this new government and 
am worried about categoric changes that will be challenging to fix. But I do not share his dark 
determinism. I think we have a way out of the current political crisis, but only if we stop 
thinking in terms of religious and ethnic a€oedemographics.a€D Instead, we must attempt to build a 
coalition based on liberal democratic values
or, more fundamentally, shared moral concerns. Such a coalition must include Arabs who desire 
communal self-determination and Jews who want the same, including secular, traditionalists, Modern 
Orthodox, and yes, individuals and communities among the ultra-Orthodox. Such a coalition should 
put forth a vision of Israel that is neither an illiberal regime run by rabbis and warmongers nor a 
state whose legitimacy rests on tribal
secular Zionist demographic calculations. If Halkin wants a secular Jewish vision to prevail, one 
where many national cultures, including his, can thrive, he will need to look for partners outside 
his own dwindling tribe of secular Zionists. And if he does, he will find thema€!

Get your bivalent booster, people!:

Eric Topol: The bivalent vaccine booster outperforms: a€~You may recall that I was a skeptic about 
the bivalent BA.5 vaccinea€!. Bivalent boosters work wella€!. They are not a panacea, by any 
meansa€”their efficacy against infections is limited and of short duration, which has been the case 
for shots since the Omicron variant came along in late 2021. The spike protein of the BA.5 bivalent 
more closely resembles XBB .1.5 than the
Wuhan ancestral spikea€!. The bivalent BA.5 booster has helped to bridge the big antigenic distance 
gap from the Wuhan strain to current Omicron subvariants. Wea€™re lucky in the United States to 
have a big supply and ita€™ s frankly disappointing to see the divisiveness, cherry picking of 
data, and detractors that defy the body of evidence that has now accumulated. The bivalent booster 
impact of broadening our immune response
has exceeded expectationsa€!

On the one hand, I want to say: yes. On the other hand, Brinka€™ s brain is massively, massively, 
more complicated and sophisticated than Chat-GPT. Evolution has done amazing things over the past 
500 million generations of brain evolution. And analogizing our intelligence to it's rotoscoped 
image of some average of human speech acts is to make a category mistake:

Brink Lindsey: a€~Musings inspired by Noah Smitha€™ s terrific essay on the a€oethird 
magica€Ua€’’namely, the expanding possibilities for control without understanding, power without 
knowledge, created by AI.a€! Pretty much all human technology before the 1800s was developed by 
trial-and-error tinkering. Pyramids, aqueducts, Gothic cathedralsa€’’nobody understood their 
underlying principlesa€! [the] knowledgea€! was
a€oeknow how,a€D not a€oeknow thata€Da€! standard operating procedures which work even if we cana€™ 
t offer an analytical explanation for whya€!. My surprised recognition of how much my own brain 
works like ChatGPTa€!. I have a big vocabulary because I read a lot. And I frequently will use an 
uncommon word that occurs to me as just the right one, even if Ia€™ m not at all sure of the 
dictionary definition when I stop to
think about ita€!. I knew just the right word to use. But that pattern-recognition know-how is 
different from the a€oeknow thata€D analytical description of the pattern (definition) or of how 
that pattern emerged (etymology). For all of us, I think, our know-how vastly exceeds our a€oeknow 
thata€Da€!

Get 33% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

