I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

CONDITION: Slouching Towards Utopia Blurb of the Day

"SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA" BLURB OF THE DAY <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> a€~Title... fantastic... argument 
compelling... prose eminently readablea€!. I almost did not put it down. Hayek and his mighty 
market and Polanyi with his market to serve the needs of humansa€!a€™ a€”ANNE McCANTS

bit.lySlouching Towards Utopia by J. Bradford DeLong I Basic Books
12:52 PM r™ Aug 4,2022

Preorder a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia"

First: Economists Assemble in Support of the IRA


l/10a€”or perhaps, more optimistically, l/4a€”of the scale at which we should be operating. But at 
least we are operatinga€”if it passes. But it might well not pass.

Perhaps the most remarkable thing is not a single Republican senator is willing to be Manchina€™ s 
frienda€”to say a€oela€™ 11 vote for thisa€D, in order to give Manchin the power to hold firm in 
case other Democrats misunderstand and wind up blowing up the deal. Such loyalty to McConnell 
rather than to the country is extremely disturbing:

Joe Stiglitz & al.: Letter from Economists to Congressional Leadership: a€~Dear Senate Majority 
Leader Schumer, Senate Minority Leader McConnell, Speaker Pelosi, and House Minority Leader 
McCarthy,
We write to strongly urge you and your colleagues in Congress to swiftly pass the Inflation 
Reduction Act of 2022.

This historic legislation makes crucial investments in energy, health care, and in shoring up the 
nationa€™ s tax system. These investments will fight inflation and lower costs for American 
families while setting the stage for strong, stable, and broadly-shared long-term economic growth.

This legislation represents the single biggest step to date in tackling the climate crisis. It 
makes key investments to incentivize the transition to cleaner energy sources and greater 
efficiency. It also invests in the current energy distribution system to make it more resilient, 
lowers energy costs for families, and helps protect U.S. family budgets against future shocks.
This legislation will quickly and noticeably bring down health care costs for families. It allows 
Medicare to negotiate lower prices with pharmaceutical companies, reduces Medicare out-of-pocket 
costs for drugs, and reduces insurance costs for 13 million Americans by building on provisions in 
the Affordable Care Act.

These investments would be more than fully paid for. The revenue raised to finance them would come 
exclusively from wealthy individuals and corporations. Further, the revenue stems from enhanced tax 
enforcement and closing some of the most distortionary loopholes in the tax code.

This proposal addresses some of the countrya€™ s biggest challenges at a significant scale. And 
because it is deficit-reducing, it does so while putting downward pressure on inflation. We 
strongly recommend Congress act decisively to build a stronger economy by passing the Inflation 
Reduction Act as soon as possible.
Sincerely, Joseph Stiglitza€!

LINK: 
<https://www.documentcloud.org/documents/22124998-letter-from-economists-to-congressional-leadership
>
I was very happy to sign this letter. I give my somewhat more nuanced view over at Project 
Syndicate:



Marginally Governable America: CHIPS, IRA, & Biden's Powers of Persuasion

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
tha€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 10 likes A- 3 comments A- Brad DeLong

WBrad DeLong's Grasping Reality


<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentary/biden-chips-ira-climate-legislation-bv-j-bradford-delo
ng-2022-07>

Share

One Audio:

Joe Wiesenthal, Tracy Alloway, & Anna Stansbury: Boosting Worker Bargainin Power 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/articles/2022-08-04/odd-lots-podcast-economist-anna-stansbury-on-the
-labor-market#xj4y7vzkg>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Thomas Palley:

18th century        ► 1800---------------- ► 1850---------------- ► 1900           ► 1950           
► 2000           ► 2050


Figure 4 A stylized VoCs analysis of the history of the North Atlantic region

Get 50% off for 1 year

Very Briefly Noted:

• Nick Cohen: The Historian Who Inspires Liz Truss: a€~Rick Perlsteina€! 
<https://www.spectator.co.uk/article/liz-truss-s-critics-are-making-the-same-mistakes-as-reagan-s-en
emies>

• Brad DeLong: Ia€™ m Brad DeLong: Ask Me Anything! 
<https://www.reddit.eom/r/AskEconomics/comments/wegObq/im_brad delong, ask_me_anything/?sort=new>

•  Ben Thompson: Political Chips: a€~Last Friday AMD surpassed Intel in market capitalization^!. 
AMDa€! only designs chips; Intel both designs and manufactures them. Ita€™ s when you include 
AMDa€™ s current manufacturing partner, TSMC, that Intela€™ s relative decline becomes particularly 
apparenta€! <https://stratecherv.com/2022/political-chips/>

• Kenneth Koch: You Want a Social Life, with Friends 
<https://polvarchive.com/vou-want-a-social-life-with-friends-kenneth-koch/>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  David French: Nancy Pelosi Takes a Stand: a€~There is an admirable consistency to Nancya€™ s 
Pelosia€™ s long opposition to the communist Chinese regimea€!


The French Press

Nancy Pelosi Takes a Stand

While this newsletter is about China, Ia€™ m not forgetting that the United States won a great 
victory this weekend. We finally tracked down and killed Ayman al-Zawahiri, the leader of al Qaeda 
and one of the masterminds of 9/11. Steve Hayes, Klon Kitchen, and I will be ona€l
Read more

6 months ago A- 463 likes A- 261 comments A- David French

• Charley Johnson: Accidents Are Inevitable'. a€~I wrote about pseudonymity, harassment, and what 
they reveal about our relationship to technologya€!. Normal accidents!a€”to explain whata€™ s 
happening in decentralized finance or a€~DeFia€™ a€!


Accidents are inevitable

Hi, and welcome back to Untangled. Last month was busy busy: I wrote about pseudonymity, 
harassment, and what they reveal about our relationship to technology. I spoke with Katie 
Notopoulos, Sr. Technology Reporter at BuzzFeed News, about the story she wrote exposing the real 
identities of the founders of the Bored Ape Yacht Cluba€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 1 like A- Charley Johnson

AJs:

Using a€oeracea€D means that outsiders can never really join onea€™ s country a€’’that, at most, we 
will agree to pretend that they can join, and tolerate them as long as it is to our advantage. With 
Hungary things are even more fraught, because a great deal of the historical a€oeculturea€D 
involves the domination of other ethnicities in the regiona€”all except for the Turks and the 
Germans, who had strong and strongly enforced beliefs about who were really
the top dogs:

John Ganz: OrbAjn the Toe: a€~Rod Dreher, despite being unceremoniously booted from Hungary for 
overstaying his visa, remains a reliable lickspittle. He claims that OrbAjn, a€oeusing the term 
a€oeracea€D as a symbol of religion and culture (and I wish he would not have done that, because it 
makes it hard to explain what he means).a€da€! The most important piece of context for this speech: 
Hungarya€™ s history of
antisemitisma€!. Historian of fascism Stanley Payne writes, a€oeOf all states in interwar Europe, 
Hungary probably took the prize for the largest assortment per capita of fascist-type, semifascist, 
or right radical movements.a€D The system was divided essentially between right, far right, and 
extreme right: with the national conservatives around the regent Horthy in competition with 
explicitly fascist and national socialist groups like the
Arrow Crossa€!

LINK:



OrbAjn the Toe

Ia€™ m taking a break from the series on Richard Rortya€™ s Achieving Our Country to quickly 
address Viktor OrbA;na€™ s recent a€ceracea€D speech, which prompted the resignation of a longtime 
advisor who called it a a€oepure Nazi speecha€D that was a€ceworthy of Goebbels,a€D In thea€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 42 likes A- 11 comments A- John Ganz

This is the most bizarre story about cancel culture that I have seen. Note what is going on here. 
It is not that someone with substantial social power and influence but crazy and malicious 
viewsa€”someone like the KKK cross-burning Charles Murray, for examplea€”is being confronted by 
people asking: why do you deserve such a loud megaphone, and our attention? It is, rather, that a 
grifter is inducing community that someone cares about to shun her, knowing
full well that she has little social power to respond and is thus a weak target. I am told that the 
Lambda Literary Awards were a semi-important thing before Mardoll tricked them. I doubt they are 
even a semi-important thing now:

Lauren Hough: Who Is Ana Mardoll'. a€~I am left with a deep sadness. Sandra Newman never gets that 
book announcement backa€!. And there are his fans, those who thought he was one of them, who 
thought he needed help, who donated money they probably didna€™ t have to give, because thata€™ s 
what we do for our friendsa€I. So when I say this, please believe that I mean this, truly, with all 
my heart, fuck you Ana Mardoll,
whoever the fuck you are. You can buy Sandra Newmana€™ s booka€!. You can buy Brandon Taylora€™ s 
booka€L As far as I know, Isabel Fall doesna€™ t publish anymorea€!

LINK:


Who is Ana Mardoll

Every so often, Ia€™ 11 get a message from someone saying they once knew a girl who grew up in the 
Family, the cult I was raised in. This started before I wrote the book and has only picked up 
since. Theya€™ 11 call her different names, but wea€™ 11 call her Ellen, because that wasna€™ t her 
name. Theya€™ 11 say Ellen told them everything. My god how it haunted hera€”tha€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 145 likes A- 18 comments A- Lauren Hough

My big question: Where is Steve Mnuchin? What does he think he is doing? Yes, I know he thinks 
that, as a plutocrat, the kleptocrats are his allies. But that is not the case. In reality, the 
kleptocrats view him as their potential prey:

Timothy F. Geithner, Jacob J. Lew, Henry M. Paulson Jr., Robert E. Rubin, & Lawrence H. Summers: 
a€™ As former Treasury Secretaries of both Democratic and Republican Administrations, we support 
the Inflation Reduction Act which is financed by prudent tax policy that will collect more from 
top-earners and large corporations. Taxes due or paid will not increase for any family making less 
than $400,000/year. And the extra
taxes levied on corporations do not reflect increases in the corporate tax rate, but rather the 
reclaiming of revenue lost to tax avoidance and provisions benefitting the most affluent. The 
selective presentation by some of the distributional effects of this bill neglects benefits to 
middle-class families from reducing deficits, from bringing down prescription drug prices, and from 
more affordable energy. This legislation will help increase
American competitiveness, address our climate crisis, lower costs for families, and fight 
inflationa€”and should be passed immediately by Congressa€!

I wrote about this before:


Where Is My Political Party?, &

FIRST: Where Is My Political Party? Why is there no democratic party infrastructure? Why is there 
only a network of semi-grifter consultants sending me panicked fundraising emails of which they get 
ana€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 9 likes A- 6 comments A- Brad DeLong

Why is there no Democratic Party infrastructure? Why is there only a network of semi-grifter 
consultants sending me panicked fundraising emails of which they get an excessive cut?:

Micah L. Sifry: An Activist Base Is a Terrible Thing to Waste: a€~The Beltway Brain churned and 
burned through the posta€“2016 surge in Democratic volunteerisma€!. My friend Josh Nelson, who is 
one of a handful of digital strategists who has been trying to address what Democratic spam is 
doing to their base, told me after reading our article that, "Ia€™m not surprised that this struck 
a nerve ,a€C On a positive note, he said,
a€oeMore and more campaigns are explicitly calling this out in their own fundraising emails. Wea€™ 
ve seen it recently from AOC, Maura Healey, John Fetterman, New Dems Action Fund and the Democratic 
Attorney Generals Association. I take that as a positive sign that the industry is taking notice 
and the counteroffensive is building steama€Da€!. If you want to find groups to give to that do 
year-round community organizing
aimed at lifting the voting participation and power of those who have less power, the best single 
resource is the Movement Voter Project, which has been going since 2016a€!

LINK:


An Activist Base is a Terrible Thing to Waste

Ita€™ s been a while since Ia€™ ve had an opinion piece published in The New York Tinies, so 
forgive me but to some extent this edition of The Connector is going to be pretty self-reflexive. 
First some internal housekeeping: To all the new folks who have just subscribed as a result of 
reading my anda€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 8 likes A- 10 comments A- Micah L. Sifry

Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

