Subscribe now

a€0 Matt Klein: "Slouching Towards Utopia" and "The Long 20th Century": a€~Brad Delong's new 
history makes an important point well, and gave me a lot of food for thought.
But I have some quibbles: Certain moments are decisive breaks between a€cebeforea€D and 
a€ceaftera€D: think of the invention of agriculture, the birth of monotheism, the
Columbian exchange, or the American Revolution. In Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of 
the Twentieth Century, Brad DeLong makes the case that 1870 is a hinge
year   in some ways more significant than 1492 or 1776.

Until 1870, more or less, technological progress had been so slow that the average persona€™ s 
living standards had grown by just 0.005% a year since the invention of agriculture.
(And those living standards were arguably lower than what had been enjoyed by the typical 
pre-agrarian hunter-gatherer.) There were gains in knowledge, but those had only been
sufficients’’barely a€”to sustain a larger population that remained at constant risk of disease and 
starvation. Both Aristotle and his intellectual descendents in the mid-19th century
could   claim, with some justification, that true freedoms’’including freedom from drudgerya€’’was 
possible only for a select few, and that this freedom depended on the servitude

of many others. Even the remarkable advances of the first industrial revolution had not been enough 
to move the needle, at least for most people. This was the context that led social
reformers such as Thomas Malthus and J.S. Mill to call for public policies that would limit 
population growth.

That changed around 1870. Since then, both the total number of people and the average persons™ s 
living standards have soared. Despite the misery that humans inflicted on each
other with world wars, man-made famines, totalitarian revolutions, and genocides, simple 
quantitative representations of human wellbeing go up and to the right after 1870 in ways
that they simply did not before. Average incomes today are 9x what they were in 1870 even as the 
human population is 6 times as large. Combining these measures, Delong
estimates that Seethe value of the stock of useful ideas about manipulating nature and organizing 
natureSD is about 22x what it was in 1870.1

This was a momentous change in the history of our species, and it had enormous implications for 
anyone contemplating the good society. Serious thinkers suddenly found
themselves wondering how to manage abundances ”as well as the social changes created by the rapid 
evolution in the structures of production and consumption.

Mass migration from the countryside to the cities has created opportunities for billions of people, 
but also new challenges associated with dense urban living. It is not a coincidence
that the social and political status of women rose as much as it did when child mortality (and 
therefore birth rates) collapsed, home appliances made cooking and cleaning far easier,
and machines reduced the economic value of physical strength. It is also not a coincidence that 
some of the most violent social movements in human history arose in reaction to the
constant disruption that went hand in hand with progress.

DelongS™ s ambitious book is an argument for recognizing how the world since 1870S”the Soelong 20th 
centurySD that above all is characterized by unprecedentedly rapid
changeS”is radically different than the world before 1870. It is also an attempt to explain how the 
sudden and dramatic acceleration in the pace of economic growth affected
different societies, most notably the United States. (He repeatedly quotes TrotskyS™ s line that 
America is the Soefurnace where the future is being forged.SU)

The central paradox, for Delong, is that the growth in humanityS™ s productive potential since 1870 
should have been sufficient to create something like a SoeutopiaSD for
everyone by now, at least by the standards of anyone alive in 1870. Yet despite the dramatic 
progress our species has experienced, we remain far from that ideal.

Part of the reason is that our desires have grown to match our capabilities. As Delong puts it, 
what were once considered luxuries eventually became conveniences and have since
become essentials, even in lower-middle-income countries. Something like 70% of Indonesians have 
smart phones, for example. From that perspective, they might be wealthier than
Rockefeller ever was, but they probably donS™ tfeel that way.

The other problem is that the gains from innovation have not been distributed particularly evenly. 
Even within the richest societies, there are still millions of people who struggle
with the pre-modern concerns of being fed, clothed, and sheltered. Billions more live at the 
threshold of subsistence outside the places that Delong calls Seethe global Norths 0.2

There is a lot to like in Slouching. I particularly enjoyed the sweep of the narrative, the clear 
writing, and the digressions into the history of business and technology. The sections on
TeslaS™s collaboration with Westinghouse to commercialize alternating current and the explanation 
of how integrated circuits (semiconductors) work were among the highlights.
Herbert HooverS™ s career trajectory turned out to be a useful and entertaining framing mechanism 
for the first half of the book.

Most importantly, I have become completely convinced of DelongS™ s thesis that the world 
fundamentally changed in 1870S”and changed in a way that it had never changed
before. I definitely recommend the book to anyone interested in these questions.

HoweverS!

At this point, I should note that Brad has asked me multiple times to tell him what he got 
SoeBigTime wrongSD in the book. What follows should be understood in that spirit.

Delong repeatedly says that the post-1870 break in humanityS™ s growth trajectory was due to Seethe 
triple emergence of globalization, the industrial research lab, and the
modern corporations □. This is a compelling claim, and Delong spends a lot of time on the 
relationship between global integration and growth. But there is surprisingly little
discussion of either industrial research labs or corporations. With remarkably few exceptions, we 
get almost no insight into how the post-1870 growth engine actually worked.

Delong basically admits that this was a deliberate choice on pages 167-168 of the hardback edition. 
In a revealing passage, he identifies a list of thinkers born in the Habsburg
domains shortly before World War I who, in various ways, tried to restore and preserve what had 
worked before 1914: Joseph Schumpeter, Karl Popper, Peter Drucker, Michael
Polanyi, Karl Polanyi, and Friedrich Hayek. (They stand in contrast to violent fantasists such as 
Hitler, Lenin, Mao, and Mussolini.) Delong says that, if he could have written a
book that was twice as long, he would have written about all of the liberal Austro-Hungarians. I 
would like to read that book!

However, constrained by space, Delong decided to focus only on Hayek and Karl PolanyiS”two men who 
were concerned with questions of political economy, specifically the
relationship between markets and democracy.3 That fits well with DelongS™ s focus on the conflicts 
over how to distribute the gains of the post-1870 windfall, but I think it ended
up detracting from some of his other arguments.

Delong claims that his book is supposed to be a story about how the Soelong 20th centurySD was 
distinct from everything that came before because of the importance of

economic forces, as opposed to great power politics or ideology. But if thatS™ s right, then there 
should have been much more focus on the history of modern business and applied
science, and much less on political intrigues, elections, and wars. Given DelongS™ s stated 
priorities, Schumpeter and Drucker would probably have been much more relevant
than Hayek and Polanyi.

My other major criticism (I have a few narrower ones that I will mention lower down) is that I am 
not convinced that the Soelong 20th century SD actually ended. The

most persuasive argument, which is not quite the one that Delong actually makes, would be that the 
agonizingly slow growth in the years after the global financial crisis represents a
fundamental break in the trend towards ever-rising prosperity. But that is a claim one could have 
made just as well in the 1930sS”and it would have turned out to have been wrong.

DelongS™ s actual argument that SoehumanityS™ s time slouching toward utopiaSD stopped around 2010 
is tucked in at the very end of the book. It rests on four claims that
mostly relate to what he perceives as the diminished status of the U.S., which had been at the 
frontier of growth since 1870. First, the U.S. stopped being the unrivalled
technological leader, with German and Japanese businesses catching up around 1990, Soeundermining 
the underpinnings of American exceptionalismSEI. Then came the terrorist
attacks                                                                                   of 
September 11,2001. Then there was the global financial crisis, which was remarkable mainly because 
it demonstrated that See we had forgotten the Keynesian lessons of
the 1930s and lacked either the capacity or the will to do what was necessary.a€D Finally, Delong 
highlights the failure of world leaders to address climate change: SDthe Devil

of Malthus taking, if not yet flesh, at least a form of shadowSD.

For Delong, the Soeperiod to the long twentieth centuryS™ s exhaustionSD was the election of Donald 
Trump, who Soeserved as a reminder that pessimism, fear, and panic
can animate individuals, ideas, and events as readily as optimism, hope, and confidence SD

This is not persuasive.

American companies remain at the technological frontier in everything from pharmaceuticals to 
microprocessor design to spaceflight and electric vehicles. Were the long wars in
Afghanistan and Iraq really worseS”or more damaging to U.S. society and global leaderships’’than 
the wars in Indochina? Was the fear of religiously-motivated terrorism worse
than the fears of violence from anarchists, Weathermen, or militias? And while I would be the first 
to agree that policymakers committed an atrocity by failing to restore growth
swiftly after 2007, the counterexample of China is not compelling, least of all to Chinaa€™ s own 
leaders, who have spent the past 11 years promising never to do it again.

Climate change is a serious problem that had not received the attention it deserves until recently, 
but there is little reason to think that it is a serious impediment to the growth
trajectory humanity has experienced since 1870. People more knowledgable on the details of the 
legislation than I am believe that the climate-related provisions in the a€oelnflation
Reduction Acta€D will be transformative. The main complaints come from Europeans who wish they 
could subsidize their own businesses just as much, not environmentalists.


Ita€™ s telling that Delong uses the pandemic as the culmination of his argument that America is no 
longer a€oean exceptional countrya€D, pointing to the disproportionate
number of people who died in the U.S. compared to Canada. The U.S. public health failure was 
inexcusable. Yet the U.S. response to the pandemic illustrates, in several important
ways, that Delong may have been premature to call time on his a€oegrand narrativeaCD.

It was American companies, using American technology, organized by the American government through 
Operation Warp Speed, that delivered mRNA vaccines to the world.4 (It
was also an American company that created what seems to be the most effective antiviral drug aimed 
at Covid.) Moreover, it was the U.S., more than any other countrya€”by
fara€”that exploited the latent power of the state to preserve jobs and incomes. China, rather 
infamously, did no such thing. The U.S. was the only major economy that was
producing  more at the end of 2021 compared to what had been expected by forecasters at the OECD at 
the end of 2019.

So while I am willing to believe that the a€oelong 20th centurya€D may have ended when Delong says 
it dida€”on the grounds that global growth has been much weaker than in
the pasta€”I have little reason to believe that this sad state of affairs must persist. I am an 
optimist who believes in the importance of contingency and human agency, what can I
say?

Other Scattered Thoughts and Nitpicks

While I sympathize with Delonga€™ s focus on the U.S., I also sympathize with those who think the 
book is too U.S .-centric. If the book had been more materialist in its focusa€”
more of a history of how businesses and innovation have powered growth since 1870 in ways that they 
did not beforea€”it would have made sense to devote relatively little space
to other countries. But since Delong opted for a story about political economy, the paucity of 
material about Canada, Europe, and Japan, especially after WWII, is unfortunate.

This omission is particularly glaring in the section on the a€oeneoliberal turna€D in the late 
1970s/early 1980s. Delong talks about race relations in the U.S. and writes that
a€oefear of moochers was a significant part of what prompted the downfall of social democracy and 
the turn toward neoliberalisma€D (416). But is that really what explained the
change  in Germany, which arguably moved first? Or Mitteranda€™ s heel-turn in France? Or the 
(modest and partial) rollback of social democracy in Scandinavia in the 1990s? Or
the transition from Mao to Deng, for that matter, which was arguably motivated by the same basic 
set of concerns?

Keynes famously wrote that a€ceanything we can actually do we can afforda€D. The unspoken corollary 
is that we can only afford the things we can actually do. Might this help
explain the global nature of the a€ceturna€D? Was the a€ceturna€D a reaction to excessive policy 
ambitions in the 1960s and 1970s that ended up fueling inflation?

In general, I wish there were a lot more about Japan. a€oeWhy the Meiji Restoration Succeededa€D is 
probably a book in itself, but I still would have liked more than what we got.
And while I am glad that Takahashi Korekiyo is given his due for getting Japan out of the Great 
Depression early with proto-Keynesian policies, Japana€™ s experience since 1990
might have been helpful context for explaining what happened in the U.S. and Europe after 2007.

There was no mention of the provisional government in Russia that followed the February revolution. 
The Bolshevik coup and the establishment of what Delong calls a€oereally-
existing socialisma€D was not inevitable. Given Delonga€™ s focus on the importance of individual 
policy decisions in the run-up to WWI and WWII, it would have been nice to
mention that the relatively liberal and democratic Kerensky government vaporized its legitimacy by 
launching an ill-fated offensive against Germany in the summer of 1917 at the
behest of its allies.

I was surprised that Delong used the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level to explain inflation in 
post-WWI France.

The section on the 1920s and the Great Depression gave too much credence to the Friedman-Schwartz 
view that the problem was tight monetary policy from the Federal Reserve, in
my view. I would have preferred more of a discussion of the Eccles/Keynes/Kindleberger view that 
the problem was excessive debt, the imbalanced income distribution, and the
decisions by the Bank of France and the Fed to sterilize gold inflows. Two related questions that I 
wish Delong had addressed:

Was the U.K. return to the gold standard in 1925 disastrous because the gold standard itself was 
bad, or because Churchill et al. chose the wrong price?

What would the 1920s have looked like if the Fed and the French had been willing to let gold 
inflows loosen domestic credit conditions and push up wages and prices, as they were
a€oesupposeda€D to under the classical gold standard? Unclear whether this would have been 
sufficient, but it should have made it easier for the major debtor countries to generate
trade surpluses to service their wartime debts and reparations obligations.

Given Delonga€™ s stated focus, I would have expected the chapter on WWII to highlight the 
Alliesa€™ material advantages and describe how the war was won thanks to
superior industrial organization and scientific prowess. I was expecting sections on the Manhattan 
Project, Bletchley Park, and a long discussion of other elements of the war effort
that                                                                                   I am less 
familiar with. Instead, we mostly get a story about diplomacy, great leaders, and decisive battles. 
Ita€™ s entertaining, but struck me as a missed opportunity.

I also would have expected the ideas that Adam Tooze laid out so masterfully in The Wages of 
Destruction and The Deluge would have played a larger role in Delonga€™ s
narrative of the 1920s-1940s. Germany was technologically underdeveloped and resource-poor, which 
meant that any war had to be fought at high speed. Nazi cooperation with the
Soviets until 1941 was not surprising, and began long before 1939 with joint military training and 
complementary trade relations. Both Hitler and Stalin were motivated by their
hatred                                                                                 of the 
Anglo-American liberal order.

I wish the section on the Marshall Plan had mentioned the importance of the U.S. using currency aid 
to force the rest of western Europea€’’particularly Francea€”to accept the
reality that West Germany needed to reindustrialize and become economically integrated with its 
neighbors.

The section on postcolonial development (and the lack thereof) had a passage that confused me. 
Delong writes that a€oeLow savings rates and the high cost of capital investment
meant that the yield from a given savings effort in the global south was lowa€D (348). Shouldna€™ t 
low savings rates and high cost of capital mean that there would be extremely
high returns for any incremental saving? Later, Delong says that a€oeeach percentage point of total 
product saved led to less than half a percentage pointa€™ s worth of
investmenta€n (354-355). Where did the rest go? Net exports?

The section on the Shaha€™ s economic reforms was really interesting and I wish there were even 
more on it, especially in contrast to Meiji Japan and/or Park Chung-Hee in South
Korea. I was also surprised to learn that one of Khomeinia€™ s original complaints was that the 
Shaha€™ s land reforms were un-Islamic because they involved debt forgiveness.

I really liked this line (366):

There is no a priori reason to think that the economic organization best suited to inventing the 
industrial future should be the same as the one best suited to
catching up to a known target.

Delong has a throwaway comment that the slowdown in productivity growth (as opposed to total 
growth) since 1970 could be explained in part by the fact that a€oeenergy diverted
away from producing more and into producing cleaner would quickly show up in lower wage increases 
and profitsa€D (431). Ia€™ m not sure I buy this but I would have
appreciated more of an explanation either way.

The section on the 1980s was a bit odd. Delong writes that a€oebig budget deficits soaked up 
financing that otherwise could have added to the capital stocka€D (443), but there is
no explanation for how or why. Later he is more explicit, but it makes less sense (444-445):

After the US economy reattained the neighborhood of full employment in the mid-1980s, the Reagan 
deficits diverted about 4 percent of national income
from investment into consumption spending: instead of flowing out of saversa€™ pockets through 
banks to companies that would buy and install
machines, finance flowed out of saversa€™ pockets through banks into the government, it funded tax 
cuts for the rich, so the rich could then spend their
windfalls on luxury consumption.

In fact, the U.S. private sector found it easier than ever to borrow in the 1980s thanks in large 
part to the boom in bank lending and the a€oehigh yielda€D corporate bond market,
which is why private indebtedness exploded and why the decade ended with a miniature version of the 
balance sheet recession that would come again in 2007. The interesting story
is that so much of this extra financing went into mergers, acquisitions, and leveraged 
buyoutsa€”a€Dthe market for corporate controla€Da€”rather than additional capital
investment.

Speaking of which: there is almost no discussion of financial history and financial innovation in 
Slouching, except at the very end in the context of 2008.
Finally, I would have liked more on this (453):


io iiMiiiiai a piuiuviaiiv VIILV, viivv IMIIIIVVJ, LU uov ILO puiitivai puwvi LU aiiapv uiv 
uvuuuiuj iu ILO uwn auvauiaguo.                                 it id iiuiniai IVJI uno LU put a 
vjiug

on economic growth. Rapid growth like that which occurred between 1945 and 1973, after all, 
requires creative destruction; and, because it is the
plutocratsa€™ wealth that is being destroyed, they are unlikely to encourage it.

A different version of the book would have used this to frame a long discussion of antitrust and 
public choice theory. More generally, I would love to know the extent to which the
post-1870 boom was due to the suppression of this a€oenormala€n behavior. If so, what caused that? 
And how can we restore the dynamism and competition that Schumpeter
recognized was so essential for progress?

1. Delonga€™ s equation is: Value of the stock of ideas = average real income per person * 
(population A (1/2)). He uses the square root of population because it is
halfway (in a geometric sense) between the unreasonable claim that additional humans have no value 
and the equally unreasonable claim that societies face no resource
constraints whatsoever.

2. The exact number depends a lot on how exactly you define the international poverty line and how 
you account for differences in living costs across countries. The
lowest estimate is that there are around 600 million people living in extreme poverty, while a 
slightly more expansive definition of material deprivation would run
closer to 3-4 billion.

3. Hayek explained how markets could coordinate people all over the world to solve complex problems 
without any need for central direction, or even mutual awareness.
He believed that the benefits of markets were so important that they needed to be protected from 
those who would impose plans or controls on the choices that
individuals wanted to make, even if that meant using market institutions to restrain democratic 
decisionmaking.

4. Delong paints Hayek as a Dr. Jekyll/Mr. Hyde whose insights into the power of markets were 
warped by his extremist libertarian views and his willingness to embrace
dictators such as Pinochet, but I dona€™ t think thata€™ s really fair. In practice, the heirs to 
Hayeka€™ s legacy are the men and women who run the European
Uniona€’’which, not coincidentally, has often been described as the modern incarnation of the 
prosperous, tolerant, and multiethnic Habsburg Empire. Hayek believed
in  guaranteed minimum incomes to protect against indigence and he arguably invented the 
Romneycare/Obamacare concept of mandatory health insurance. In fact,
Hayek has been criticized by libertarians for being a socialist because, among other things, he 
believed in public provision of theaters and sporting grounds in addition
to vital infrastructure, in using the government budget to run countercyclical macro policy, in 
military conscription (under certain conditions), and in public policies to
protect against pandemics. Hayeka€™ s biggest fear was the arbitrary use of state power, which was 
why he wanted governments constrained by clear general rules. I
know almost nothing about Polanyia€™ s thinking beyond Delonga€™ s repeated claim that Polanyi 
believed that a€oemarkets were made for man, not man for the
marketa€D.

5. Pfizer developed its vaccine with BioNTech, which is based in Germany. But the underlying 
technology overwhelmingly derives from research going back decades that
took place in the U.S.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

