Subscribe now

FIRST: Davis Kedrosky Has Smart Things to Say About a€oeSlouchinga€n


Young whippersnapper Davis Kedrosky has a sharp review of Adam Toozea€™ s review of my Slouching 
Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>:

Davis Kedrosky: a€~Tooze's FT take on Slouching Towards Utopia is a fun read, but it's less of a 
book review than a prospectus for the book that Tooze thinks Brad should've written. In particular, 
[Tooze] thinks that there's too much America and too little China and climatea€!. That's ironic, 
though, because STU is the most Toozian history of the 20th ccentury.! Brad notes the centrality of 
American finance, manufacturing heft, and
political economy to a global economic order in transition. That's the underlying theme across 
[Toozea€™ s] Wages, Deluge, and Crashed:

[Tooze: a€oeAmericaa€™ s sway was often exercised] indirectly and in the form of a latent, 
potential force rather than an immediate, evident presence. But it was nonetheless real. Tracing 
the ways in which the world came to terms with America's new centrality, through the struggle to 
shape a new order, will be the central preoccupation of this book [Deluge]. It was a struggle that 
was always multidimensional^’’economic, military
and political. It was one that began duringa€! [WWI] itself and stretched beyond it into the 1920s. 
Getting this history right matters because we need to understand the origins of the Pax Americana 
that still defines our world today. It is crucial too, however, to understanding the huge second 
spasma€!. It was precisely the looming potential, the future dominance of capitalist democracy, 
that was the common factor impelling Hitler, Stalin,
the Italian Fascists and their Japanese counterparts to such radical actiona€!a€D

I [Davis Kedrosky] think the climate crisis is a big part of the American Century's story. But the 
idea that it's the only way to frame the narrative is wrong. I wouldn't have written a book about 
North Atlantic political economya€”but that's not a very useful critique of a book that is .Brad 
could have emphasized the climatological consequences of modern economic growth, sure. But the 
political economy story helps to explain the
trajectories and distribution of economic power that structure the world today in a way that 
climate does not. Maybe in 20 or 50 years, immersed in a catastrophe of our own making, we'll think 
about Hayek, Keynes, and Polanyi in the same way we do the bullionists and mercantilists of 
yesteryear. That's not true now. Brad's KP-FH formula was worth more than a sentence of 
engagementa€!.

Using the rising exigency of the climate crisis as a demarcation line between the 20th and 21st 
centuries is a perfectly valid way to deal with the issue and Brad does thisa€!

Davis Kedrosky @dkedrosky

Tooze's FT take on *Slouching Towards Utopia* is a fun read, but it's less of a book review than a 
prospectus for the book that Tooze thinks Brad should've written. In particular, AT thinks that 
there's too much America and too little China + climate.

One can see why this combination was traumatic for veterans of the i990s-era
Clinton administration. But, as a world historic caesura, it is something of an
anticlimax. Does the shock of Hillary Clinton’s 2016 defeat really rank
alongside     the fall of the Soviet Union or the rise of China? Or is the relative
banality  of that moment, the confirmation of the bigger point, that for all its
monumental self-obsession the American narrative is losing its ability to
organise                                                     our understanding of the world?

Furthermore, are we convinced that this is how the American century ends —
with a whimper, not a bang? The last few years hardly suggest as much. For
better and for worse, the US Federal Reserve remains the hub of the global
financial system. American military power and technology span the globe and
are girding themselves for a clash with China. The US is a major energy
producer and the supplier of last resort for liquefied natural gas. Which brings
us to what is surely the most puzzling aspect of DeLong’s book: his failure to

thp vact ninhilicntinn nf nnn-rpnpwahlp rpQnnrrpc that from ites


beginning defined and powered the American-led growth model.

8:27 PM r™ Sep 29,2022

3 8Likes4Re tweets

My Responses:

(1) I agree that Davis has the goods on the centrality of America here: it was, starting in 1870, 
what Trotsky called it: a€oeThe furnace where the future is being forged.a€D And so I believe that 
a viewpoint centered in America is appropriate, just as a viewpoint centered in Britain would be 
appropriate from 1690 to 1870.

(2) As to energy, global warming, and fighting global warminga€”as I really do not want to knuckle 
under to the bad right-wingers who insist on a€oeclimate changeaCD and a€oeclimate policya€D; and 
perhaps it is Toozea€™ s failure to search for a€oeglobal warminga€D in my text that leads him to 
say that a€oeof all of this there is no mention in DeLonga€™ s historya€D?a€”that is a more complex 
issue. Sometimes I think yes; sometimes I think no.

To the question of whether I should have focused on the coming of resource extractionaC’’driving 
mines deep with steam shovels, shipping commodities, like guano across half the world, and taking 
advantage of the fact that the last generation of glaciers served as bulldozers to scrape all the 
post-Permian rock away and leave the store to sunlight energy of half 1 billion years ago on the 
surface in the form of really cheap coala€”I simply say no: that is the story
of the British Industrial Revolution Century 1770-1870. 1870 to 2010 does see an expansion of 
energe scalea€”but the energy sector is far from unique, in that such an expansion of scale is 
economy-wide over 1870 to 2010.1870 to 2010 does see a shift from coal to oil. 1870 to 2010 does 
see an important story in the repeated interactions of global energy economics and global energy 
politics. But the Storm God of the Semites knows that the last thing the book
needed was yet another digression from its Polanyiesque Grand Narrative.

There are manuscript pieces on the cutting-room floor for roughly 60 more print pages on the 
cutting-room floor that might anwer Adam Toozea€™ s complaints about neglect ofoil, and globall 
warminga€”10 pages on Colonel Drake, John D. Rockefeller, and company; 10 pages on how an 
oil-driven economy is different from a coal-driven one, 10 pages on the centrality of the Middle 
East in the post-World War II economy, and some 30 pages on the the three
civilization-shaking threatsa€’’global warming, nuclear weapons, and reviving fascisma€”that the 
Neoliberal Order made precisely zero attempt at handling at the end of the Long 20th Century.

But the book weighs in at 605 pages. And the book is, as my friends politely say, a€oesprawlinga€n 
as it is: it could have used more authorial discipline in making sure that everything circles back 
to my Polanyiesque Grand Narrative than I was able to mobilize.
To the question of whether I should have made fighting global warming a major thread, I say no: We 
have not yet begun to do so.

To the question of whether I should have made the coming of global warming a major narrative 
thread, I oscillate. Maybe. But I came down on the side of seeing global warming as part of the 
story of the 21st centurya€”a story we do not yet knowa€”not of my 20th century. An effective book 
has to tell a narrative, and a narrative needs a beginning, a middle, and AN END.
Sue me.

(3) As for neglect of China, it would simply have been silly for me to have tried to write a world 
history focused on Chinaa€™ s rise. For one thing, China has not yet risen. It does not yet have 
superpower, let along hyperpower, status. We can see it cominga€’’maybe. But it is not yet here.

Moreover, I simply do not know enough about China to say more than I have. It is indeed true that, 
as my friend Yingyi Qian says, come 2100 the story that everyone will see as central starts in 1976 
with the accession of Deng Xiaoping and is the story of the Chinese 21st century. But that, again, 
is a different story.

So what is my advice to Adam Tooze, given that his reaction to my Sluching Towards Utopia is the 
same as my reaction was to Hobsbawma€™ s The Age of Extreme sa€” that it is not the book he wanted 
to read?
My advice is: WRITE IT! WRITE THE BOOK YOU WANT TO READ!

Share

Other Things That Went Whizzing Bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Dani Rodrik: An Industrial Policy for Good Jobs: a€~A modern approach to industrial policy must 
respond to new circumstances. It must target a€oegood-jobs externalities,a€D in addition to the 
traditional learning, technological, and national security considerations^!. Focus on manufacturing 
and globally competitive industries has to be broadened to service sectors and smaller and 
medium-sized firms. And the practice of industrial policy will
need to relya€! more on collaborative, iterative interaction whereby public agencies supply a 
portfolio of customized public services in exchange for firms undertaking soft commitments on the 
quantity and quality of employments!

•  Sara Trimble & Hannah Eliiot: Stunt Driver Sera Trimble on How She Got Her Start (and Her 
Porsche 911): a€~In the latest a€oeHowa€™ d You Get That Car?a€D column, Trimble talks with Hannah 
Elliott about getting into car collectinga€”and showbiza€!

•  John Anthers: The UK Cannot Afford to Look This Ridiculous: a€~The Bank of England may have 
saved gilts, but scorn and political danger for Truss and Kwarteng still have a long way to 
runa€”and could cut their careers short. Ridicule is something politicians need to be very, very 
scared of...

•  Radley Balko: Welcome to The Watch: a^~a€oeA masterpiece of reporting ... If the goal of great 
journalism is to speak truth to power, Balkoa€™ s contribution does just that.a€U^.€”Judgesa€™ 
statement, 2022 Deadline Club AwardsS!

•  The Economist: What to read to understand central banking: a€~Lombard Street: A Description of 
the Money Market. By Walter Bagehot. White Crane Publishing; 232 pages; $8.99. John Wiley & Sons; 
A£15.99a€\. A book that analyses in simple language the Bank of Englanda€™ s role in the British 
monetary systema€!. Bernanke refers to Bagehot in at least eight chapters of his memoir and kept 
the book in his office at the Fed...

• The Economist: What to read to understand Donald Trump: a€~Identity Crisis: The 2016 Presidential 
Campaign and the Battle for the Meaning of America. John Sides, Michael Tesler and Lynn Vavreck. 
Princeton University Press; 352 pages; $29.95a€.\. Trumpa€!. Were non-college-educated whitesa€”key 
to his victory in the battleground statesa€”swayed by economic anxieties or by his racism, 
Islamophobia and anti-immigrant
scapegoating? This book, by three political scientists, argues it was the lattera€!. Racial 
attitudes shaped their perception of who deserved what from the economya€!. Grievance politics 
prevaileda€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

