Over at: <https ://equitablegrowth.org/?s=delong>
Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1.If you havena€™ t read this, read it. If you have read it, re-read it now. My grandfather used, 
to the end of his days, lament that his discipline had turned from a€oePublic
Administration^□ to a€oePolitical Sciencea€D over his lifetime. Political science, he thought, was 
a swamp of opinion and ideology that produced very little of value. Public
Administration on the other handa€’’there was a great deal that was known, and a great deal to 
study, and the tools to study it to learn more:

Amanda Fischer & Alix Gould-Werth (2020-07-29): Broken Plumbing: How Systems for Delivering 
Economic Relief in Response to the Coronavirus
Recession Failed the U.S. Economy 
https://equitablegrowth.org/broken-plumbing-how-systems-for-delivering-economic-relief-in-response-t
o-the-
coronavirus-recession-failed-the-u-s-economy/: a€~Four delivery systems [were] tasked with 
providing relief during the coronavirus recessiona€”relief
targeted            to small and large businesses, Unemployment Insurance, direct payments to 
consumers, and paid leave programsa€!. Looking at business rescue
programs, we see pipes well-designed to flow easily to people with power, while the taps of the 
less powerful remain dry. Looking at Unemployment
Insurance, we see the failure to invest in pipes, preventing these benefits from flowing smoothly 
to people who need them the most. Looking at direct
payments, we see who profits when the plumbing is routed through costly private systems that twist 
and turn, enabling the powerful to siphon off of the
plumbing. And looking at paid leave, we see what happens when policymakers build no pipes at all 
and suddenly need to turn on a spigot when the
economy  hits a droughta€!

2. Two of our Equitable Growth people get airtime on NPR. They, I think, do very well:

Ellora Derenoncourt, Arindrajit Dube, & al.. NPR: Life on Minimum Wage: Why the Federal Debate 
Continues
https://www.npr.org/2021/01/29/962236606/life-on-minimum-wage-why-the-federal-debate-continues 
(13:00): a€~The history of the minimum wage in
the                                  U.S. is tied closely to civil rights. Ellora Derenoncourt, an 
economist at the University of California, Berkeley, says one theme of the 1963 March on
Washington was a call for a higher minimum wage. Many states have a higher minimum wage than the 
federally mandated $7.25. Arindrajit Dube from the
University of Massachusetts, Amherst discusses how those states have fareda€!

3. And if you havena€™ t read this, read it. If you have, reread it. Practically everything in it 
is still very valuable, and we will hopefully have time and political energy to put all the
recommendations into effect before the next recession comes to visit:

Equitable Growth & Hamilton Project: Recesson Ready: Fiscal Policies to Stabilize the American 
Economy https ://equitablegrowth.org/recession-ready-
2/: a€~Economic recessions are inevitable and they are painful, with harsh short-term effects on 
families and businesses and potentially deep long-term
impacts on the economy and society. But we can ameliorate some of the next recessiona€™ s worst 
effects and minimize its long-term costs if we adopt
smart policies now that will be triggered when its first warning signs appear. Equitable Growth has 
joined forces with The Hamilton Project to advance a

set of specific, evidence-based policy ideas for shortening and easing the impacts of the next 
recession. In a new book, Recession Ready: Fiscal Policies to
Stabilize the American Economy, experts from academia and the policy community propose six big 
ideas, including two entirely new initiatives and four
significant improvements to existing programs, all to be triggered when the economy shows clear, 
proven signs of heading into a recession. These
proposals (see more on each below) aim to strengthen and add to our automatic stabilizers: policies 
that inject money into the economy in a downturn and
withdraw stimulus when the economy is strong. Congress should consider these policy proposals now 
because when the next recession appears on the
horizon, it may be too latea€!

4. The minimum wage debate appears to be moving in a very good direction this winter. OK remains 
the question of what will bring 10 Republican senators onboard for the Fight
for                                                                              15. But I think 
the intellectual discussion is pretty-well won, and the popular-political discussion is pretty-well 
won as well:

Brad DeLong: DeLongTODAY: How to Think About the Minimum Wage http://delongtoday.com: a€~The first 
thing to note is that the sweet spot is not the
point at which the minimum wage level results in the most jobsa€!. The purpose of the minimum wage 
is to ensure that the market is our servant, not our
mastera€”that the market was made for man, not man for the market. The market economy needs to 
deliver a fair distribution of income and wealth.

Having the minimum wage to make sure that even low-wage jobs are fairly remunerated is an important 
part of that. As Adam Smith wrote back in
1776a€!. a€oelt is but equitya€! that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of the 
people, should have such a share of the produce of their own
labor  as to be themselves tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodgeda€!a€D The sweet spot for society 
as a whole is above the point at which the employment­
inducing effect of the minimum wage is exactly offset by the growing employment-shrinking effecta€!

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1.Hiring Ezra Klein may well be one of the very, very few really good decisions the New York Times 
editorial editors have made in this millennium. I would note that much of what
Ezra Klein fears in California are the consequences of immense wealth inequalitya€’’and would melt 
away if we could return to a properly social-democratic income distribution
via an appropriate federal-level tax system. But this is very keen-eyed. Read, as they say, the 
whole thing. It is short.

Ezra Klein: California Is Making Liberals Squirm 
https://www.nytimes.eom/2021/02/ll/opinion/california-san-francisco-schools.html?smid=tw-share:
a€~The California Environmental Quality Act wasna€™t passed to stop mass transita€”a fact 
California finally acknowledged when it recently passed
legislation carving out exemptions. The profusion of councils and public hearings that let NIMBYs 
block new homes are a legacy of a progressivism that
wanted to stop big developers from slicing communities up with highways, not help wealthy 
homeowners fight affordable apartments. California's]...
structures of decision making too often privilege incumbents who like things the way they are over 
those who need them to change.... Ibram X. Kendi....
a€oeRacist policies are... policy that leads to racial inequitya€D. In California, taking that 
standard seriously might mean worrying less about the name

on the school than whether there are children inside ita€”as Mayor Breed has been insisting. It 
might mean worrying less about the sign in the yard than
the median home price on the block. And yes, it might mean worrying less about a cumbersome process 
that claims to be about environmental protection
and more about how to speed along projects that will lead to environmental justice.  If 
progressivism cannot work here, why should the country believe it

can work anywhere else?a€!

2. One thing puzzling me right now about the left-establishmenta€™ s intellectual attack on Larry 
Summers this week is that when you look at the bottom line of his Washington
Post column, it is this: a€oeStimulus measures of the magnitude contemplated are steps into the 
unknown and need to be accompanied by clear statements tha the consequences will
be monitored closely, and there will be the capacity and will to adjust policy quicklya€!a€D And 
that seems to me to be completely true, and not something with which anyone can,
should, or woulda€”if they had read ita€”take any exception whatsoever:

Noah Smith & Brad DeLong: Hexapodia Podcast: Bidena€™ s $1.9TReconciliation Rescue, Relief, 
Support, & Stimulus
https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/hexapodia-is-the-key-insight-i-relief: a€~Perhaps the rise of MMT 
has worried people about that, that politicians will
decide                        there is no such thing as too much debt or deficita€! no fiscal 
constraint and that a cowed central bank will be cowed into supporting infinite fiscal
expansiona€! a scary policy regime anda€! that's what people are scared ofa€!. a€oeStimulus 
measures of the magnitude contemplated are steps into the
unknown and need to be accompanied by clear statements tha the consequences will be monitored 
closely, and there will be the capacity and will to adjust
policy quicklya€da€’’that is a quote from Summersa€™ s Washington Post op-eda€!. Virtually no one 
talking about this has actually read the thinga€!

3. A very well-done, useful, and extremely timely demonstration that the Republican a€oemoderatea€D 
plan for rescue, relief, support, and stimulus is too small. It is not clear to
me who could have been advising them who would have recommended this:

Wendy Edelberg & Louise Sheiner: A Macroeconomic Analysis of a Senate Republican CO VID Relief 
Package
https://www.hamiltonproect.Org/blog/a macroeconomic analysis of a senate republican covid relief 
package: a€~Ten Senate Republicans recently
proposed               a $618-billion CO VID relief package. In this piece, we provide an analysis 
of that package and update our analysis of the Biden
Administration^™   s $1.9 trillion fiscal package, using the current-law GDP projections that the 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) released on Monday.


YW V DL1111CLLV L11OL LI IV IWpUUHVail pi Oil VYUU1U 1O1DV L11V 1V V VI VI 1VO1 ^lllllOLlVll 
OUJUDLWy              W111VDL1V piWUVL          ± .V pVIVVIlL 111 LI IV IV UI Lil LJUO1 LV1 VI

2021 and 0.8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2022, above the baseline level that CBO projects 
under current law (which assumes no additional fiscal
support). This would leave GDP about 0.8 percent below its pre-pandemic trajectory at the end of 
both and 2021 and 2022, but a touch above CBOa€™ s
estimate of potential GDPa€”the maximum sustainable level of outputa€!

4. Back in 1993, the expanded EITC for childless workers was one of the last things the Clinton 
Treasury threw out of the wolf-pursued troika as we dashed through the snow in the
race to get the Clinton reconciliation bill across the finish line. a€oeWe will fix it next 
yeara€D, we promised ourselves then. Nobody ever has:

Cynthia Miller & Lawrence F. Katz: Biden Wants to Boost the EITC for Workers without Dependent 
Childrena€”What Does the Research Say?
https://thehill.com/opinion/finance/538298-biden-wants-to-boost-the-eitc-for-workers-without-depende
nt-children-what?rl=l#.YCUykA0cLq8.twitter:
a€~Many commentators have expressed the hope that the inequalities exposed by the pandemic will 
lead to renewed efforts to address them by expanding
the social safety net and by providing basic protections for workers. An expanded EITC can be an 
effective part of this effort, increasing workersa€™
incomes (without depressing work effort) and putting them in a better position to recover from this 
crisis and weather the nexta€!

5. The slowdown over the past fifteen years in the rate at which the value of the stock of useful 
ideas about technology and organization has been growing in the global north is very
worrisome. In order to figure out why it happened and how to repair it, we need to think straight 
about how our industrial research labs create and our corporation-based value
chains deploy new ideas. And William Janeway has spent a lifetime working in this sector and 
thinking about it:

William Janeway: Venture Capital in the 21st 
C£ntaryhttps://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/videos/venture-capital: a€~In this eight-part 
lecture
series, Bill Janeway investigates the relationship between venture capital and technological 
innovation, and the interdependent roles of entrepreneurial
firms, the mission-driven State and financial speculation in the overall innovation systema€!

6. The age when low-wage companies could seek a comparative advantage in light manufacturing and 
then use that to massively upgrade the skill level of their workforces and the
functionality of their communities of engineering practice is over. Manufacturing either does not 
upgrade skills or does not employ enough workers. This is a huge problem for
countries that hope to develop in the future. I do not have an answer to it:

Dani Rodrik: Poor Countriesa€™ Technology 
£h7e7wnflhttps://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/poor-countries-technology-dilemma-by-dani-
rodrik-2021-02: a€~Africaa€™ s manufacturing renaissancea€! [but] few good jobs have been created 
in the more modern, formal, and productive
manufacturing branchesa€!. The bulk of the increase in manufacturing employment coming from small, 
informal enterprises. This experience stands in
stark   contrast with that of the rapid industrializers of East Asiaa€!. Large firms in the 
manufacturing sectors of Tanzania and Ethiopia to be significantly
more capital-intensive than these countriesa€™ income levels or factor endowments would suggesta€! 
as capital-intensive as firms in the Czech
Republica€!. African economies [are] in a bind. Their manufacturing firms can either become more 
productive and competitive, or they can generate more
jobs. Doing both at the same time seems very difficult, if not impossiblea€!. This is yet another 
reason for a public debate on the direction of technological
change and the tools that governments have to reorient ita€!

7. Do not let yourself get confused by numbers about a€oevaccine efficacya€D that do not tell you 
what you really want to know. A lot of things have to go right for the virus for it
to kill you. If not nearly everything goes right for the virus, you survive. And a vaccine that is 
not strong enough to keep you from getting the disease is strong enough to keep
almost everything from going right for it:

Matt Yglesias: Vaccines Are Better than You Think https://www.slowboring.eom/p/good-vaccines: 
a€~None of the people in the Pfizer/Moderna treatment
groups died or even fell seriously ill and had to be hospitalizeda€!. These days they vaccinate 
kids against chickenpox, so kids mostly dona€™ t get
chicken                                                                    pox. But even more 
remarkable, when they do get chickenpox these days ita€™ s a a€oesick for a few daysa€D kind of 
thing not a€oemiss weeks
of school while suffering in agony.a€D This is a really big deal with regard to the lower efficacy 
we are expecting from the AstraZeneca and Johnson &
Johnson vaccines. A vaccine thata€™ s only 70 percent effective at blocking infection would be 
expected to generate a larger than that reduction in
hospitalizations and an even larger reduction in deathsa€!

8. Why isna€™t the unequal distribution of ex ante expected lifetime incomea€’’inequality of 
opportunitya€’’conceptualized by us economists as the greatest of all market
failures? And why isna€™ t the distribution of political power that creates & preserves a property 
order of unequal wealth seen as the greatest of all a€oeregulatory capture by a
special interest groupa€D flaws in the working of society, economy, and the state? Remember: I 
learned much of my political economy from Richard Musgrave and his TA Manuel
Trajtenberg, who explicitly conceptualized public finance as having 3 branches: (1) repairing 
Pigovian externalities, (2) fiscal policy for full employment, (3) redistribution to shrink
all   the Negishi weights in the marketa€™ s SWF toward one:

Trevon Logan: Trevon D Logan: a€™ This is actually a deep point

Dr. Tre von D Logan @TrevonDLogan

This is actually a deep point @ delong is makinga€” we have not recognized the single largest 
market failure in the economy. And we rarely talk about it as
a market failure at all. The answer: thata€™ s how they wanted it when they sold it to you!

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!' @delong

@Undercoverhist @Econ Marshall I remember back in the... spring of 1981,1 think it was. I asked my 
professor, William Thomson, visiting from
Rochester, roughly this: "The utilitarian social welfare function is I© = U(l) + U(2) + U(3)... The 
competitive market economy maximizes a market social
welfare 1/

2:37 AM a~™ Jun 12,2020

160Likes36Re tweets

a€!. We have not recognized the single largest market failure in the economy. And we rarely talk 
about it as a market failure at all. The answer: thata€™ s
how they wanted it when they sold it to you! Anyone who has seriously thought about equilibrium 
theory knows that the lack of attention to endowments is
pretty shameful. DeLong extends that here to thinking of the weights we apply and why it should 
encourage, not discourage, redistribution. But we never
quite get therea€!

Ben Boehlert: a€™ Ia€™ m consistently shocked in my undergrad Econ classes how inequality of 
opportunity almost never comes up. In a world where
everyone is perfectly rational, it seems like pretty big deal!a€!

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

