Subscribe now

CONDITION: In Which I Am Relatively Quiet Todaya€!

A bunch of things for ya€™ all to read, most of which I have not yet fully processeda€!
Share

One Audio: Money & Crypto:

Tracy Alloway, Sam Bankman-Fried, Matt Levine, & Joe Weisenthal: How to Make Money in Crypto 
chttps://overcast.fm/+5 AWMdOFdo

Transcript Excerpts:

Transcript: Sam Bankman-Fried and Matt Levine on How to Make Money in Crypto
By Tracy Alloway and Joe Weisenthal

April 25,2022 at 11:24 AM PDT

Matt: Can you give me an intuitive understanding of farming? I mean, like to me, farming is like 
you sell some structured puts and collect premium, but
perhaps there's a more sophisticated understanding than that.

SBF: Let me give you sort of like a really toy model of it, which I actually think has a surprising 
amount of legitimacy for what farming could mean. A

company... builds a box.... They dress it up to look like a... world-altering protocol that's gonna 
replace all the big banks in 38 days.... You. take

Ethereum... put it in the box... and... get... an IOU.... Then this protocol issues... X token. 
[that] promises that anything cool that happens because of this

box is going to... be usable by... governance vote of holders of the X tokens.... So far we 
haven't. given a compelling reason for why there ever would be

any [thing cool]... but... maybe there will be....

Each day they're gonna airdrop... 1% of the X token pro rata amongst everyone who's put money in 
the box.... X token. gets given away to the box

people.... X token has some market cap, right? It's probably not zero. Let say it's... $20 million. 
I acknowledge that it's not totally clear that this thing

should have market cap, but empirically I claim it would....

So... X tokens [are] being given out each day.... Sophisticated firms are... "Huh, that's 
interesting.... If the  money in the box is a hundred million dollars,

then it's going to yield $16 million this year in X tokens.... That's pretty good. We'll put a 
little bit more in.". Maybe that happens until there are $200

million dollars in the box.... Sophisticated traders... Crypto Twitter or other [s]... put $200 
million in the box... and... start getting... X tokens....

Now... everyone's.... "This is a valuable box as demonstrated by all the money that people have 
apparently decided should be in the box. I love boxes as

much as the next guy."... People are... recalibrating.... It's been... 48 hours and it already is 
$200 million, including from... sophisticated players. They

look at these ratios... [of] total value locked in the box... to [the] market cap of the boxa€™ s 
token.... "lOx that's insane. IX is the norm.". X token price

goes way up.... Now it's $130 million market cap token because of... the bullishness of people's 
usage of the box.... Now... the smart money's. "Wow, this

thing's... yielding... 60% a year in X tokens. So they go and pour another $300 million in the 
box." And you get a psych and then it goes to infinity. And

then everyone makes money.

Matt: I think of myself as like a fairly cynical person. And that was so much more cynical than how 
I would've described farming. You're just like, well,
I'm in the Ponzi business and it's pretty good.

Joe: At no point did any of this require any sort of... economic case. Ita€™ s just. "other people 
put money in the box, and so I'm going to too", and then

it's more valuable.... t no point in the cycle, did it... describe aAy... economic purpose?...

SBF: I'll stay on the cynical route.... What's the end game? This box is worth zero, obviously.... 
But... if everyone. now thinks that this box token is

worth... a billion... that's what people are pricing it at and... [it] has that market cap. You put 
X token in a borrow-lending protocol and borrow dollars

with it. If you think it's worth like less than two thirds of that, you could even just like put 
some in there, take the dollars out. If the world never decides

that we are wrong... in... a coordinated way... you're... the guy... saying, "no, this thing's 
actually worthless", but in what sense are you right?....

Tracy: Are you saying that the value has to derive from everyone agreeing that it's worth 
something?. There have been these different arguments about

how it actually gets value. Everyone's gonna start migrating stuff on blockchain, and then you're 
gonna have a real economic use attached to these

assets.... But are you saying that it depends more on everyone just agreeing that these are worth 
something?...

SBF: It could come... from either. You can... get a market cap... because of cash flow.... Or you 
could... get market cap in the way that. Doge coin or SHIB

coin have, where people are just... a€~ha haa€™ and then they buy it. And if you're. "that's dumb, 
it has no cashflow flow, I'm gonna short sell it" you

lose all your money.... AMC or Hertz or GameStop or meme stocks in general have... a very similar 
pattern. Maybe people will pay something for it even

though it doesn't seem traditionally valuablea€”[that] is not a crypto-specific concept. Although 
it certainly has become likea€!.

SBF: I was being a little facetious, although I do think it's...an important way to understand part 
of what's going on. It's not really the case that the biggest

of these claim to be a box that is nothing but a box. They claim to be a bit more than that. You 
can query how much you believe the story that their value

at its heart is coming from them being more than just a box, but people certainly perceive them to 
be more than that  Maybe it's gonna be like the

preeminent DEX... maybe it's gonna be the preeminent borrow-lending protocol on chain.... This... 
starts out as just this. side show to the bigger story of

we're gonna change the world with the protocol.... Now, sometimes that sideshow becomes the main 
show.... Sometimes. in the end what really happens is

that like the box plus yield nature of it becomes more popular than the original use case....

Joe: How big is the farming industry?... How big is this... ecosystem and how sophisticated are the 
trades... beyond just. simple crude a€~put money in

the boxa€™?...

SBF: Rough ballparking.... Total value locked on chain... maybe a hundred billion.... Yields are 
certainly down a fair bit. We might be talking $5 billion a

year that sort of like traders are making from farming....

Joe: What's your take on the rise of either algorithmic or partially algorithmic partially backed 
stable coins. One of the most interesting phenomenon
happening right now is the rise of Luna and UST, and Luna has this Treasury Reserve consisting of a 
lot of Bitcoin, which seems a little dicey, but some
people say any idea of like an algorithmically-backed stable coin is a perpetual motion machine. 
It's only a matter of time before it fails. Do you believe
there can be like a truly sort of like decentralized stable coin? What do you make of these 
projects?

SBF: I think they're really cool. I do have some sympathy to the perpetual motion machine crowd 
here.... If you do zoom out... and. say, this is a stable

coin, backed by volatile assets, what's gonna happen in a big market move. The goal isn't for 
someone to sit there and hold it for five years, the goal is for

it to be used briefly for like transactions on chain and get created and redeemed on chain.... 
Answers like that can make sense. I think there's  versions of

a€~algorithmic stablecoinsa€™ that do have risk. but that also have massively enhanced yield 
because they're taking that risk on in order to do a trade

that makes money effectively....

Joe: I'm... curious.... What are the different approaches... that either institutional money or 
quasi-sort of like VC money has taken to. find the next big

thing? How do like people know?...

SBF: I want to... zoom out. How do VCs find the next anything that they're gonna invest in, right? 
Like how do they find the next company they're gonna

invest in?... When you break it down... you get a bizarre process... that does not look like the 
paragon of efficient markets.... They. see what all their


friends are chattering about, and they start FOMOing and then their LPs are like, "yo, have you 
made us a lot of money off of this company or token
yet?"... "No, we haven't invested in it"... is not a good answer given what question your LPs just 
asked. So instead you're... "oh boy, you're gonna be excited
about what we have done and/or will do." And then you find a way to get into that token and/or 
company.  It's bizarre processes like that ultimately that

are like shaping VC's investments in both traditional equities and in cryptocurrencies....

Joe: Tracy, I loved that. The highlight was definitely Sam's description of yield farming that even 
a sort of crypto cynica€!

Tracy: As a magic box that you put money into and more money comes out?

Joe: And even Matt Levine was like, I would've never described it this way because I thought it 
would be too cynical.

Tracy: Yeah. I don't really know what to say about that. This idea of like the value either coming 
from actual economics and use cases versus everyone

just agreeing.... Everyone just agreeing something is valuable. Sometimes it works. The fact that 
it's been working for so long certainly has surprised

many people myself included....

Joe: That's the thing. This is ridiculous. This is a perpetual motion machine. And yet here we are 
in 2022 and the industrya€™ s still going.

Tracy: Yeah, the machine's still going.

Joe: So the way DeFi works is: you put in a money in a box that you think more people will put 
money into. And the way VC works is: you hear what

your friends in the industry are investing in based on 2027 numbers. And then you also wanna get on 
that. So it's really just FOMO all the way down.

Tracy: The other thing I would say.... Momentum trading is not... entirely unknown in finance.  t 
has been a very profitable strategy, arguably, since 2008

and the finance crisis. I don't know how to feel about it. I feel weird

Joe: We all feel weird.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Must-Read: I Confess I Did Not Expect to Learn Azt U.C. Berkeley Was Seriously Long FTX:

Jake Curtis: Welcome to Cal's FTX Field, a Naming-Rights Deal Funded by Cryptocurrency: a€~Former 
Golden Bears walk-on football player is the Chief Operating Officer of
the company partnering with Cal on landmark 10-year deal: Cal announced on Monday that it has 
reached agreement on the first-ever collegiate cryptocurrency naming-rights
sponsorship, a 10-year, $17.5 million deal that will be paid in full in cryptocurrency, with the 
result being that the Golden Bearsa€™ football field will now be known as FTX Field
at California Memorial Stadium. So, Cal fans, welcome to FTX Field for the Bearsa€™ Sept. 4 opener 
against Nevada, knowing the name is paid for by virtual currency. An
interesting note to this story is that the head of FTX (Sina Nader) was a walk-on football player 
at Cal two decades ago. The deal will also include on-field branding and branding
on  athletics press backdrops and social integration and will initiate a community-service platform 
that will support philanthropic causesa€!

Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

• Max Kennerly: My uncle was innocent !a€!

Max Kennerly @MaxKennerly

My uncle was innocent! https://t.co/9QXp883L3a
10:38 PM^ Feb 18,2019

125Likes6Retweets

• Dan Primack: Sequoia Capital tells investors it did proper due diligence on FTXa€!

• Ed Luce: Joe Biden is still Donald Trumpa€™ s worst nightmare read: a€~The fact that the red wave 
became a red ripple suggests the anger of Americaa€™ s voters
does not equate to recklessnessa€!

•  Kate Clark: FTXa€™ s Bankman-Fried Quietly Invested More than $500 Million in Sequoia and Other 
VCs: a€~Bankman-Fried was not only a tireless fundraiser
from venture capital firms including Paradigm and Sequoia Capital, but also quietly made 
investments in those same fundsa€! how entangled Silicon Valley VC firms
are in Bankman-Frieda€™ s collapsing crypto empirea€l

• FRBNY: Underlying Inflation Gauge (UIG)a€!

• Diane Coyle: The end of growth: a€~When I ask DeLong what he thought of the pandemic, his answer 
is: a€oeWell, it was better than the Black Death.a€D There is
some humour among the bleakness. But the challenge of solving our economic problems is immense. My 
conversation with DeLong, like his book, was enjoyable but
hardly comfortinga€!

• Bobby Ghost: Republicans May Not Be Able to Stop Bidena€™ s Agenda: a€~With a 
narrower-than-expected House majority, speaker-in-waiting Kevin McCarthy
will have to manage the GOPa€™ s far-right factiona€!

•  George Steer: J.P. Morgan's "Transitory" Intransigence: a€~Opining on the data as if the past 12 
months (and boss Jamie Dimona€™ s hawkish April letter to
shareholders) were all just a bad dreama€!. a€oeThe October report supports the idea that we are 
moving past the firmest period for inflation and that a decent amount
of    the inflation we have seen over the past year will prove to be temporary or transitory in 
naturea€Da€!E ven so, economist Brad DeLong writes that Team Transitory
would be looking a€oepretty good right nowa€D were it not for RussiaaC™ s invasion of Ukrainea€!

• Anton Howe: The Beacons are Lit!a€!
Give a gift subscription


AJs:

Matt Levine: FTX Is Still Looking for Money: a€~The obvious questiona€! is: Is it a liquidity 
problem, or a solvency problem?a€! A nice clean distinction in theory but very hard
to see in practice. For one thing, if a financial firm is facing a liquidity crisis, ita€™ s 
usually because people are worried about solvencya€L Still the distinction matters. Roughly it
comes down to: If someone gave you enough time to sell all your assets a€” whatever that means 
exactly a€” would you be able to sell them for enough money to cover your

debts? If the answer is yes, then you have a liquidity crisis, and someone can probably fix ita€L 
There is a long history of scams and Ponzis in crypto, so if you have a liquidity
problem everyone is going to assume that you are running a scam or a Ponzia€!. One thing to 
consider is that if FTX is solvent, and Binance has the opportunity to buy it for $0,
then thata€™ s in Binancea€™ s best interestsa€i. If Binance walks away, it mostly gets contagion, 
as crypto prices fall and customers lose confidence in the whole industry.

Binance had some incentives to conclude that FTX is solvent, but it couldna€™ t get therea€!
Get 50% off a group subscription

Donate Subscriptions

Read null in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

