Subscribe now

The 2020-2022 COVID-19 plague caused by the coronavirus SARS-COVID-19 has, many today think, put 
the world economy in an odd position. For more than a quarter century
now the ongoing revolution in data processing and data communications technology has been 
profoundly altering the basic underpinnings of property and exchange and valuea€”
has been shifting us from a a€cecommoditya€D to an a€ceattentiona€D economy. We have all watched 
this shift gradually lurch forward. But now, many say, our two plague years
are packing, in some aspects, what would have been at least a decade of change and development into 
two years, as requirements of quarantine and social distancing have taught
and humans have had to learn on an emergency basis how to better use information and communications 
technology to try to substitute for much face-to-face interaction.

Share

But what exactly, are we moving toward? Let me attempt to set out the ideal type of an 
a€oeattention economya€D, more-or-less by simply reversing the polarity on a
a€cecommodity economya€D o under the four headings: excludability, rivalry, transparency, and 
coordination.

In a commodity economy the things of valuea€”the goods that people wanta€”are concrete objects 
useful to them that are both rival (hence you a€ceshoulda€D in some sense pay
a price for using them) and excludible (hence you can straightforwardly be charged a price for 
access). In an attention economy the things of valuea€”the things that you can be led
to pay attention to, and would be willing in the abstract to pay fora€”are neither. Hence, on the 
one hand, you a€ceshoulda€D in some sense have access to them for free. And, on a
second hand, you should be offered great variety conforming to your taste, because it is no longer 
make-one use-one, it is write-once run-e very where. But how is such a system of
creators and attention-payers to be sustained when you cannot charge directly for what people find 
valuable in terms of what they want to pay attention to? You must, somehow, sell
something ancillary that is not itself an attention good that you can somehow bundle with the 
attention good, and often this will take the form of a side-channel that can be
manipulated   to get them to direct attention elsewhere, for people who think that they can profit 
for it.

In an attention economy information problems are not just a complication or a distraction, they are 
at the essence. You cannot know what you are consuming before you do so. Once
you have learned what it is, you have already paid attention to it, and your part of the economic 
cycle is done. This seems likely to lead to a world in which reputation and branding
are of overwhelming importance: since I cannot know what it is before I make my decision to pay 
attention to it or not, a natural heuristic will be: is this channel one that I have
found it worthwhile to pay attention to in the past, or that has a warranty of quality from 
something I trust?

This will, I think, lead repeatedly to the dominance of platforms and aggregatorsa€”of all kinds.

Plus there is the problem that human attention is not human utility, not to mention not human 
flourishing. Looking at a lot of people I know, a number of them would really be much
happier and much more well-balanced if Facebook had never existed. The sharp Matthew Yglesias has, 
I think, a good take:

Matthew Yglesias: a€ceFuturea€ce & the Future of Media’. a€~Content distribution^! is mediated via 
Googlea€! Facebook, anda€! lessera€! smaller
networks like Twitter. Alla€! especially Facebooka€! deci[ded]a€! to give maximum visibility to 
content that is maximally engaginga€!. Engagement­
maximization mostly boosts rightwing populists pushing pessimistic negative-sum worldviews while 
giving a secondary boost to leftwing populists
pushing    a different set of pessimistic negative-sum worldviews. Oops!a€! https://w w 
w.slowboring.com/p/future-media

People woh are prosperousa€”even richa€”in a material sense, and who are definitely engaged, but in 
a way that makes them extremely unhappy, and dangerous to their fellows
who happen to look different, speak different, get labeled as different, and simply happen to be in 
the wrong place at the wrong time.

Then there is the question of the coordination problem in an attention economy. Back in the 
commodity economy, the price mechanism was an adequate communications channel
because the details of the specification about exactly what was demanded were rarely if ever of the 
essence. Why not? Because since the division of labor was relatively shallow and
simple, standard commodities could be purchased and altered to serve.

For example, consider the 30-foot bronze statue of Athene Promakhosa€’’Athene 
Fighting-in-Fronta€’’designed by Pheidias that the council and people of Athens had cast and
installed on the Acropolis in the year -456. 63 tons of copper and seven 7 tons of tin went into 
the statue. Where were the artisans of Athens to find 7 tons of tin? Herodotos of
Hallicarnassos reported that nobody in Athens could tell him where the tin was coming from: all 
anyone could say was that the ships had picked up the tin, already mined, in Sicily,
and    that they thought it came from a€oetin islandsa€O in the ocean. But he could find nobody who 
would claim to have actually seen these a€oetin islandsa€D. The answer was:
from Cornwall, in Britain. The market as a mechanism a€ceknewa€D that 7 tons of tin needed to be 
mined in Cornwall and then shipped to Athensa€”but apparently no individual
human knew that.

But as time passed, and as the division of labor advanced, coordination requires much more than 
simply going into the marketplace somewhere, calling out your willingness-to-pay
as a signal, and waiting for travelling merchants and the market mechanism to respond. In the 1930s 
the Ford Motor Company can run its assembly lines at full speed and efficiency
only in the United States, and only near Detroita€”its auto assembly plants elsewhere struggle to 
attain half that productivity, even in places like the United Kingdom. And when
Ford sells its dies and jigs for the Model T to the USSR when it replaces it with the Model A? In 
Russia, worker productivity stalled out at about AU the U.S. value. During World
War II, from iron ore to final test at which you try to drive it out the factory, a U.S. Sherman 
tank took approximately 10000 man-hours to build. A Soviet T34-C, approximately
30000. Tight, personal, face-to-face linkages of designers to engineers to assembly workers and 
then on to maintenance and sales staff who have visited the factory and know what
the machines can do and what their quirks are becomes essential. And coordinating this led to the 
modern corporations that the French christened a€oeFordista€D.

Now, of course, the coming of the attention economy has given what Richard Baldwin calls the 
a€oesecond unbundlinga€D: that of intra-firm communication. With the coming of
the internet it is no longer necessary that a firm's sophisticated industrial division of labor be 
geographically concentrated. Faxes, datafiles, and hopping onto a transoceanic jet as a
last resort: the word is that in the Before Times Apple Computer had 50 first-class seats a day 
back and forth between San Francisco and China. Even for those cases in which the
limits of the division of labor are not so much the communication of knowledge but the 
face-to-face, looking-in-the-eye establishment of trust and its limits was necessary, video
calls cemented by a final jet-flight-and-handshake worked remarkably well.

And so we got the international value-chain economy and the smile curve: low in the middle, high at 
the beginning and the end. Great value was earned at the beginning by
providing raw materials and resources and, more important, industrial design. Little value was 
added in the middle by increasingly routinized manufacturing and assembly. And
great value was added at the end by marketing, branding, and distribution^’’providing information 
(and misinformation) to consumers about what they might want from the
enormous variety of types and qualities of goods that could be churned out from the expanding 
capacity of factories. And it was, again, a quilt. Very good things happened in
selected places. Other places, nearby in culture, political allegiances, and attitudes, got left 
behinda€’’either their industries that they drew on for relatively high-value and high-
income niches in the worlda€™ s division of good things packed up and moved away, or never arrived.

So here we have the characteristics of the a€oeattention economya€n that we are moving into in a 
nutshell: Increasingly, highly, highly sophisticated and integrated divisions of
labor that need in no wise be geographically concentrated any more. Increasingly, information 
problems no longer complications but of the essence, and so we have the capture of
high-value positions in the value chains by brands and platformsa€”and the remarkable phenomenon of 
clickbait in the small and the large: earning money by making your primary
users more unhappy. Increasingly, the things of greatest valuea€”with the highest notional 
willingness-to-paya€”are experiential attention-grabbers, produced in a process of write-
once, write-often, distribute-everywhere, and take advantage of what virally grabs attention to 
then make enough to sustain the enterprise via the sale of ancillary services.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

This is the direction we are headed as we head away from the a€oecommodity economya€D. We are 
almost surely not going to get all the way to the end of the road. But toward
this is where we are tending. And right now it looks as though we are packing ten to twenty years 
of this change into two.

1628 words

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)
21


