3) The Biden administration knows what needs to be done. The problem is that the center caucuses of 
the currently elected congress does not see the necessity. At least, they do not believe that those 
who they are functionally in the
business of representing see the need::

Michelle Holder: a€™ Pleased to see the Build Back Better Act framework today^'xt^^ s a historic & 
imperative policy step to strengthen our massively underfunded Social Infrastructure. But ita€™ s 
just 1
step. Wea€™ 11 need many more steps to create an equitable, inclusive economy. There is much-needed 
funding for universal pre-K & a #LivingWage for childcare workers. This will reduce costs for 
families,
revolutionize access to high-quality Early Education AND protect workers. Investments in childcare 
= investing in workers & kids: win-win. This is BIGa€!. Millions have benefited from the Child Tax 
Credit,
and expanding it for another year will continue to protect against childhood poverty. The next step 
beyond the #BuildBackBetterAct is to make it permanent. Build Back Better also makes key 
investments in
Climate Change mitigation, health care, housing, tax enforcement, and home carea€’’investments that 
will help combat racial, gender, and economic inequality. BUT the framework also misses some major
opportunities to help even more families and the economy overall. There is still much work to be 
donea€!

LINK:


step. Wea€™ 11 need many more steps to create an equitable, inclusive economy. There is much-needed 
funding for universal pre-K & a #LivingWage for childcare workers. This will reduce costs for 
families,
revolutionize access to high-quality Early Education AND protect workers. Investments in childcare 
= investing in workers & kids: win-win. This is BIGa€!. Millions have benefited from the Child Tax 
Credit,
and expanding it for another year will continue to protect against childhood poverty. The next step 
beyond the #BuildBackBetterAct is to make it permanent. Build Back Better also makes key 
investments in
Climate Change mitigation, health care, housing, tax enforcement, and home carea€’’investments that 
will help combat racial, gender, and economic inequality. BUT the framework also misses some major
opportunities to help even more families and the economy overall. There is still much work to be 
donea€!

LINK:

Michelle Holder @mlholder999

/7 BUT the framework also misses some major opportunities to help even more families and the 
economy overall. There is still much work to be done.
5:06 PM r™ Oct 28,2021

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)Russiaa€™ s economic future does not look bright: an economy of rent-seeking and rent-extraction, 
rather than of win-win productivity improvement and equitable growth. Russiaa€™ s economic failure 
is, I think, a consequence of
its political failure. The logic of rule in Russia involves those currently at the top of the state 
pyramid maintaining their power by rewarding friends and supporters and punishing enemies and 
opponents. That political logic of coalition
construction and maintenance is not one in which equitable growth is at all likely. Was there an 
alternative road? I think prioritizing democracy and voice early on, and building institutions for 
grassroots representation, would have given
Russia  a better chance over the past generation. Michael McFaul has seen this process up close. He 
has lots that is thought-provoking to say:

Michael McFaul: Russiaa€™ s Road to Autocracy. a€~Russiaa€™ s democratic collapse must rank as one 
of the most consequential setbacks among the third and fourth waves of democratization. A
comprehensive explanation for Russiaa€™ s transition from autocracy and back again counts on both 
structure and agency, but leans toward agency. Structurally, Russia was forced to navigate 
democratic and
market  reforms while managing the dissolution of the Soviet empire. Yet the agency of individual 
actors may have played a more decisive role: It was Mikhail Gorbachev, not weakening state 
institutions or a
failing command economy, who triggered regime change in the Soviet Union. Following Gorbachev, 
Boris Yeltsin made decisions that undermined democratic consolidation and to some extent paved the 
way for
future autocratic restoration. The most notable of these was Yeltsina€™ s naming of Vladimir Putin 
as his successor. While Russians may be shaped by historical legacies, immutable cultural norms, or 
static
institutions, they are not trapped forever by them. If some Russians in the past made decisions 
that produced autocracy, others in the future might make choices that engender democracy a€!

LINK: chttps://muse.jhu .edu/article/815934>

2) I did not see this when people were looking for people to sign on, and that leaves me a little 
bit sad. The only thing I would add is that the social-spending package is only going to counter a 
small proportion of the harm done by the
substantial decades of underinvestment by the public sector that began back in the days of Richard 
Nixon. It will take a much greater effort, and be a much heavier lift, to get the public capital 
stock and its pace of growth back to where it
really ought to be:

Juliana Kaplan & Ben Winck: 61 Economists, Nobel Laureate Joseph Stiglitz Say Pass Social Spending: 
a€~The package would a€oecounteract decades of underinvestment,a€D the group said in a letter
organized by Invest in America Action. The plan includes funding for universal preschool, 
affordable housing, and clean-energy projects, among other provisionsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.businessinsider.com/biden-plan-economists-nobel-laureate-ioseph-stiglitz-social-spendin
g-2021-lQ>

3) I do find myself puzzled by the failure to find total factor productivity gains from the Korean 
Heavy Industry Drive of the 1970s. It certainly was a remarkable success for output, for wages, and 
for profits. The authors see it as a
successful coordination effort that got South Korean heavy industry to a desirable high-investment 
equilibrium. But that should have brought with it learning by doing and business model 
experimentation as well. Yet apparently Korea
got  only the capital deepening benefits. I will have to look much more closely at this puzzle:

Minho Kim, Munseob Lee, & Yongseok Shin: The Korean Heavy Industry Drive of 1973: a€~Industrial 
policy has divided economists for decades. This column evaluates Korean governments™ s policy of
promoting heavy and chemical industries in the 1970s, using plant-level output and productivity 
data. It shows that output and input use of targeted industries/regions grew significantly faster 
than those of non­
targeted ones. However, total factor productivity did not increase because the misallocation of 
resources across plants within targeted industries/regions got significantly worse .a€!

LINK: <https://voxeu .org/article/korean-heavy-industry-drive-1973>

4) And now the Center for American Progress also has a new head. Patrick Gaspard is a highly 
qualified and extremely energetic guy. I am very pleased to see this:

Center for American Progress: A New Era of American Progress: a€~We welcome our new president and 
CEO, Patrick Gaspard. With an introduction by CAP founder John Podesta and closing remarks by CAP
board member Secretary JuliAjn Castro, the event will highlight Gasparda€™ s vision for CAP and the 
progressive movement as a whole. It will address how we, as progressives, can move policy that 
alleviates
inequality, uplifts underserved communities, and creates a more equitable and just world for alla€!

LINK: <https://www.americanprogress .org/events/2021/09/24/504109/new-era-american-progress/>

5) Only once in my lifetimes ”1994a€’’has the US Federal Reserve successfully attain a Scesoft 
landingSoe: maintaininn price stability and tighten monetary policy without sending the economy 
into a recession, and so prematurely
cutting short a useful and beneficial expansion. The fear of a repeat of the inflationary 1970s has 
indeed imposed heavy long-term costs on American economic growth:

Antonio FatAjs: The Short-Lived High-Pressure Economy: S~In 2019, the US economy had reached levels 
of employment that ensured that the gains of the economic expansion were shared across many
segments of the labour market. Unfortunately, the benefits of this high-pressure economy were 
short-lived thanks to the recession that started in March 2020. This column argues that this 
pattern fits all previous
US cycles. Expansions end too early to allow for long periods of stable and low unemployments!

LINK: <https://voxeu .org/article/short-lived-high-pressure-economy>

6) What is the relationship between Soealternative factsSD and Soealternate realitySD?

Jason Koebler: Zuckerberg Announces Fantasy World Where Facebook Is Not a Horrible Company: 
S~FacebookS™ s new name is SoeMeta,SD and its new mission is to invent a SYnetaverseS™ that
will make us all forget what itS™ s done to our existing reality: Moments before announcing 
Facebook is changing its name to a€ceMetaa€D and detailing the companyS™ s SoemetaverseSD plans 
during a
Facebook Connect presentation on Thursday, Mark Zuckerberg said Scesome people will say this isna€™ 
t a time to focus on the future,a€D referring to the massive, ongoing scandal plaguing his company

relating to the myriad ways Facebook has made the world worse. a€oel believe technology can make 
our lives better. The future will be built by those willing to stand up and say this is the future 
we wanta€Ua€!
LINK: <https://www.vice.com/en/article/q 
jb485/zuckerberg-facebook-new-name-meta-metaverse-presentation>

Leave a comment

Subscribe now


relating to the myriad ways Facebook has made the world worse. a€oel believe technology can make 
our lives better. The future will be built by those willing to stand up and say this is the future 
we wanta€Ua€!
LINK: 
<https://www.vice.com/en/article/qjb485/zuckerberg-facebook-new-name-meta-metaverse-presentation>

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

