Subscribe now

First:

Thisa€”Gregory Clark: The Secret History of the Industrial Revolutiond€”is an extremely interesting 
but ultimately, I think, not fully sustainable paper.

In it, Greg Clark does the Greg-thing: taking an unsustainable position, turning all his 
intelligence and industry to sustaining it, and getting remarkably far. His unsustainable position 
is that the British Industrial Revolution was not the start of modern economic growtha€”the 2%/year 
economy-wide improvements in lab or productivity broadly distributed over sectors that we have seen 
since 1870a€”but rather the last two of the post-Medieval discrete
localized and sector-specific industrial advances. Steam and textile machinery are therefore 
classified as things like the caravel, printing.

It was only, Clark claims, a€oeaccidents of demand, demography, trade, and geographya€D that make 
this spurt appear different, but it was really, like its predecessors, a discontinuous stroke of 
genius that was eventually self-limiting. In the absence of the coming of the technologies of the 
Second Industrial Revolution fueled by the industrial research lab to discover and develop and the 
coming of the modern corporation to develop and deploy, we might well
still, today, be in a very impoverished steampunk world.

That last part of the argument may, I think, well be correct. Semi-permanent steampunk world was 
definitely a possibility as late as 1870, and may have been a probability as of 1800.

Just as the caravel made spices essential freea€”but the demand for spices was small and quickly 
satiated, so the impact was limiteda€”and just as the printing press made books essentially 
freea€”but the demand for books was small and quickly satiated, so the impact was limiteda€”so the 
steam engine made coal-for-heating essentially free and textile machinery made spinning and weaving 
essentially free. And if Britain had been an autarchic economy with
a stable population, capable of being satiated with coal-for-heating and with spinning-and-weaving 
limited by wool from sheep, full stop.

So it is nevertheless the case that the price-elasticity of demand for spinning and weaving were, 
over a substantial range, worldwide, significantly greater than one did make a huge difference, one 
large enough to make the BIR experience different in kind and not just the last post-medieval 
efflorescence with nothing to do with modern economic growth. Steam and machinery mattered much 
more than did the caravel or the printing press. And they mattered
because differences in a€oedemand, demography, trade, and geographya€D made the British Industrial 
Revolution decisively different than anything that had come before.

The way Clark puts the argument is: in historical 1860 Britaina€™ s TFP was 100, compared to 65 in 
1780. But remove Britaina€™ s ability to export cotton textiles and require that it move labor 
counterfactually out of export industry into the production of goods that were historically 
acquired via importing, and counterfactual 1860 TFP drops to 85. And remove cottona€”the only fiber 
the machines could work ona€”and counter actual 1860 TFP drops
down to 75.

Thus we have a non-cotton economy TFP growing from 65 to 75a€”15%a€”from 1780 to 1860; a 
static-exports but cotton-using economy growing to 85a€”another 15%a€”from 1780 to 1860, and the 
historical export economy growing to 100a€”another 23%. And throughout those 80 years the 
population was growing from 8 to 20 million, creating enormous food-resource scarcity at home that 
requires an export machine of previously unprecedented size.
I agree: this is not modern economic growth. But it is also not (merely) Dutch-style intensive 
agriculture and commerce, the caravel (although note that the caravela€™ s effects ex-Europe were 
momentous, even genocidal, it was just its effects within Europe that were 
substantial-but-not-overwhelming), or printing (although Jeremiah Dittmar notes that printing does 
not just make books cheap, but makes the knowledge engine-of-growth get in gear),

Gregory Clark: The Secret History of the Industrial Revolution'. a€~Other places in Europe in the 
years 1200 to 1760 saw similar episodes of productivity growth that were as substantial as those in 
England from 1760 to 1860a€! between 1550 and 1650 the Netherlands saw significant productivity 
advance. The appearance that the Industrial Revolution in England represented a decisive break from 
the past is largely a product of the
unusual demographic experience of England in the Industrial Revolution yearsa€! driving up land 
rentals and creating urbanization, spurreda€! changesa€! the enclosure of common lands, 
improvements in transportation, the expansion of coal mining, and perhaps also the fall in interest 
ratesa€!

LINK: <http://faculty.econ.ucdavis .edu/facultv/gclark/papers/secret2001 .pdf>

Figure 12: Overall TFP in England, 1610-1860

120

FP - no

cotton exports                   Actual TFP

100


I

TFP without cotton

Table 13: Agricultural Consumption per Person in England, 1700s to 1860s.

1700-9     1860-9

Population (millions)                                           5.16       19.97


English Fann net output (£ m)                                    63.1      111.7

Net Food Imports (£ m.)                                          2.2       75.2

Net Raw Material Imports (£ m.)                                  -1.3       62.7

Domestic Coal Consumption (£ m.)                                 1.7      50.3

Total Food, Energy and Raw Material Consumption (£ m.)              65.7     309.9

Consumption per Person (£)                                      12.7       15.5

Predicted Consumption (£)                                       12.7       15.8

Notes: Cotton, wool, flax, and silk retained for home consumption are estimated by subtracting
the raw material content of textile exports estimated using figures given in Deane and Cole
(1962).

Sources: Coal production: Flynn (1984, p. 26) and Church (1986, pp. 19, 53, 85-97). Imports

1860-9: Mitchell (1988). Imports 1700-9: Schumpeter (1960, tables XV, XVII). Exports 1700-

9: Schumpeter (1960, tables VII, IX, X, XII, XIII), Mitchell (1988), pp. 221-2).

Share


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Anton Howes: Is Innovation in Human Nature?'. a€~The more I study the lives of British 
innovators, the more convinced I am that innovation is not in human naturea€!. As the agricultural 
innovator Arthur Young put it, the natural state is not innovation, but a€oethat dronish, sleepy, 
and stupid indifference, that lazy negligence, which enchains mena€! 
<https://medium.com/@antonhowes/is-innovation-in-human-nature-
48c2578e27ba#.v54zq0ogx>

• Friedrich A. Von Hayek: The Use of Knowledge in Society <https://www.jst0r.0rg/stable/l 
809376?seq=l#metadata info tab contents>

•  Noah Smith: Bidenomics Takes on Government Investment: a€~The numbers are disappointingly small 
so far, but our mindset has begun to changea€! 
<https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/bidenomics-takes-on-government-investment>

•  Larry Summers: On China: a€~Demographic changesa€! declining labor forcea€! rural-to-urban 
migrationa€!. How China has nurtured a cutting-edge set of venture-type companies despite being a 
relatively poor countrya€! transition of powera€! possibilities of wrenching changea€!. I dona€™t 
have a good feeling fora€! likely discontinuitya€! the Weltanschauung of Chinese citizens towards 
the rest of the worlda€!

<https://chinatalk.substack.eom/p/larrv-summers-on-china7utm campaign=post&utm medium=web&utm 
source=twitter>

•  Mingxing Liu, Victor Shih, & Dong Zhang: The Fall of the Old Guards: Explaining Decentralization 
in C/nna<https://gps.ucsd.edu/ files/faculty/shih/Shih Explaining%20Credible%20Decentralization 
with names ,pdf>

• Wikipedia: Diligent Work-Frugal Study Movement: a€~(g*™ ze3*a<>3a-¥a„%oaizeoef; simplified 
Chinese: 9*™ zeM^aYa^aia^s; pinyin: LiA° FQZ qAngAdng jiQZnxuA© huA-<; French: Mouvement 
Travail-A%otudes) was a series of work-study programs which brought Chinese students to France and 
Belgiuma€! between 1912 and 1927a€!. A group of Chinese anarchists who had come to Paris and wanted 
to introduce French science and soci
idealism to ChinaaCI <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Diligent Work-Frugal Study Movement#cite 
note-sacu.org-12>

• Henry David Thoreau: Walden <https://ww w.gutenberg.org/files/205/205-h/205-h.htm>

• Jennie Spencer-Churchill: The Reminiscences of Lady Randolph Churchill <https: //books .google 
.com/books ?id=8162RvphymOC>

•  Jeet Heer: Of Patriots & Back-Stabbers: a€~In turning Babbitt into a martyr, Trump and his 
followers are creating their own-stabbed-in-the-back myth of the events January 6a€!. Babbitt is 
being mythologized as a figure like Horst Wessel, the young stormtrooper killed by communists in 
1930 whose death served as a rallying cry for Nazisa€! 
<https://ieetheer.substack.eom/p/of-patriots-and-back-stabbers>

•  Elsa B. Kania: A United States Undermined by Racist Authoritarian Violence Cana€™ t Be a Great 
Power: a€~The future of American democracy appears disturbingly precarious, and the damage of the 
past four years may take decades to repair. Not since the Civil War has white supremacy so 
threatened the American republica€! 
<https://foreignpolicy.com/2021/01/07/united-states-great-power-china-domestic-threats-capitol-mob/>


•  Jason Gale: Covid Origins Mirror SARS Introduction From Animals: a€~The epidemiological history 
of SARS-CoVa€“2 is comparable to previous animal market-associated outbreaks of coronaviruses and 
offers a simple route for human exposurea€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-07/covid-origins-mirrors-sars-introduction-from-ani
mals-study-says>

•  Jarrett Carter Sr.: Howard Professor Ta-Nehisi Coates: a€~Coates shares his reflections on 
returning to his alma mater as a professor in the HU College of Fine Arts, the idea of Black 
luminaries seeking opportunities to align with HBCUs, and the weight of serving as an example of 
excellence for Black Americaa€! <https://www.hbcudigest.eom/p/howard-professor-ta-nehisi-coates>

Paragraphs:

It would be easy to get a job. But would it be easy to get a good joba€”your best possible 
joba€”right now? That is not so clear to me. So labor demand in the sense that it matters may not 
be all that high right now.
Nick Bunker muses on JOLTS:


•  Jeet Heer: Of Patriots & Back-Stabbers: P~In turning Babbitt into a martyr, Trump and his 
followers are creating their own-stabbed-in-the-back myth of the events January 6P!. Babbitt is 
being mythologized as a figure like Horst Wessel, the young stormtrooper killed by communists in 
1930 whose death served as a rallying cry for NazisP! 
<https://jeetheer.substack.eom/p/of-patriots-and-back-stabbers>

•  Elsa B. Kania: A United States Undermined by Racist Authoritarian Violence Cana€™ t Be a Great 
Power: P~The future of American democracy appears disturbingly precarious, and the damage of the 
past four years may take decades to repair. Not since the Civil War has white supremacy so 
threatened the American republicP! 
<https://foreignpolicy.eom/2021/01/07/united-states-great-power-china-domestic-threats-capitol-mob/>


•  Jason Gale: Covid Origins Mirror SARS Introduction From Animals: P'The epidemiological history 
of SARS-CoVP“2 is comparable to previous animal market-associated outbreaks of coronaviruses and 
offers a simple route for human exposureP! 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/articles/2021-07-07/covid-origins-mirrors-sars-introduction-from-ani
mals-study-says>

•  Jarrett Carter Sr.: Howard Professor Ta-Nehisi Coates: a€~Coates shares his reflections on 
returning to his alma mater as a professor in the HU College of Fine Arts, the idea of Black 
luminaries seeking opportunities to align with HBCUs, and the weight of serving as an example of 
excellence for Black AmericaP! <https://www.hbcudigest.eom/p/howard-professor-ta-nehisi-coates>

Paragraphs:

It would be easy to get a job. But would it be easy to get a good jobP”your best possible 
jobP”right now? That is not so clear to me. So labor demand in the sense that it matters may not be 
all that high right now.
Nick Bunker muses on JOLTS:

Nick Bunker: May 2021 JOLTS Report: Demand for Workers Remains Strong: P~Not quite the barn burner 
of last month, butP! job openings are still near historic highs, the rate of quitting is still 
above pre-pandemic levels and employers are laying off workers at record lows. The outlook for 
hiring remains brightP!. The ratio of unemployed workers to job openingsP! still above pre-pandemic 
levelsP! the labor market can still
get tighter. Employers not only want to hire a large number of new employees, but they also want to 
hold onto the ones they have. The layoffs and discharge rate declined to a new all-time low in May 
at 0.9%P!. ThereP™ s a lot to like hereP!

LINK: <https ://www.hiringlab .org/2021/07/07/may-2021- jolts-report/>

I think I highlighted this when it came out. To what extent are these American Gentry the real 
funding base of the Republican Party, and to what extent do they see Trump as one of them, telling 
it like it is?:

Patrick Wyman: American Gentry: P'YakimaP!. Commercial agriculture is a lucrative industry, at 
least for those who own the orchards, cold storage units, processing facilities, and the large 
businesses that cater to them. They have a trusted and reasonably well-paid cadre of managers and 
specialistsP! but the vast majority of their employees are lower-wage laborersP!. Ownership of the 
real, core assets is where the regionP™ s
wealth comes from, and it doesnP™ t extend down the social hierarchy. Yet this bounty is enough to 
produce hilltop mansions, a few high-end restaurants, and a staggering array of expensive vacation 
homes in Hawaii, Palm Springs, and the San Juan IslandsP!. This kind of eliteP™ s wealth derives 
not from their salaryP! but from their ownership of assetsP! a bunch of McDonaldP™ s franchises in 
Jackson, Mississippi, a beef­
processing plant in Lubbock, Texas, a construction company in Billings, Montana, commercial 
properties in Portland, Maine, or a car dealership in western North CarolinaP!. Their wealth and 
connections make them influential forcesP!. Because their wealth is rooted in the ownership of 
physical assets, they tend to be more rooted in their places of originP!. Gentry are, by 
definition, local elites. The extent to which they wield
power in their localities, and how they do so, is dependent on the structure of their regimeP!. 
There are an enormous number of organizations and institutions dedicated to advancing the interests 
of this gentry classP!. Some people work their way into this property-holding gentry class by 
virtue of their blood, sweat, and sheer gumption. ThatP™ s one variant on the American Dream: the 
belief that hard work and talent, and maybe a
bit of luck, can take a person into the ranks of the elite. But far more of the gentry class are 
born into it. They inheritP!. Managers run their companies, lawyers look over their contracts, 
accountants manage their finances, but theyP™re the ownersP!

LINK: <https://patrickwvman.substack.eom/p/american-gentrv>

And another take on the same set of issues:

Eric Levitz: Tucker Carlsona€™ s Populism Is for the Small-Time Rich: P~What makes his defense of 
single-family zoning so instructive is that itP™ s both anti-free-market and anti-working-classP!. 
For the downtrodden Preforgotten men and womenPD whom right-wing populists claim to champion, 
single-family zoning is actually a scourge. It prevents homeowners in economically depressed 
regions from affordably
relocating to thriving metros. And it forces renters to forfeit an ever-higher share of their 
income to landlordsP!. Viewed from the perspective of society as a whole, single-family zoning is 
ruinousP!. One minute, Carlson casts Blackrock as the cause of the affordable-housing crisis; the 
next, he explains that the firma€™ s nefarious mission is to make housing cheap. He is speaking to 
genuine economic anxieties, but they are the
anxieties of precariously wealthy homeowners who jealously guard their financial, geographic, and 
psychic distance from the lower orders. Carlsonism is a politics of downward-looking class 
resentment disguised as its oppositeP!. This eraa€™ s self-styled populist conservatives have 
consistently demonstrated their fealty to small-time capitalistsa€”and contempt for the median 
laborera€”in just about every major policy fight of
Bidena€™ s tenure. Carlsona€™ s call for higher housing costs isna€™t an exceptional betrayal of 
the populist righta€™ s putative class allegiance, only an exceptionally naked onea€!

LINK: 
<https://nvmag.com/intelligencer/2021/07/tucker-carlson-populism-jd-vance-abolish-suburbs.html>

I am not sure this has been rightly interpreted. I took Lyotard to say that we needed to focus on 
a€oepetit receitsa€D in order to understand that the Grand Narratives were all false. But I thought 
he still recognized that we need Grand Narratives in order to think at all:

Wikipedia: Metanarrative: a€~In The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (1979), Lyotard 
highlights the increasing skepticism of the postmodern condition toward the totalizing nature of 
metanarratives and their reliance on some form of a€oetranscendent and universal trutha€Da€l. 
Attempts to construct grand theories tend to unduly dismiss the naturally existing chaos and 
disorder of the universe, the power of the
individual eventa€!. Postmodernists attempt to replace metanarratives by focusing on specific local 
contexts as well as on the diversity of human experience. They argue for the existence of a 
a€oemultiplicity of theoretical standpointsa€D rather than for grand, all-encompassing theoriesa€!

LINK: <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metanarrative#cite_note-5>

This is highly cool: no, the Pilgrims were not Israel, New England was not the Promised Land, the 
voyage of the Mayflower was not Exodus, and Britain was not Egypt. Instead, America was Egypt, the 
African-Americans were Israel, and their historic task was to take the Declaration and the 
Constitution seriously and so turn America into the Promised Land:

John Ganz: The 1619 Project Revisited: a€~Samuel Goldman describes three types of American 
nationalism^!. The Covenanta€! chosen peoplea€!. The Cruciblea€! a melting pot where a new people 
is being forged out of diverse sourcesa€!. The Creeda€! bound by its adherence toa€! liberty and 
equality embodied in the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence^!. The Hannah-Jones 
essaya€! was so upsetting to
manya€! [by] itsa€! reversal of this Covenant traditiona€!. 1619a€! displace[s] the Mayflowera€!. 
Jonesa€™ s narrative begins with the Israelites ina€! Egyptian captivitya€!. Hannah-Jones replaces 
the Puritan WASPs as the original Americans, keeping the Covenant when others did nota€!. The 
Covenant is the faith shown by black Americans in the nationa€!. Trole of the guardians or 
custodians of American democracy was

traditionally given to the WASP elitea€!. a€oeAs much democracy as this nation has todaya€! has 
been borne on the backs of black resistance. Our founding fathers may not have actually believed in 
the ideals they espoused, but black people dida€!. I wish, now, that I could go back to the younger 
me and tell her that her peoplea€™ s ancestry started here, on these lands, and to boldly, proudly, 
draw the stars and those stripes of the
American flag. We were told once, by virtue of our bondage, that we could never be American. But it 
was by virtue of our bondage that we became the most American of alla€!a€D. It cleaves so closely 
the sources of American political imagination but just inverts thema€!. The crucible is here not 
the melting-pot, but the struggle against slavery and racisma€!. I find neither narrative of 
American historya€”that of WASPs or blacks to
be a€oeoriginal Americansa€D or a€oemost Americana€na€”to be that offensive or even particularly 
incompatible: Ia€™ m happy to grant New England Puritans a formative role as well as the black 
freedom struggle. As a the descendant of immigrants, I am willing to be tolerant of a little ethnic 
pride or even a touch of chauvinism from time to timea€!

LINK: <https://johnganz .substack.com/p/the-1619-project-revisited>

Two guys who assume that Beijinga€™ s consensus weltanshuung is wrong. That is not in evidence:

Jude Blanchette & Seth G. Jones: How Beijinga€™s Narrative ofU.S. Decline Is Leading to Strategic 
Overconfidence: a€~Since the Global Financial Crisis in 2007a€“2008, Beijing has assessed that the 
United States is experiencing a slow but steady deterioration of its national power and 
international influence. Events of the past 12 months have consolidated this consensusa€!. Since 
the founding of the Peoplea€™ s Republic of
China in 1949, Chinaa€™ s leaders have looked at the United States with a complex and shifting 
mixture of fear, admiration, and hostilitya€!. The Global Financial Crisis in 2007a€“2008 was an 
inflection point, with a pronounced consolidation of the Precapitalist instabilitya€D narrative in 
policymaking and intellectual circles. At the same time, it gave rise to the view that ChinaaC™ s 
own domestic institutional and political
system possessed significant advantages relative to Western democracya€!. Beijinga€™ s American 
Narrative. The United StatesP™ democracy and its political system have stopped functioning. The 
United StatesP™ conception of Preuniversal valuesPD only maintained global appeal because they were 
backed by U.S. power. As U.S. strength wanes, so too will the values it promotes. The world is no 
longer looking to the
United States for global leadership; the world is moving toward multipolarity; and the East is 
rising, the West is decliningP!

LINK: <https://opensource.csis .org/features/beijing-narrative-us-decline/>

700,000 total COVID-19 deaths so far in America suggests between 70 and 140 million total cases:

NIH: C0VIDa€“19 Prevalence far Exceeded Early [Confirmed] Pandemic Cases: P'Researchers estimate 
nearly 17 million undiagnosed cases in the U.S. by mid-July 2020P!. During spring and summer of 
2020P! for every diagnosed COVIDP“19 caseP! there were 4.8 undiagnosed cases, representing an 
additional 16.8 million cases by July aloneP!. Article: Undiagnosed SARS-CoVP“2 Seropositivity in 
the United States
During the First Six Months of the Pandemic). 2021. Science Translational Medicine. DOI: 
10.1126/scitranslmed.abh3826P!

LINK: 
<https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-studv-suggests-covid-19-prevalence-far-exceeded-e
arly-pandemic-cases>

It would be good if this worked, but it is not looking good for it, in which case it would be very 
bad if it crowds out effective treatments, like vaccination:

Yuani M Roman & al.: Ivermectin for the Treatment of COVIDd€“19: A Systematic Review & 
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials: P'Published and preprint randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) assessing IVM effects on C0VIDP“19 adult patients were searched until March 22,2021 
in five engines. Primary outcomes were all-cause mortality, length of stay (LOS), and adverse 
events (AE)P!. Risk of bias (RoB) was
evaluated using Cochrane RoB 2A-0 toolP!. Controls were standard of care [SOC] in five RCTs and 
placebo in five RCTsP!. In comparison to SOC or placebo, IVM did not reduce all-cause mortality, 
length of stay or viral clearance in RCTs in COVIDP“19 patients with mostly mild disease. IVM did 
not have an effect on AEs or severe AEs. IVM is not a viable option to treat COVIDP“19 patientsP!

LINK: <https://academic .oup.com/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciab591/6310839>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisP! weblog-like newsletterP! here:

Subscribe now

ThereP™ s a free email list. ThereP™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


LINK: <https://patrickwyman.substack.eom/p/american-gentry>

And another take on the same set of issues:

Eric Levitz: Tucker Carlsona€™ s Populism Is for the Small-Time Rich'. P~What makes his defense of 
single-family zoning so instructive is that itP™ s both anti-free-market and anti-working-classP!. 
For the downtrodden Preforgotten men and womenPD whom right-wing populists claim to champion, 
single-family zoning is actually a scourge. It prevents homeowners in economically depressed 
regions from affordably
relocating to thriving metros. And it forces renters to forfeit an ever-higher share of their 
income to landlordsP!. Viewed from the perspective of society as a whole, single-family zoning is 
ruinousP!. One minute, Carlson casts Blackrock as the cause of the affordable-housing crisis; the 
next, he explains that the firma€™ s nefarious mission is to make housing cheap. He is speaking to 
genuine economic anxieties, but they are the
anxieties of precariously wealthy homeowners who jealously guard their financial, geographic, and 
psychic distance from the lower orders. Carlsonism is a politics of downward-looking class 
resentment disguised as its oppositeP!. This eraP™ s self-styled populist conservatives have 
consistently demonstrated their fealty to small-time capitalistsP”and contempt for the median 
laborerP”in just about every major policy fight of
BidenP™ s tenure. CarlsonP™ s call for higher housing costs isnP™t an exceptional betrayal of the 
populist rightP™ s putative class allegiance, only an exceptionally naked oneP!

LINK: 
<https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2021/07/tucker-carlson-populism-jd-vance-abolish-suburbs.html>

I am not sure this has been rightly interpreted. I took Lyotard to say that we needed to focus on 
Prepetit receitsPD in order to understand that the Grand Narratives were all false. But I thought 
he still recognized that we need Grand Narratives in order to think at all:

Wikipedia: Metanarrative'. P~In The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge (1979), Lyotard 
highlights the increasing skepticism of the postmodern condition toward the totalizing nature of 
metanarratives and their reliance on some form of Pretranscendent and universal truthPDPI. Attempts 
to construct grand theories tend to unduly dismiss the naturally existing chaos and disorder of the 
universe, the power of the
individual eventP!. Postmodernists attempt to replace metanarratives by focusing on specific local 
contexts as well as on the diversity of human experience. They argue for the existence of a 
Premultiplicity of theoretical standpointsPD rather than for grand, all-encompassing theoriesP!

LINK: <https://en.wikipedia.Org/wiki/Metanarrative#cite note-5>

This is highly cool: no, the Pilgrims were not Israel, New England was not the Promised Land, the 
voyage of the Mayflower was not Exodus, and Britain was not Egypt. Instead, America was Egypt, the 
African-Americans were Israel, and their historic task was to take the Declaration and the 
Constitution seriously and so turn America into the Promised Land:

John Ganz: The 1619 Project Revisited'. P~Samuel Goldman describes three types of American 
nationalismP!. The CovenantP! chosen peopleP!. The CrucibleP! a melting pot where a new people is 
being forged out of diverse sourcesP!. The CreedP! bound by its adherence toP! liberty and equality 
embodied in the Constitution and the Declaration of IndependenceP!. The Hannah-Jones essayP! was so 
upsetting to
manyP! [by] itsP! reversal of this Covenant traditionP!. 1619P! displace[s] the MayflowerP!. 
JonesP™ s narrative begins with the Israelites inP! Egyptian captivityP!. Hannah-Jones replaces the 
Puritan WASPs as the original Americans, keeping the Covenant when others did notP!. The Covenant 
is the faith shown by black Americans in the nationP!. Trole of the guardians or custodians of 
American democracy was

traditionally given to the WASP eliteP!. Pre As much democracy as this nation has todayP! has been 
borne on the backs of black resistance. Our founding fathers may not have actually believed in the 
ideals they espoused, but black people didP!. I wish, now, that I could go back to the younger me 
and tell her that her peopleP™ s ancestry started here, on these lands, and to boldly, proudly, 
draw the stars and those stripes of the
American flag. We were told once, by virtue of our bondage, that we could never be American. But it 
was by virtue of our bondage that we became the most American of allPiPD. It cleaves so closely the 
sources of American political imagination but just inverts themP!. The crucible is here not the 
melting-pot, but the struggle against slavery and racismP!. I find neither narrative of American 
historyP”that of WASPs or blacks to
be Preoriginal AmericansPD or Premost AmericanPnP”to be that offensive or even particularly 
incompatible: IP™ m happy to grant New England Puritans a formative role as well as the black 
freedom struggle. As a the descendant of immigrants, I am willing to be tolerant of a little ethnic 
pride or even a touch of chauvinism from time to timeP!

LINK: <https ://johnganz .substack.com/p/the-1619-project-revisited>

Two guys who assume that BeijingP™ s consensus weltanshuung is wrong. That is not in evidence:

Jude Blanchette & Seth G. Jones: How Beijinga€™s Narrative ofU.S. Decline Is Leading to Strategic 
Overconfidence'. a€~Since the Global Financial Crisis in 2007a€“2008, Beijing has assessed that the 
United States is experiencing a slow but steady deterioration of its national power and 
international influence. Events of the past 12 months have consolidated this consensusa€!. Since 
the founding of the Peoplea€™ s Republic of
China in 1949, Chinaa€™ s leaders have looked at the United States with a complex and shifting 
mixture of fear, admiration, and hostilitya€!. The Global Financial Crisis in 2007a€“2008 was an 
inflection point, with a pronounced consolidation of the Precapitalist instabilitya€D narrative in 
policymaking and intellectual circles. At the same time, it gave rise to the view that Chinaa€™ s 
own domestic institutional and political
system possessed significant advantages relative to Western democracya€!. Beijinga€™ s American 
Narrative. The United StatesP™ democracy and its political system have stopped functioning. The 
United StatesP™ conception of Preuniversal valuesPD only maintained global appeal because they were 
backed by U.S. power. As U.S. strength wanes, so too will the values it promotes. The world is no 
longer looking to the
United States for global leadership; the world is moving toward multipolarity; and the East is 
rising, the West is decliningP!

LINK: <https://opensource.csis.org/features/beijing-narrative-us-decline/>

700,000 total COVID-19 deaths so far in America suggests between 70 and 140 million total cases:

NIH: COVIDd€“19 Prevalence far Exceeded Early [Confirmed] Pandemic Cases: P'Researchers estimate 
nearly 17 million undiagnosed cases in the U.S. by mid-July 2020P!. During spring and summer of 
2020P! for every diagnosed COVIDP“19 caseP! there were 4.8 undiagnosed cases, representing an 
additional 16.8 million cases by July aloneP!. Article: Undiagnosed SARS-CoVP“2 Seropositivity in 
the United States
During the First Six Months of the Pandemic). 2021. Science Translational Medicine. DOI: 
10.1126/scitranslmed.abh3826P!

LINK: 
<https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/nih-study-suggests-covid-19-prevalence-far-exceeded-e
arly-pandemic-cases>

It would be good if this worked, but it is not looking good for it, in which case it would be very 
bad if it crowds out effective treatments, like vaccination:

Yuani M Roman & al.: Ivermectin for the Treatment of COVIDd€“19: A Systematic Review & 
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials: P'Published and preprint randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) assessing IVM effects on C0VIDP“19 adult patients were searched until March 22,2021 
in five engines. Primary outcomes were all-cause mortality, length of stay (LOS), and adverse 
events (AE)P!. Risk of bias (RoB) was
evaluated using Cochrane RoB 2A-0 toolP!. Controls were standard of care [SOC] in five RCTs and 
placebo in five RCTsP!. In comparison to SOC or placebo, IVM did not reduce all-cause mortality, 
length of stay or viral clearance in RCTs in COVIDP“19 patients with mostly mild disease. IVM did 
not have an effect on AEs or severe AEs. IVM is not a viable option to treat COVIDP“19 patientsP!

LINK: <https://academic.oup.eom/cid/advance-article/doi/10.1093/cid/ciab591/6310839>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisP! weblog-like newsletterP! here:

Subscribe now

ThereP™ s a free email list. ThereP™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

