Subscribe now

The French Government, after requesting the armistice, has now full knowledge of the conditions 
dictated by the enemy.

As a result, the French Army, Naval and Air Forces would be completely discharged, our weapons laid 
down, the French territory occupied and the French Government under the control of Germany and 
Italy.
One can say that this armistice would not only result in capitulation but also in slavery.

Share

However, a large number of French people do not accept the capitulation or the enslavement for 
reasons that are called honor, common sense and the higher interest of the Nation:

I am talking about honor! Indeed, France is committed to not laying down its weapons unless its 
allies agree to do so. As long as its allies continue fighting, our government does not have the 
right to capitulate. The Polish Government, the Norwegian Government, the Belgian Government, the 
Dutch Government, as well as the Government of Luxemburg, although evicted from their own 
countries, have understood their duty.

I am appealing to your common sense! It is absurd to consider the fight as over. Yes, we have been 
heavily defeated. A bad military system, the mistakes made in conducting the operations, the 
government's spirit of abandon have all made us lose the Battle of France. But we still have a 
large Empire, an intact fleet, a lot of gold. We still have allies with immense resources who 
dominate the oceans. We still have the gigantic potential of the American industry. The
same war conditions which led to our defeat by 5,000 aircraft and 6,000 tanks can, tomorrow, lead 
to victory with 20,000 tanks and 20,000 aircraft.

I am talking about the higher interest of our Nation! Because this war is not a war between France 
andGermany that can be decided by a battle. It is a world war. Nobody can predict if the countries 
that have taken a neutral stand, will do so tomorrow, nor can one predict if Germanya€™ s allies 
will remain forever its allies. If the forces of freedom finally prevail over those of slavery, 
what would be the fate of a France which submitted to the enemy?
Honor, common sense, and the superior interest of the Nation command to all the free French to 
continue fighting wherever they are and however they can.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

I, General de Gaulle, am starting this national task here in England.

I invite all French soldiers of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, I invite the engineers and 
workers specialized in armament that are on British soil or could go there, to join me.
I invite the leaders, the soldiers, the sailors, the pilots of the French Army, Navy and Air Force, 
wherever they may be, to get in touch with me.


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

I, General de Gaulle, am starting this national task here in England.

I invite all French soldiers of the Army, the Navy and the Air Force, I invite the engineers and 
workers specialized in armament that are on British soil or could go there, to join me.
I invite the leaders, the soldiers, the sailors, the pilots of the French Army, Navy and Air Force, 
wherever they may be, to get in touch with me.

I invite all the French who want to remain free to listen to me and to follow me. Long live a free 
and independent France!

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

