Subscribe now

First:

Third dosesa€”hell, first dosesa€”are in short supply worldwide. Masks and avoiding crowding 
together in effective batcaves are not in short supply worldwide. So let me second Claudia on this: 
there is no either/or tradeoff here.

To say that we should focus on vaccines a€oeinstead ofa€D masks and social distancing and other 
extremely cheap and easy non-pharmaceutical measures to deal with the fact that there are three 
days during which you are infectious before you know you area€”well, the a€ceeither/ora€D in place 
of a€oeboth/anda€n is something I find hard to interpret except as a form of two-sided affinity 
fraud. Suppose you, on the one hand, dona€™t want to come across as an anti-science COVID denialist 
who has unmoored himself from reality. Suppose you, on the other hand, dona€™t want to come across 
as an enemy of
human liberty and a servant of the TOTAL STATE. Pro-vaccine and anti-mask is a position you might 
come up with.

At least it is better than anti-vaccine and pro-horse dewormer:

Claudia Sahm: a€~Tyler Cowen: a€oel say it is third doses we should be doubling down on, not 
masksa€! emerging science on third doses is much stronger, and most countries have been dropping 
the ball on that one.a€oe I dona€™ t understand the either/or on mask vs vaccines debates. I 
absolutely, positively think we should vaccinate the world, and I would drop all the intellectual 
property protections on the vaccine to get mass production in developing countriesa€!. One thing I 
think about is the social signaling value of masks. Covid is a collective problem that the United 
States and
other vaccine-access-rich countries have turned into an individual choice battle (again, thanks a 
lot to libertarians for banning the word a€Dsocietya€ce). Impossible to know who is vaxxed, so I 
take comfort when I walk into the grocery store and people are masked. I live in a high vax area 
and masks are not mandatory, to me masks say a€DI care about you too." makes me feel better. 
ANYTHING that makes us feel better is a godsenda€!. PSa€! Tyler has come a long way from asking 
what epidemiologistsa€™ GRE scores were, see, he has emotions too, and Easter Sunday 2020 (really
that was the day he chose to blast them) was an emotional time for all of usa€!

LINK:

Claudia Sahm @Claudia Sahm

"I say it is third doses we should be doubling down on, not mask ... emerging science on third 
doses is much stronger, and most countries have been dropping the ball on that one." @tylercowen I 
don't understand the either/or on mask vs vaccines debates.



marginalrevolution .comAn update on the mask debate - Marginal REVOLUTION! am long since tired of 
this debate, and I see that a lot of people are not joining it in the best of faith. I can pass 
along a few updates, namely this study, with some critical commentary attached. And here is more on 
the Bangladeshi mask RCT. With more data transparency, it does [a€!]
1:22 PM r™ Nov 28,2021

Share

One Picture:

Overall average    Average of heavily Biden counties
Average of heavily Trump counties


100

VACCINATIONS

250

DEATHS


Very Briefly Noted:

• Wikipedia: Panic of1837 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panic_of_ 1837>

•  Peter Hotez: a€™ Vaccine researcher Peter Hotez is deeply troubled, a winter surge/omicron 
brewing a€oela€™ m not trying to change Republican or far-right thinking,a€D he says a€oela€™ m 
trying to say a€~The anti-science doesna€™ t belong; it doesna€™ t fit. Just stop it and save 
livesa€™ a€Da€!


+ Overall average + Average of heavily Biden counties

+ Average of heavily Trump counties

VACCINATIONS                          DEATHS

% vote for Trump                     % vote for Trump

npr.orgPro-Trump counties now have far higher COVID death rates. Misinformation is to blameAn 
analysis by NPR shows that since the vaccine rollout, counties that voted heavily for Donald Trump 
have had more than twice the COVID mortality rates of those that voted for Joe Biden.
1:28 PMr™ Dec 5,2021

5,859Likes2,009Retweets


• Eric Topol: a€™ Omicrond€™ s doubling time in Gauteng exceeds the prior variants of concern, but 
the question as to whether in can displace Delta as the dominant variant there and globally 
loomsa€! <https://t.co/cMPX6RvuRR>

Eric Topol @EricTopol

Omicron's doubling time in Gauteng exceeds the prior variants of concern, but the question as to 
whether in can displace Delta as the dominant variant there and globally looms 
thelancet.com/iournals/lancea€! @TheLancet

Figure: SARS-CoV-2 cases in first, second, third, and fourth waves, Gauteng Province of South 
Africa

2:04 PM r™ Dec 3,2021

541 Likes 180Retweets

• Matthew Yglesias: Omicron Is a Reminder of How Little Wea€™ re Doing on Pandemic Prevention'. 
a€~Our science is impressive a€” our investments in logistics and manufacturing capacity much less 
soa€!


Slow Boring

Omicron is a reminder of how little we're doing on pandemic prevention

In January of 2021, the Bipartisan Commission on Biodefense issued a proposal for an ambitious 
Apollo Program for Biodefense. The Biden administration largely embraced this vision and released a 
call for a $65 billion pandemic prevention initiative, but that turned into a $30 billion budget 
request as part of the original White House version of the Build Back Better proposal, which 
dwindled to aa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 99 likes A- 135 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

•  John Ganz: The Political Economy of Reaction'. a€~Being involved in some public outrage is a 
very quick and effective form of publicitya€!. Often these stances involve a sort of cant or 
a€oewhiny heroisma€D to borrow a wonderful phrase from Fritz Sterna€™ s The Politics of Cultural 
Despair^}. This connection between journalism, theatricality, and cultural politics feels very 
familiar to me from reading about the 19th and 20th centurya€!


The Political Economy of Reaction

a€oeTheories and schools, like microbes and globules, devour each other and by their struggle 
ensure the continuing of life.a€Da€’’Marcel Proust, Sodom and Gomorrah a€oeLiterary men exist not 
by the preservation, but by the destruction of their own species.a€Da€’’William Hazlitta€!
Read more


The Political Economy of Reaction

a€oeTheories and schools, like microbes and globules, devour each other and by their struggle 
ensure the continuing of life.a€Da€’’Marcel Proust, Sodom and Gomorrah a€ceLiterary men exist not 
by the preservation, but by the destruction of their own species.a€Da€’’William Hazlitta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 32 likes A- 14 comments A- John Ganz

Paragraphs:

Wolfgang Keller & Carol Shine: Modernisation & Chinaa€™ s a€~Century of Humiliation^™: a€~China 
end[ed] centuries of relative isolationa€! [when forced to open] open dozens of a€~treaty portsa€™ 
to Western tradersa€L [This] shifted the focus of capital markets from inland areas to the coasta€! 
increased the number of banks, firm investment, as well as the adoption of steam engines and 
industrial machinery, and significantly lowered local interest ratesa€!. Western intervention in 
the 19th century had a substantial role in creating Chinaa€™ s economy today. Offering the year 
1842 as the turning point
that explains the Chinese economy we see today pre-dates 1921 (foundation of the Communist Party of 
China), 1949 (foundation of Peoplea€™ s Republic of China), and 1978 (beginning of market reforms). 
The development of China was not simply propelled by its own prea€“1800 history, or by posta€“1978 
reforms. The nearly 100 years of semi-colonisation have shaped Chinaa€™ s economy today as one 
focused on the coastal areasa€!

LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/modernisation-and-china-s-century-humiliation>

Will McLean (2008): A Commonplace Book: Buying Power of 14th Century Money'. a€~What was 14th 
century money worth in todaya€™ s dollars? Thata€™ s tricky, because it depends on what you were 
buying. In the second half of the 14th century, a pound sterling would: Support the lifestyle of a 
single peasant laborer for half a year, or that of a knight for a week. Or buy: Three changes of 
clothing for a teenage page (underclothes not included) or Twelve pounds of sugar or A carthorse or 
Two cows or An inexpensive bible or ten ordinary books or Rent a craftsmana€™ s townhouse for a 
year or Hire a servant
for six months. It should be obvious from the above list that the conversion rate depends a great 
deal on what you buy. A husbandman or yeoman servant spent most of his budget on food and clothing, 
which have become relatively cheap since the industrial revolution. For that basket of goods, a 
pound sterling might buy $500 worth of goods today. On the other hand, a knight or noble might 
spend a quarter of his income on servants, and much of the rest on handmade luxury goods, things 
that were relatively cheap then and expensive today. For that bundle of goods, a pound might buy 
$1,800 worth of goods todaya€!

LINK: <http://willscommonplacebook.blogspot.eom/2008/07/buving-power-of-14th-centurv-monev.html>

Philippe Lemoine: Population Structure & Transmission: a€~If the population can be divided into 
networks of quasi-homogeneous mixing populations that are internally well-connected but only 
loosely connected to each other, the effective reproduction number can undergo large fluctuations 
even in the absence of behavioral changesa€!. [This] could explain several phenomena beyond the 
cyclical nature of the pandemic and the disconnect between transmission and behaviora€”why the 
transmission advantage of variants is so variable, why waves are correlated across regions, why 
even places with a high
prevalence of immunity can experience large wavesa€”that are difficult to explain within the 
traditional modeling frameworka€!. In the presence of complex population structure, the methods 
that have been used to estimate the impact of non-pharmaceutical interventions are totally 
unreliablea€!. We should try to find data about the characteristics of the networks on which the 
virus is spreading and make sure that we have such data when the next pandemic hits so that 
modeling can properly take population structure into accounta€!

LINK: 
<https://cspicenter.org/blog/waronscience/have-we-been-thinking-about-the-pandemic-wrong-the-effect-
of-population-structure-on-transmission/>

Robert Pleasants (1785): To George Washington: a€~It seems highly probable to me, that thy example 
& influence at this time, towards a general emancipation, would be as productive of real happiness 
to mankind, as thy Sword may have been: I can but wish therefore, that thou may not loose the 
opertunity of Crowning the great Actions of thy Life, with the sattisfaction of, a€oedoing to 
Others as thou would (in the like Situation) be done by,a€D and finally transmit to future ages a 
Character, equally famous for thy Christian Virtues, as thy worldly achievements: For 
notwithstanding thou art now receiving the
tribute of praise from a grateful people, the time is coming when all actions will be weighed in an 
equal ballance, and undergo an impartial examination; how inconsistant then will it appear to 
posterity, should it be recorded, that the Great General Washington, without fee or reward, had 
commanded the united forces of America, and at the expence of much Blood & treasure been 
instrumental in relieving those States from Tyranny & oppression: Yet after all had so far 
countinanced those Evils, as to keep a number of People in absolute Slavery, who were by nature 
equally entitled to freedom as himself. O Remember I
beseech thee that a€oeGod will not be mocked,a€D and is still requiring from each of us, to, a€oedo 
justly, love mercy and walk humbly before him. a€ dad

LINK: <https://founders .archives .gov/documents/Washington/04-03-02-0384>

Chad Orzel: How Notable Is Science?: a€~The New York Times a€oeNotable Booksa€d lista€!. The 
non-fictiona€! fifty booksa€! about sciencea€! three: Lifea€™s Edge bya€! Carl Zimmer, Kindred by 
Rebecca Wragg Sykes, and The Extended Mind by Annie Murphy Paul. Thata€™ s actually pretty good, by 
NYT Notable Books standardsa€!. [But] 14 of the 50 non-fiction titles are tagged by the Times as 
Memoirsa€” are unhappy childhoods really 4.7 times more notable than the entirety of science?a€!
LINK:

Counting Atoms

How Notable Is Science?

Every year, it seems like the year-end signifiersa€” Christmas decorations in stores, colorful cups 
at Starbucks, grating holiday musica€” show up a few days earlier. In keeping with that, the New 
York Times a€oeNotable Booksa€D list has dropped. I think of this as a late December thing, but I 
guess ita€™ s pre-Thanksgiving nowa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 1 comment A- Chad Orzel
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

