Subscribe now

First:

Jason Zweig soft peddles the idiocy of Kevin Hassett and James Glassman on the 18 years-late Dow 
36000 day. Buy-and-hold is a good investment strategy for the U.S. stock market. The strategy 
Hassett and Glassman were pushinga€’’borrow money, leverage up, and go highly long stocks near the 
peak of a valuation-ratio bubblea€”led to bankruptcy in 2000 for anyone who acted on the 
recommendations of Dow 36000. Jason here is much kinder than I would
have been:

Jason Zweig: Dow Crosses 36000a€” Making a Bookd€™ s Prediction Just Two Decades Late’. a€~This 
week, the book a€oeDow 36,000a€D by James Glassman and Kevin Hassett turned out to be prophetic. 
The Dow Jones Industrial Average should hit that mark a€oevery quickly,a€D a€oeimmediately,a€n even 
a€oetoday,a€n the book had proclaimed. aCceThe rational time frame is this afternoon,a€D wrote 
Messrs. Glassman
and Hassett, although they conceded it might take a€ce three to five years.a€D The book was 
published Oct. 1,1999, when the Dow closed at 10273. More than 22 years later, the index very 
briefly crossed the mark at 9:42 a.m. on Monday, in a moment barely noticed by investors. The 
booka€™ s prediction finally came truea€!. On Jan. 17,2012, with the Dow at 12482 and used copies 
of a€oeDow 36,000a€D selling around that time
for as little as one penny, a reviewer using the pseudonym a€ceAnnyong Bluth,a€D a character from 
the television comedy a€oeArrested Development,a€D gave the book a five-star review on Amazon.com. 
It wasna€™ t what most people would consider positive, though. a€oel used the pages of this book to 
line the base of our two-month-old Rottweiler puppya€™ s cage,a€D the reviewer wrote. a€oel was 
struck by the moisture and
odor-absorbing power of its pages. These super-absorbent sheets really took to canine urine and 
feces. And, at 1 penny for 294 pages, Dow 36,000 was such a steal! Highly recommended !a€da€ I As 
for a€oeDow 36,000 ,a€D after years of insisting that the booka€™ s thesis was correct, Mr. 
Glassman finally wrote in an opinion piece in the Journal in February 2011: a€oel was wrong. a€D 
Saying the world had become a€oea riskier
placea€D  since 1999, Mr. Glassman urged investors to scale back their stock holdings. The Dow 
closed at 12068.50 that day. Since then, the Dow has tripleda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.wsj.com/articles/dow-jones-36000-stock-market-predictions-glassman-hassett-1163482365Q>
What is Kevin Hassett saying today, on Dow 36,000 day? In my inbox:

In a wide-ranging interview with -Washington Post Live_ today, author Kevin Hassett discussed his 
warning that high inflation will drive the U.S. economy into a recession and his new book, The 
Drift: Stopping Americaa€™ s Slide Toward Socialism. Hassett is a former senior adviser and chair 
of the Council of Economic Advisers under President Donald Trumpa€!. a€~The fact is that socialism 
doesna€™t worka€™: a€oeThe fact is
that socialism doesna€™t work. And when you pursue strategies other than profit maximization, then 
you dona€™ t maximize productivity, you dona€™t maximize wagesa€! Even the Scandinavians when they 
move to the U.S., their standard of living skyrockets ,a€D Hassett says income inequality 
a€~dropped sharplya€™ while President Trump was in office: a€oeDonald Trump comes in and pursues 
very capitalist policiesa€! and
those policies had a massive positive effect on a€~social justice.a€™ You know, the number of 
people living in poverty dropped by six milliona€! Income inequality skyrocketed before President 
Trump came to office, and dropped sharply when he was in office,a€D Hassett on how to help the 
middle class: a€oel think the best way to help the middle class is the way we did it during the 
Trump administration which is to encourage
businesses to expand, to cut corporate taxes so that therea€™ s a big increase in capital 
formation, that increases productivity, that drives wages upa€!

Hassett knows that there was no big increase in capital formation after the Trump-Ryan-McConnell 
corporate income tax cut he helped design. The big increases in capital formation came (a) under 
Clinton due to smart policies, and (b) under Obama as the economy recovered from the Great 
Recession that grew out of policies and circumstances that took place on George W. Busha€™ s watch. 
The red arrow shows the effect on capital formation of Trump-Ryan-
McConnell: none. Hassett knows that. But his Washington Post Live interviewers didna€™ t know and 
didna€™ t care to learn:


FRED^

0.18

— Real Gross Private Domestic Investment/Real Potential Gross Domestic
Product/1.06



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Jason Furman & Wilson Powell III: Worker Bargaining Power Has Been No Match For High Inflation'. 
a€~Real compensation growth has been below trend in all sectors apart from leisure and 
hospitalitya€! 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/worker-bargaining-power-has-been-no-match
-high-inflation>

•  Gideon Rachman: The Moment of Truth Over Taiwan Is Getting Closer: a€~The US and China are 
engaged in a dangerous game of military poker over the future of the islanda€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/9833d499-07ce-40eb-84e7-436Q23c6eb8b>

• Rajiv Sethi: Notes on a Remarkable Finding from Finlandn: a€~the understanding of meritocracy in 
public discourse is terribly impoverished. If one wire to design a truly meritocratic policy, it 
could well have features that resemble the pursuit of representation targets. Meritocratic policies 
will not, in general, involve the application of a common score threshold across all candidatesa€!
Imperfect Information

Notes on a Remarkable Finding from Finland

I recently came across a paper by Ursina Schaede and Ville Mankki that contains a fascinating 
empirical finding with major implications for the way in which we think about meritocracy. The 
paper examines the long run effects on students of a change in the manner in which their teachers 
were selected into a graduate program. Finland is well known for hava€!

Read more

a year ago A- Rajiv Sethi

Paragraphs:

Michael Pettis: Chinaa€™ s Economy Needs Institutional Reform Rather Than Additional Capital 
Deepening: a€~Consider European countries after 1918 or Europe and Japan after 1945a€! highly 
advanced economies that had been devastated by war and thrown into poverty, but because their 
institutions remained largely intact, they were nonetheless able to grow extremely quicklya€!. They 
hada€! very high Hirschman levelsa€!. But after many years of
spectacular growth driven by capital deepening (in large part restoring the infrastructure and 
manufacturing capacity that had been wrecked by war), each of these countries reached that point 
again, after which their growth rates slowed rapidly. Their actual levels of investment had 
a€oecaught upa€D not to the capital frontier set by the United States but rather to the Hirschman 
levels consistent with their own domestic institutions. The same has been true of
China.  When the reform era began in the late 1970s, the country had emerged from five decades of 
anti-Japanese war, civil war, and Maoism that had left it terribly underinvesteda€’’relative not to 
the capital frontier set by the United States, but rather, more meaningfully, to a Hirschman level 
of investment that its own institutions allowed it to absorb productivelya€!. In Chinaa€™ s case, 
the fastest way to develop in the 1980s and 1990s was to increase capital
deepening as rapidly as possible. Buta€! it was always just a matter of time before it reached its 
own Hirschman levela€!. Being further behind economically does not increase the probability of 
catch-up except in specific cases, usually in cases where, for historical reasons (like war, 
revolution, political circumstances, or incompetence), a countrya€™ s level of investment has 
fallen far behind its Hirschman level, which is itself determined by the development
level                                                                                               
                                                                                                    
              of the countrya€™ s institutions. The so-called middle income trap is, in my opinion, 
a recognition of this facta€!. What China really needs is a transformation of its institutions in a 
direction that some might argue is very different from the direction it is currently followinga€!

LINK: <https://carnegieendowment.org/chinafinancialmarkets/82362>

Don Kalb: HAU Not: For David Graeber & the Anthropological Precariate: a€~I told my students that 
O[pen ]A[ccess] in academia might perhaps be a possibility, buta€! more likelya€! endless 
exploitation of precarious academics on every level. And that it would serve to fortify the 
prestige economies of the old Ivy Leaguea€ “Oxbridge axisa€!. It was an unsustainable proposition 
to run a journal without money, unless you could trade on old prestige and
turn that into the fictitious accumulation of a pyramid scheme for a few yeara€!

LINK: 
<http://www.focaalblog.eom/2018/06/26/don-kalb-hau-not-for-david-graeber-and-the-anthropological-pre
cariate./>

Enrique Martino: The Bullshit Hit Job: David Graeber & the Hau a€ceCoupd€n a€~Analytical summary of 
93 pages of email correspondence between David Graeber, Ilana Gershon, Sarah Green, one postdoc and 
one graduate student, in addition to messages from Marshall Sahlins, Marilyn Strathern, Sean Dowdy 
and members of the anthropology departments of SOAS and Stanford, from November 11 to December 
25,2017, regarding Giovanni da Col and
HAUa€l

LINK: 
<https://eprints.ucm.eS/id/eprint/60749/l/Memorandum,%20DAVID%20GRAEBER%20AND%20THE%20HAU%20COUP,%20
Martino,%20Mav%202020%20(l).pdf>

Gregori GalofrA©-VilA & al.: Austerity & the Rise of the Nazi Party : a€~ Areas more affected by 
austerity (spending cuts and tax increases) had relatively higher vote shares for the Nazi 
Partya€!. Localities with relatively high austerity experienced relatively high sufferinga€!. Our 
findings are robust to a range of specifications including an instrumental variable strategy and a 
border-pair policy discontinuity designa€!
LINK: 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-economic-historv/article/austeritv-and-the-rise-
of-the-nazi-partv/7FBlBC0E727F47DC790A23D2A4B70961>

Alberto Alesina & al.: a€~0n the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough: a€™ Traditional 
agricultural practices influenced the historical gender division of labor and the evolution and 
persistence of gender normsa€!. Descendants of societies that traditionally practiced plough 
agriculture, today have lower rates of female participation in the workplace, in politics, and in 
entrepreneurial activities, as well as a greater prevalence of attitudes favoring
gender inequality. We identifya€! by exploiting variation in the historical geo-climatic 
suitability of the environment for growing crops that differentially benefited from the adoption of 
the plougha€!. To isolate the importance of cultural transmission as a mechanism, we examine female 
labor force participation of second-generation immigrants living within the USa€!

LINK: 
<https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/alesina/files/ontheoriginsofgenderroleswomenandtheplough.pdf>

Gillian Brunet: Stimulus on the Home Front: The State-Level Effects of WWII Spending: a€~I use 
newly-digitized contract data on U.S. war production spendinga€!. I estimate a local fiscal 
multiplier of 0.25, implying an aggregate multiplier of roughly 0.25 to 0.3. Employment effects are 
commensurately smalla€!. Two features of the wartime economy significantly reduced the stimulative 
effect of wartime spending. Conversion from civilian manufacturing to
war production reduced the direct shock to economic activity because war production directly 
displaced civilian manufacturing. Saving and taxes account for 75% of the income generated by war 
spending, implying that the add-on effects from increased consumption were minimala€!

LINK: <https://berkeley.app .box .com/v/JMP-Brunet-current>
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Gregori GalofrA©-VilA & al.: Austerity & the Rise of the Nazi Party : a€~ Areas more affected by 
austerity (spending cuts and tax increases) had relatively higher vote shares for the Nazi 
Partya€!. Localities with relatively high austerity experienced relatively high sufferinga€!. Our 
findings are robust to a range of specifications including an instrumental variable strategy and a 
border-pair policy discontinuity designa€!
LINK: 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/journal-of-economic-historv/article/austerity-and-the-rise-
of-the-nazi-party/7FBlBC0E727F47DC790A23D2A4B70961>

Alberto Alesina & al.: a€~0n the Origins of Gender Roles: Women and the Plough: a€™ Traditional 
agricultural practices influenced the historical gender division of labor and the evolution and 
persistence of gender normsa€!. Descendants of societies that traditionally practiced plough 
agriculture, today have lower rates of female participation in the workplace, in politics, and in 
entrepreneurial activities, as well as a greater prevalence of attitudes favoring
gender inequality. We identifya€! by exploiting variation in the historical geo-climatic 
suitability of the environment for growing crops that differentially benefited from the adoption of 
the plougha€!. To isolate the importance of cultural transmission as a mechanism, we examine female 
labor force participation of second-generation immigrants living within the USa€!

LINK: 
<https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/alesina/files/ontheoriginsofgenderroleswomenandtheplough.pdf>

Gillian Brunet: Stimulus on the Home Front: The State-Level Effects of WWII Spending: a€~I use 
newly-digitized contract data on U.S. war production spendinga€!. I estimate a local fiscal 
multiplier of 0.25, implying an aggregate multiplier of roughly 0.25 to 0.3. Employment effects are 
commensurately smalla€!. Two features of the wartime economy significantly reduced the stimulative 
effect of wartime spending. Conversion from civilian manufacturing to
war production reduced the direct shock to economic activity because war production directly 
displaced civilian manufacturing. Saving and taxes account for 75% of the income generated by war 
spending, implying that the add-on effects from increased consumption were minimala€!

LINK: <https://berkeley.app .box.com/v/JMP-Brunet-current>
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

