I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please the button below. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of 
supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

One Audio:

Martin Wolf: How to Change Onea€™ s Mind <https://www.ft.com/content/44f526b2-8181 
-44b8-86d7-c50527b 172ae>
Share


One Image:

Welcome to another edition of Kedrosky: Daily Graphs. Here are today's entries:

Estimates of the real price of Dutch books. 1460-1800 (1460/74 • 100) - van Zanden (2009)-


0 11 i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i 11 i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i i 
i
1460 1485 1510 1535 1560 1585 1610 1635 1660 1685 1710 1735 1760 1785

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Izabella Kaminska: The Blind Spot <https: //the-blindspot ,com/about-us/>

• Austin Carr: Googlea€™ s ChromeOS Flex Aims to Bring New Life to Old Computers: a€~Google is 
trying to resurrect old Macs and PCs with new softwarea€!. Flex is a cloud-centric platform mostly 
designed for web apps like Gmail and Google Docsa€! help millions of dying PCs adapt to the modern 
worlda€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-07-19/google-s-chromeos-flex-aims-to-bring-new-hfe-
to-old-computers?
cmpid=BBD071922 TECH>

•  Christopher Condon: Supply Chain Latest: Yellen Pitches Friend-Shoring to Counter China: a€~As 
she hammers away at a plan to limit Russiaa€™ s oil revenue, US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen 
also found time during a three-stop East Asian tour to promote the Biden administration^™ s 
approach to reshaping global supply chainsa€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/newsletters/2022-07-19/supplv-chain-latest-vellen-pitches-friend-
shoring-to-counter-china?cmpid=BBD071922 TRADE>

•  Duncan Black: The Sensible Hustle: a€~a€oeWe all agree on these goals, BUTa€!a€D On policy ita€™ 
s always, a€oedona€™ t do it like this, do it like that.a€D On climate change specifically I can 
never remember if the Sensible solution is a cap-n-trade, a carbon tax, or regulation, because we 
seem to cycle through those about every 3 months or so. Propose carrots, they demand sticks as the 
carrots are too expensive, propose sticks, they say the
sticks are politically unpopular or will DESTROY BIDNESS. We dona€™ t have to listen to these 
people or engage with them as if they are acting in good faith. They are nota€! 
<https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/07/the-sensible-hustle.html>

•  David Wallace-Wells: Endemic CovidaC “19 Is Beginning to Look Pretty Brutal: a€~100,000 annual 
deaths may be as good as it getsa€! LINK: 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nvtimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit 
dww._2022072Q&instance_id=67123&nl=david-wallace-wells&productCode=DWW&regi_id=64675225&segment 
id=99028&te=l&uri=nyt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2F44bc247e-a8bb-5c5b-bcff-
19b82a2ece81&user id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

• Yuriy Gorodnichenko, Anastassia Fedyk, & Ilona Sologoub: How to Organize Reconstruction Aid for 
Post-War 
Ukrame<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/planning-reconstruction-of-ukraine-by-vuriv-goro
dnichenko-et-al-2022-07>

• Heebie Jeebie: Slouching Towards Utopia: Reprise 
<http://www.unfogged.com/archives/week_2022_07_l7.html#018059>

• Michael R. Strain: Cap RussiaaC™s Oil Price Now: a€~US Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen has 
proposeda€! allow[ing] Russia to continue exporting oil, but impose a cap on the price Russia can 
charge. This would help keep a lid on oil prices while ensuring that the US and its allies are not 
funding Russiaa€™ s ongoing aggression against Ukrainea€! 
<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentarv/russia-oil-price-cap-yellen-plan-bv-michael-r-
strain-2Q22-Q7>

•  Robert J. Shapiro: The Case for Bill Clintona€™ s Economic Record: a€~Clinton delivered the 
strongest economy of the past half century and helped working familiesa€! 
<https://washingtonmonthlv.com/2022/07/21/the-case-for-bill-clintons-economic-record/>

Twitter & Stack:

• Misha David Chellam: Movement vs. Abundance Progressives

MODERN

PAWFR


Movement vs. Abundance Progressives

Close your eyes and imagine the California you want to live in. Would it have a lower cost of 
housing and energy? More opportunity for people to earn middle class wages and have stable jobs? 
Better quality of life, including cleaner air and safer streetsa€l
Read more

7 months ago A- 16 likes A- 4 comments A- Misha David Chellam

• Eric Topol: The Pandemic & the Boiling Frog Story

Ground Truths

The pandemic and the boiling frog story

The SARS-CoV-2 variants successively keep finding new and repeat hosts, now more efficiently than 
they did before, despite so many prior infections, vaccinations, and boosters. Reinfections with 
BA.5, while poorly tracked, are likely occurring at the highest frequency in the pandemic, whereas 
through the Delta variant wave the chance was less than 1 in a€!
Read more

7 months ago A- Eric Topol

AJs:

When the economics profession is unified, it can have an impact: ideas that essentially all 
professional PhD economists say are nonsense have a very hard time getting political and policy 
traction. But one of the lessons of the days since the start of the global financial crisis that 
caused the Great Recession back in 2007 is this: It requires only a relatively small number of 
incompetent or simply grifting professional Ph.D. economists to provide running room for all


Noah Smith: Nutty Macroeconomic Theories Will Ruin Your Countrya€™ s Economy: Turkey & 
Neo-Fisherism\ a€~Neo-Fi sheri sma€! its most notable proponent is John Cochrane, formerly of the 
University of Chicago, now of the (aptly named) Hoover Institution^! originally invented by 
Narayana Kocherlakota (who later discarded the idea) and Steve Williamson. The basic ideaa€! is 
that in the long run, high interest rates raise
inflation and low interest rates reduce inflationa€! exactly counter to conventional wisdoma€!. We 
think that if you raise interest rates, inflation goes down, as it did in the 1980sa€!. But no, say 
the Neo-Fisherians, you have to wait for the long term. In the long term, they say, keeping 
interest rates high will cause inflation at first to dip but then to recover to an even higher 
level than it was before!a€! In 2014,1 got a call from a reporter in
Turkeya€!. She told me she was interested because Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdogan and his 
administration had been advancing this idea, and were looking for support from economistsa€!.

Noahpinion

Turkey, you were doing so well!

In 2014,1 got a call from a reporter in Turkey. She wanted to talk about a blog post I had written, 
called a€oeThe Neo-Fisherite Rebelliona€D. In that post, I talked about a few macroeconomists who 
were toying with the idea that low interest rates a€” which most people think encourage higher 
inflation a€” might actuallya€!

Read more

a year ago A- 74 likes A- 34 comments A- Noah Smith

When inflation rose, Erdogan insisted on keeping rates low. As a result, inflation rose more, but 
Erdogan stayed the course. Now it looks as if the country is exploding upwards into 
hyper-inflationa€! exactly the kind of explosion that Neo-Fisherian theory assumes awaya€!. The 
ideaa€! is wrecking Turkeya€™ s economy nowa€!
LINK:

Noahpinion

Nutty macroeconomic theories will ruin your country's economy

In Herbert Hoovera€™ s memoirs, he discusses some very bad advice that he received from his 
Treasury secretary, Andrew Mellon, in the early days of the Great Depression. a€oeLiquidate labor, 
liquidate stocks, liquidate farmers, liquidate real estate,a€D Mellon reportedly thundered. a€oelt 
will purge the rottenness out of the system. High costs of living and high living will come down. 
People will work harder, live a more moral life. Values will be adjusted,
and enterprising people will pick up the wrecks from less competent peoplea€!

Read more

7 months ago A- 49 likes A- 31 comments A- Noah Smith

a€oeThe old world is dying, and the new struggles to be born; now is a time of monsters 
"a€’’Antonio Gramsci

Let me put it straight: Neoliberalism ought to have died no later than 2008, in the Global North at 
least. Failure to reinvigorate economic growth, hobbling governmentsa€™ ability to deal with 
rapidly-approaching wicked problems like global warming, and its extraordinary inequality-raising 
effect on the distribution of income should, when added to its role in causing and then 
accentuating the Great Recession, have placed it in the garbage can of history. Yet it
hangs on and it's possible successors appear considerably worse. Now why is this?:

Brian Ketterling: Neoliberalism Is Dying. What Comes Next?'. a€~[Gerstlea€™ s] The Rise and Fall of 
the Neoliberal Order first tacklesa€! the New Deal order, 1930a€“1970a€! New Deal liberalisma€™ s 
undoing: the Vietnam War, race, and an economic crisisa€! vexing to elites and the public alikea€!. 
Ronald Reagana€! built the neoliberal order; George H. W. Bush extended it; anda€! Bill Clinton 
consolidated ita€!. Sectors of
the public called for thingsa€! lower property taxes, deregulation, and the privatization of public 
goodsa€! in a racialized response to the civil rights movementa€!. Politicians like Reagan mined 
this discontent to great political effecta€!. Gobal modelsa€! the state-authoritarian capitalist 
modela€! neoliberalism retooleda€! ethno-nationalisma€!. None of these geopolitical arrangements 
will serve America or the world wella€!. The
interregnum before the emergence of the next political order will be messya€!

LINK: <https://washingtonmonthly.com/2022/06/20/neoliberalism-is-dying-what-comes-next/>


I confess I do not understand lawyers: Why do Elon Muska€™ s lawyers think it is good for their 
client for them to potentially annoy the Chancellor by working much too hard to make an untenable 
positio, appear tenable, on the surface, for a little while?:

Matt Levine: Elon Wants to Fight the Bots : a€~Oh Elon. In some parallel universe, Elon Muska€™ s 
dispute with Twitter Inc. is about how many bots there are on Twitter. In that universe, Twittera€™ 
s merger agreement with Musk contains a representation that no more than 5% of Twittera€™ s 
monetizable daily active users, or mDAUs, are bots, Muska€™ s obligation to close the merger is 
contingent on this representation being
true, and Musk has discovered that it is wrong. Therefore he is able to walk awaya€!. In our actual 
universe none of this is truea€!.

Now, even in the real world, the merger agreement does contain a representation that none of 
Twittera€™ s filings with the US Securities and Exchange Commission a€oecontained any untrue 
statement of a material fact.a€Ua€! Twittera€™ s SEC filings do mention botsa€!. Leta€™ s pick out 
the factual assertionsa€!.

• There are a€oefalse or spam accountsa€D on Twitter.

• Twitter reviews some sample accounts each month.

• It estimates, based on that review, that the bots (false or spam accounts) are fewer than 5% of 
mDAUs.

•  That estimate is based on the a€oeaverage of false or spam accounts in the samples.a€C That 
estimate, and the labeling of spam accounts, is subjective; Twitter a€oeapplied significant 
judgmenta€D to reach it.

• a€oeThe actual number of false or spam accounts could be higher than we have estimated.a€D

You could imagine how some of those statements could be false. If Twitter did not review any sample 
accountsa€”if it just made up the 5% number and put it in the filingsa€”then its SEC filings would 
be falsea€!

Muska€™ s lawyersaC lopposing Twittera€™ s motion to have a quick triala€!. This documenta€! exists 
in that alternate universe where Twitter promised that no more than 5% of its mDAUs are spam bots 
and Musk agreed to buy Twitter in reliance on that promise.a€!
LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2022-07-18/elon-wants-to-fight-the-bots#xj4y7vzkg>


Not just the low effective population size of the human race, but a not-stable female-to-male ratio 
of effective population size that does not seem to me to accord with a species that is 
substantially monogamous:

Patriarchy

High patriarchy—and men
take advantage:

•  Extinction of y-chromosome lineages

•  But even afterwards: patriarchy

•  Emancipation of women comes late: following
the political strategies of franchise and rights
extension, but happening a century or so later...

•  Women rarely have legal personality...

•  Childbed mortality: 1 in 7

•  Eating for two: 20 years

Males


•  Employment: textiles, gardening, in-home
production, other occupations with savable
state

Doug Jones: Toba?, or the Sperm Whale Effect?'. a€“74 thousand years ago, a big chunk of the island 
of Sumatra blew upa€! the biggest volcanic explosion in the past two million yearsa€! coincides 
with a shift back to glacial conditions, and it may be that therea€™ s a connectiona€!. Did Toba 
have an effect on human evolution? Somewhere between 100 and 50 thousand years ago, human 
populations went through a bottleneck:
modern humans are descended from just 1,000 to 10,000 breeding pairs from that period. Ita€™ s been 
argued that Toba wiped out the majority of Homo sapiens around at the time, leaving only a small 
group of survivors. But the evidence that Toba is responsible for the bottleneck is equivocala€!. 
We may not be looking at an external catastrophe wiping out most of humanity, and a few groups of 
survivors recovering. Instead, we may
be looking at a small population of our eventual ancestors expanding and outcompeting other 
populations, so that it was our ancestors, not a volcano, who made sure that most human beings 
alive 74,000 years ago didna€™t leave descendantsa€!. Human beings typically belong to tribes and 
ethnic groups defined by distinctive cultures, and cultural boundaries (including language 
boundaries) often act as barriers to interbreeding. Several
authors have suggested that this may make human beings unusually susceptible to population 
replacement via a€oecultural group selectiona€D and that this might account for humans having 
unusually low effective population size, as genes a€cehitchhikea€D along with expanding cultures. 
Interestingly, sperm whales, which live in populations defined by different song dialects (and 
other cultural differences) may show the same genetic
patterna€!

LINK: <https ://logarithmichistory.wordpress .com/2021/08/05/toba-or-the-sperm-whale-effect-6/>

I really would like Cozmo to finish this essay on how modern intellectuals are in a very different 
sociological relative position, then their predecessors before the age of mass literacy and mass 
communication:

Cosma Shalizi: Intellectuals'. a€~Intellectualsa€! interpret, and justify or condemn. They have 
nothing else to talk about. They must either support themselves in some way independent of their 
activity as intellectuals, or receive support for their opinionsa€! inherited family wealth, 
clerking, the learned professions, and teaching. Much of our intellectual heritage has been built 
by the idle sons of gentlemen, time-serving dynastic
bureaucrats, and schoolmastersa€!. How, though, might intellectuals persuade other people to 
support them for the sake of their opinions?a€! a€oeWe have in our possession certain books which 
contain information of the greatest importancea€!. To order onea€™ s life in accordance with them 
is certain to bring all good things; flouting them leads to the worst possible misery.a€D If you 
believe that, it becomes imperative to have
accurate copies of the books around, and somebody who can interpret them and apply them their 
lessonsa€!. What qualities make for succcess in an Interpreter of Written Authorities ?a€! 
Literacya€! knowledge of the accepted canona€! [and] of the tradition of commentarya€! skill in 
interpreting writing, particularly knowledge of the exact meanings of words, and sensitivity to 
their associations, connontations, and subtle shades of
importa€! eloquencea€! aptitude in applying interpretations to events and situationsa€! and arguing 
for the correctness of the application^ I belief: to persuade others, it helps to first persuade 
yourselfa€!. Such Interpreters naturally tended to organize into more or less formal clerical 
establishments^! at least from the classical eras, about a€“600 to a€“200, onwardsa€!. 
(Incidentally, why a canon?a€! The inherent implausibility of
many books containing the Answersa€! the limitations of manual book reproduction^! network 
externality .)a€! This venerable pattern has fallen, comparatively speaking, on hard timesa€!

LINK: <http://bactra.org/notebooks/intellectuals.html>

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

RAttheann


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please the button below. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of 
supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

