Subscribe now

CONDITION: The Benefits of Central Heating!

I went to a Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> panel at the SSHA Convention at the Palmer 
House in Chicago. It was 15F outside. I had the best possible discussants. And the video should be 
up in a couple of weeks.
A brief preview, in still images and words:

photo: Anne McCants

2022-11-19 Sa 14:00 PM -15:45 CST: Clark 3 (Floor 7); Palmer House, Chicago:

Simone Wegge: This is an exciting session. We're here to celebrate the birth of this book: 
Slouching Towards Utopia. We have the author here in person. We almost are without empty seats. 
This is fabulous. Our discussants today are Barry Eidlin from McGill, Emily Merchant from UC Davis, 
Jari Eloranta from the University of Helsinki, and myself. Wea€™re going to each get a chance to 
say something about Braea€™ s book. But first we're
going to ask Brad himself to tell us.

Brad DeLong: Thank you very much . One of the great things about having finally managed to get this 
book out has been to discover how many friends I have, and how many friends the book has, and how 
many friends economic history has, and how many people are interested in thinking and thinking hard 
about what we know about the long run shape of human economic history. What are the stories we 
should tell ourselves?
[AS PREPARED:]



DRAFT: Talk on a€oeGrand Narrativesa€D & a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia11

FOCUS: DRAFT: DeLong: SSHA Session: Introduction: What do we know about the very long-run shape of 
human economic history? We think that people became markedly less fit after the coming of 
agricultural I
Read more

3 months ago A- 6 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong
And let me stop there.

Simone Wegge: If one looks at the NBER working paper series, one sees Brad writing one entitled: 
The Shape of 20th Century Historya€’’perhaps that was one of the precursors of this book. And 
around that time in the year 2000, Paul Krugman wrote an opinion piece in The New York Times in 
which refers to Brad's book in progress.
So for getting it done, congratulations.

I still have the question of how the title cannot even change.

Brad DeLong: I could not think of a better one. I tried and tried. But you're William Butler Yeats 
is the best.

Simone Wegge: Slouching Towards Utopia made the New York Times bestseller list for nonfiction books 
in September, and their bestseller lists for books in business in the month of October. And then if 
you go to Amazon, you can see that this week, it was fifth in macroeconomics books on Amazon, and 
13th in economic history books,

Brad DeLong: Actually higher than fifth. The fifth rank includes three different versions of Ray 
Dalioa€!

Simone Wegge: Amazon also tells us that the reading age is 13 years old, and grade 11 and up.
I beg to differ.

I made use of the audio version. And there were many times when I had to rewind to make sure I had 
gotten Brad's point.

Let me describe the subject matter and the breadth of the book a little bit more. The breath of 
economic and political events it covers is wide ranging. The geographic range is also very 
widea€”he goes all over the world. It's very accessible to a very wide audience. There are no 
equations providing some complicated economic model. There's no tedious econometrics, nothing about 
instrumental variables, identification strategies, diff-in-diff
estimation, etc, etc. cetera, et cetera, et cetera, which would bore the non economists of the 
world. The writing engages the reader. Brad has striking stories to tell you. Every other page, he 
comes up with some fact of describe some interesting socio-economic relationship, or uses a turn of 
phrase that is clever, and adroit. And this all keeps the reader reading on and eager to get to the 
next pagea€!


Share

FOCUS: In Which I Quibble wiA34 Paul Krugman:

He has a very good case here. But I do not think it is as strong as he presents it, for there are 
huge things going on with safety premia as well. Thus there is much more going on, even in the long 
run, than fluctuations in real investment demand and in aggregate savings supply:

Paul Krugman: Why interest rates (probably) wona€™t stay high: a€~Herea€™ s the interest rate on 
10-year indexed bonds a€” bonds that are protected against inflation a€” since the 2000s:

— Market Yield on U.S. Treasury Securities at 10-Year Constant Maturity. Quoted on an Investment 
Basis.

Inflation-Indexed


•2

2004    2006    2006       2010       2012       2014       2016       2016       2020       2022

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (US) fred.stlouisfed.org

After a long period in which money was almost free (at least if you were the government), wea€™ re 
back up to rates close to those that prevailed before the 2008 financial crisis. But is the era of 
cheap money over?a€! Eventually, the boost to the economy from pandemic aid will fade away. And 
once that happens, wea€™ 11 probably be back where we were before the pandemic, with weak private 
investment demand holding interest rates down.
Why will investment demand be weak?a€! The accelerator effecta€!. Investment spending will only 
remain high if we expect rapid economic growth. And what we know now doesna€™t support that 
expectation^!. Why the slowdown? Demography indeed plays a rolea€!. Another important factor is 
that aforementioned midlife crisis in technologya€!. What all this suggests to me is that the era 
of cheap money is not, in fact, over. A few years
from now, wea€™ll probably be back to a situation in which too much saving is chasing too few 
investment opportunities...

Our 10-year inflation-protected Treasury, security, the TIPSa€”which is market tradersa€™ 
putting-their-money-where-their-mouth-is expectations of inflationa€”does not go back into the past 
millennium. But we can construct a very crude proxy for real Treasury long interest rates by 
subtracting the past yeara€™ s core inflation from the nominal 10-year Treasury rate. The two track 
each other well since 2004, save for the period immediately after the nadir of the Great
Recession, when bond traders wrongly expected inflation to rise with recovery, and except for the 
past year, when the rebound supply-chain and now Russian attack inflation also has taken bond 
traders by surprise:

10.0


7.5

Volcker
Disinflation


<u

OJ

Post-Volcker
Disinflation


Pre­
Inflation

10-Yr TIPS

10-Yr Treasury
1-Yr Past CPI
Inflation

1970              1980              1990              2000              2010              2020

Looking further back into history, we see:

1. A period before 1965, when the ex ante 10-year expected Treasury rate was about 2.5%.

2. The post-1965 inflation, when the past yeara€™ s inflation is really not a good proxy for what 
ex ante inflation expectations were, and it is hard to figure out what real long-term bond rates 
were.

3. The Volcker disinflation of highly elevated long-term real interest rates from 1981-1985.

4. The post-Volcker a€oeGreat Moderationa€D period, in which the ex ante 10-year expected Treasury 
rate was about 3.5%.

5. The post-2001 period of increasingly despressed real interest ratesa€’’either the global savings 
glut, secular stagnation, or the global safe asset shortage, depending on your theoretical model.

6. The return toward pre-2001 normalcy that we see right now.

But what if we want to look not at nominal-safe assetsa€”those that are useful as collateral and as 
safety anchorsa€”but at profit rates, at real rates of return on risky assets? The best long-term 
measure we have is the earnings yield on Robert Shillera€™ s spliced-together Cowles-S&P Composite 
stock index series, which is the inverse of the profit rate:

Ratio of S&P Index to a Ten-Year Lagged Moving Average of
Earnings (Shiller CAPE)


50

0

1880              1916              1953              1989              2025

In the 1990s, this Shiller CAPE index fluctuated between 14 and 44, with an average near 20, 
corresponding to a 5% real profit rate. Since the year-2000 collapse of the dot-com bubble, this 
Shiller CAPE index has fluctuated between 14 (at the nadir of the 2008-9 financial crisis) and 38 
(at the recent market peak), with an average of 27 during the secular-stagnation era and 30 in the 
decade after the Great Recession:

•  For the part of the decade of the 2000s before the Great Recession, the ratio corresponds to a 
risky-profit rate average of 3.9%/year, compared to a 10-year real TIPS rate of 2.3%, and a 
short-term Treasury-bill real rate of 0.5%/year.

•  For the decade after the Great Recession, the ratio corresponds to a risky profit rate average 
of 3.3%/year, compared to a 10-year real TIPS rate of 0, and a short-term Treasury-bill real rate 
of -1.5%/year.

The post-2010 riskv-real profit rate averaging 3.3% is indeed sustantiallv elevated below the 1990s 
average riskv profit rate of 5%. But I find it verv interesting that the profit rate held up so 
well: long nominal-safe real rates fall from 3.8% in the 1990s to 0% in the 2010s. while the fall 
in the riskv-profit rate is onlv 2/5 as large in percentage point terms.


There are important things going on that are not just real investment demand and savings supply.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: Enlightened Economist Prize:

Diane Coyle: Enlightened Economist Prize 2022a€”The Winner: a€~Ita€™ s always much harder to select 
a winner than to decide on the 10 (occasionally 12) books on the longlist, and somehow harder than 
usual this year. For Ia€™ ve decided there are two that have the combination of interest, 
distinctiveness and excellent writing Ia€™ m looking for. So, with the usual caveat that this is an 
entirely personal decision based on what I happen to have read, my own interests,
(and no doubt my mood at the time), Ia€™ m offering a free lunch to both Brad DeLong for Slouching 
Towards Utopia and James Bessen for The New Goliaths. Congratulations to both!

James Bessen:

James Bessen @JamesBessen

Honored to be selected, along with @delong, as author of one of the two books of the year by 
@DianeCoylel859

GOLIATHS

JAMES BESSEN

z

enlightenmenteconomics .comEnlightened Economist Prize 2022 a€“ the winner I The Enlightened 
Economist
7:19 PM r™ Nov 18,2022

18Likes3Retweets
Leave a comment

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Tom Ferguson: From Normalcy to New Deal: Industrial Structure, Party Competition, and American 
Public Policy in the Great Depression: a€~International Organization Vol. 38, No. 1 (Winter, 1984), 
pp. 41-94 (54 pages)a€!

• Cosmo Rodewald: Money in the age of Tiberiusa€!

• Noah Smith: Are the UK, Japan, and Italy "undeveloping countriesa€D?: a€~The danger of real 
economic declinea€!

•  Gary Clyde Hufbauer & Megan Hogan: CHIPS Act will spur US production but not foreclose China: 
a€~More US semiconductor fabrication plantsa€! R&D will be accelerateda€! advanced chips and 
chip-making machines will be denied toa€! adversariesa€!.. The Act will not make a material 
difference to US chip supplies in the next two or three years.... US self-sufficiency is an 
illusion.  Continuing to prioritize advanced chip productiona€! is the most

efficient course of action...

• Rebecca Choong Wilkins: Chinaa€™ s Xi Sends Joe Biden an Olive Brancha€!

•  Andrew Gelman & Cosma Rohilla Shalizi: Philosophy & the practice of Bayesian statistics: a€~The 
most successful forms of Bayesian statisticsa€! accorda€! with sophisticated forms of 
hypothetico-deductivism. We examine the actual role played by prior distributions in Bayesian 
models, and the crucial aspects of model checking and model revision, which fall outside the scope 
of Bayesian confirmation theorya€!. Clarity about these matters should benefit
not just philosophy of science, but also statistical practicea€!

•  Nathan Baschez: Writing with Machines: a€~How AI willa€”and wona€™ ta€”change writinga€!. My 
goal right now is to try and identify the ways that AI can most fundamentally transform the writing 
process. The more different and valuable it is, the better. If wea€™ re just like Google Docs with 
a bit of commodity AI slapped on, ita€™ s not going to be very interestinga€!

•  Matthew Yglesias: Getting back on track with the Latino vote: a€~You were trying to get to a 
dinera€! but youa€™re actually at a pizzeria, because you made a mistake several steps agoa€!. Now 
youa€! can eat some pizza or you can break out your map and make your way to the diner. Buta€! 
dona€™ ra€! pretenda€! stroll into the pizzeria, and order pancakes. This is what Democrats seem to 
me to be doing with the Hispanic votea€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:


= NtW

GOLIATHS

JAMES BESSEN

z

enlightenmenteconomics .comEnlightened Economist Prize 2022 a€“ the winner I The Enlightened 
Economist
7:19 PM r™ Nov 18,2022

18Likes3Retweets
Leave a comment

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Tom Ferguson: From Normalcy to New Deal: Industrial Structure, Party Competition, and American 
Public Policy in the Great Depression: a€~International Organization Vol. 38, No. 1 (Winter, 1984), 
pp. 41-94 (54 pages)a€!

• Cosmo Rodewald: Money in the age of Tiberiusa€!

• Noah Smith: Are the UK, Japan, and Italy "undeveloping countriesa€D?: a€~The danger of real 
economic declinea€l

•  Gary Clyde Hufbauer & Megan Hogan: CHIPS Act will spur US production but not foreclose China: 
a€~More US semiconductor fabrication plantsa€! R&D will be accelerateda€! advanced chips and 
chip-making machines will be denied toa€! adversariesa€!.. The Act will not make a material 
difference to US chip supplies in the next two or three years.... US self-sufficiency is an 
illusion.  Continuing to prioritize advanced chip productiona€! is the most

efficient course of action...

• Rebecca Choong Wilkins: Chinaa€™ s Xi Sends Joe Biden an Olive Brancha€!

•  Andrew Gelman & Cosma Rohilla Shalizi: Philosophy & the practice of Bayesian statistics: a€~The 
most successful forms of Bayesian statisticsa€! accorda€! with sophisticated forms of 
hypothetico-deductivism. We examine the actual role played by prior distributions in Bayesian 
models, and the crucial aspects of model checking and model revision, which fall outside the scope 
of Bayesian confirmation theorya€!. Clarity about these matters should benefit
not just philosophy of science, but also statistical practicea€!

•  Nathan Baschez: Writing with Machines: a€~How AI willa€”and wona€™ ta€”change writinga€!. My 
goal right now is to try and identify the ways that AI can most fundamentally transform the writing 
process. The more different and valuable it is, the better. If wea€™ re just like Google Docs with 
a bit of commodity AI slapped on, ita€™ s not going to be very interestingaCI

•  Matthew Yglesias: Getting back on track with the Latino vote: a€~You were trying to get to a 
dinera€! but youa€™re actually at a pizzeria, because you made a mistake several steps agoa€!. Now 
youa€! can eat some pizza or you can break out your map and make your way to the diner. Buta€! 
dona€™ ?a€! pretenda€! stroll into the pizzeria, and order pancakes. This is what Democrats seem to 
me to be doing with the Hispanic votea€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Rana Faroohar: Crypto: new asset, old problem: a€~The demise of FTX mirrors any number of 
traditional financial meltdowns in the past: a€~This time still isna€™ t different when it comes to 
the financial sector and riska€!. The detailsa€l mirroa€! the 2008 financial crisis, and other 
periods of financial speculation^!. It was an internal trading operation, Alameda Research, making 
opaque deals that set the collapse in motion. Plain vanilla lending or market making
becomes boring; the temptation for greater profit and risk via trading looms largea€!. Alameda was 
able to make its crypto trades on the FTX platforma€!. This sort of conflict of interest came to 
the fore several years ago during the Goldman Sachs aluminium hoarding scandal of 2013. It is also 
omnipresent in the tech platform arenaa€l. But it is even more problematic in the fintech space, 
which blends all the risk of complex financial transactions witha€! algorithmic
opacitya€!. Once it became clear that the company was in trouble, there was a classic run...

Sam Hammond: Why I'm not (exactly) an Effective Altruist: a€~Coase & Ostrom » Bentham & Pigou: My 
own contribution to this debate is to argue that, contra the growth-equity trade-off, robust social 
insurance programs are both a condition and accelerant of sustainable economic growth. Yet the 
normative logic of social insurance is Paretian, reflecting the contractarian imperative to 
efficiently compensate the potential a€celosersa€D from creative-destruction, and
thus isna€™t merely instrumental to growth. The preference-neutrality and positive-sum logic of a 
Pareto improvement makes it easily confused with utilitarianism, but the two have quite different 
implications. Utilitarianism is top-downa€!. Paretians, in contrast, start with the bottom-up 
process of exchange and transaction^!. This is at the heart of bargaining theory and how de jure 
property rights emerged in the first placea€!

Eric Levitz: Is Effective Altruism to Blame for Sam Bankman-Fried?: a€~Caroline Ellison, an SBF 
associate and CEO of Alameda Research, put the point more accessibly in a now-deleted Tumblr post. 
a€oels it infinitely good to do double-or-nothing coin flips forever? Well, sort of, because your 
upside is unbounded and your downside is bounded at your entire net worth. But most people dona€™t 
do this, because a€! they really dona€™t want to lose all of their money.
(Of course those people are lame and not EAs; this blog endorses double-or-nothing coin flips and 
high leverage.)a€D In other words, according to their own public statements, Bankman-Fried and 
Ellison both believed that they had a moral obligation to make a€cedouble-or-nothinga€n financial 
bets over and over againa€”even though this would almost certainly lead to financial ruin 
eventuallya€”because there was a small chance that they would just keep winning such
bets, and thereby save humanity. And some of the worlda€™ s most reputable investors handed them 
billions of dollars anywaya€!

Michael Pettis: a€~The easiest way to convince someone else of a lie is to believe it yourself: 
Because I've been devouring books and papers on financial history for over 30 years, I thought 
understood from fairly early on how risky the crypto space was and how likely to be filled with 
scammers and pyramid schemes. The emerging picture of what went wrong suggests the crypto empire 
was a mess almost from the start, with few boundaries, financial or personal. And yet I
still find all these article about SBF fascinating because they add a lot to the historical 
accounts. For example I had always assumed there was a sharper difference between the scammers that 
took advantage and the unsophisticated victims they exploited. But from these accounts it occurs to 
me that the self-delusion was so deep that it drove the scammers as much as it drove the victimsa€!

