Subscribe now

pages <https://www.icloud.com/pages/ODimW 1 dRNmxkH9qXpOdbHyOiw>

html chttps ://w w w.bradford-delong .com/2019/11 Zlecture-notes-adam- smith .html>
latest pdf <http://delong.typepad.com/files/lectureadam-smith-2019-11-21-1 .pd£>

Share

a€!.Last of all, Adam Smith minimizes the importance of economic inequality by claiming that there 
is little or nothing to be done about it. Human nature is such that people will
seek to create, and then to obey, those whom they will call their superiors. It is the view 
expressed by Calvera in the movie The Magnificent Seven. Chico asks Calvera:

And the people of the village? What about them?

Calvera responds:

I leave that to you. Can men of our profession worry about that? If God did not want them to be 
sheared, he would not have made them sheep!

As Adam Smith puts it in his Theory of Moral Sentiments:

A stranger to human nature, who saw the indifference of men about the misery of their inferiors, 
and the regret and indignation which they feel for the
misfortunes and sufferings of those above them, would be apt to imagine, that pain must be more 
agonizing, and the convulsions of death more terrible to
persons                                                                 of higher rank, than they 
are to those of meaner stations. Upon this disposition... is founded the distinction of ranks, and 
the order of society. Our
obsequiousness to our superiors more frequently arises from our admiration for the advantages of 
their situation, than from any private expectations of
benefit from their goodwill.... We desire to serve them for their own sake, without any recompense 
but the vanity or the honour of obliging them...

To attempt to eliminate inequality is, for Smith in this cynical mode, like trying to bail out the 
sea: make society equal, and people will find somebody to look up to, and then figure
out a way to give their money away to the rich.

So that is Adam Smith: worry about prosperity and wealth, yes; trust the (properly managed) 
a€oesystem of natural libertya€d, yes; worry about poverty and want, yes; worry
about inequality, not so much.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


