Subscribe now

FIRST: The Slouching Towards Utopia Book Launch Effort Continues:

<bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

I continue to do podcasts. For example:

John Ashmore & Brad DeLong: The CapX Podcast: Brad DeLong on Slouching Towards Utopia: a€~In a 
world of relentless, high-velocity news, sometimes it pays to take a step back and look at the big 
picture. Our guest this week, the US economist Brad DeLong, does that with some aplomb in his new 
book a€~Slouching Towards Utopiaa€™ cbit.ly/3pP3Krk>, a sweeping survey of economic development 
from the late 19th
century to the present day, and an attempt to work out how wea€™ ve ended up in this period of 
roiling economic crises. As well as making a big argument about the nature of economic life in the 
long 20th century that started in 1870, Brada€™ s book is full of winning vignettes and works just 
as well as a piece of narrative history as an argument about economicsa€!

I continue to engage people on Twitter. For example:

Richard Yeselson:

Richard Yeselson @ yeselson

Brenner engaging with @delong is (potentially!) peak academia, socialism v. liberalism a€oeterms of 
conciliationa€D stuff: Slouching Towards Utopia: Berkeley Social Science Matrix, by @delong

UC BERKELEY
SOCIAL SCIENCE

MATRIX


Slouching Towards Utopia
An Economic History of the
Twentieth Century

•  J. Bradford DeLong, Professor of Economics, UC Berkeley

•  Robert Brenner, Professor Emeritus, Director of the Center
for Social Theory and Comparative History, UCLA

•  Steven Vogel (moderator), Professor of Political Science
and Political Economy, UC Berkeley; Co-director, Network
for a New Political Economy (N2PE)

SLOUCHING
TOWARDS

HIOMA

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

J. BRADFORD DELONG

braddelong.substack.comSlouching Towards Utopia: Berkeley Social Science MatrixSep 1,2022
10:59 PM r™ Sep 17,2022

6Likes3Retweets

Brenner engaging with @delong is (potentially!) peak academia, socialism v. liberalism a€oeterms of 
conciliation^□ stuff: Slouching Towards Utopia: Berkeley Social Science Matrix, by @delonga€!

To which I respond: Yes. Brenner took great exception to my claim A^t AMe economies & societies in 
AMe circle wiA34in 300 miles of A34e English port of Dover over 1600 to 1870 had more in common 
wiA% A34e gunpowder empires elsewhere in A34e world over 1600 to 1870 and with pre-1600 societies 
than they had with post-1870 societies. This claim is not a hill Iwould necessarilydie on, although 
I doconsider it substantially more likely than not.

I see the breakouta€”the moment after which we were highly likely to be on track to something like 
our modern worlda€”as taking place around 1870, with the coming of the Industrial Research Lab, the 
Modern Corporation, and full globalization. Those amp-up global technology growth more than 
four-fold and allow humanity to escape fromits ensorcellment by the Devil of Malthus. Without the 
IRL, MC, & G, it is more  likely than not,I think, that we
would today be in a very poor Malthusian steampunk world.

Brenner sees the hinge of history as coming in the 1500s and 1600s, with the transformation of the 
Dover Circle socieities from those of peasants, craftsmen, knights, and lords to societies of 
laborers, farmers, entrepreneurs, merchants, mercenaries, bureaucrats, and kings. It is those 
changes, Brenner thinks, that set us on the path to today.
Thus he sees the key as a transformation in the relations of production (and domination); while I 
see the key as the creation of a system to drive technological advance at a pace that 
revolutionizes the forces of production every generation, and then revolutionizes them again.

In a way, this conflict springs from a tension inherent in the relationship between Freddie from 
Barmen and Charlie from Trier, with Freddie focusing much more on industrial technologies and 
Charlies focusing much more on the socio-economic order created by the bourgeoisie. While Marx was 
alive, this tension was submerged. Engels had his day job, after all, and worshipped his friend, 
who he saw as a genius on the level of Newton or Darwin. After
Marxa€™ s death, however, socialist elder Engels swings back toward the technological-determinist 
line that I take in my book, aCceSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D, and that Brenner so vociferously 
objected to. <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>


Plus there are now some very nice critiques coming in. For example:

Jim Buhler: Twitter: a€~As an outsider who doesna€™t know enough about the details of economic 
history to evaluate the choice, I cana€™ t really say. But to me 2010 feels very arbitrary as an 
end point to the story DeLong tells. DeLonog wants to tell in fact seems to end effectively (and 
tragically) in the 1970s in the West with the inflation cycle and a€oelegitimation crisis ,a€D 
which for some reason was sufficient to bring the
whole thing downa€!

And so I reply: In this you agree with Tim Noah, who sees 1870-1980 as the Age of Social Democracy, 
which was then followed the an Age of Neoliberalism, Neofascism, & of Authoritarian State 
Surveillance Capitalism with Egalitarian & Utopian Aspirations .It depends on whether you see 
Social Democracy as the main protagonist, or the Polanyian-von Hayekian attempt to surf the waves 
of Schumpeterian creative destruction as the main narrative.
Read the whole thing:


>rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Jim Buhler: Review of a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia"

Jim Buhler: Thread by @JimBuhler on Thread Reader App: a€~Last weekend, I read DeLonga€™ s 
Slouching Toward Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>, an economic history of what he calls the long twentieth 
century (1870-2a€!
Read more

5 months ago A- Brad DeLong

It is certainly one of the best reviews of Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.lv/3pP3Krk> that I have 
yet seen.
And now comes Paul Krugman, with a second Twitter review. And I added a response of my own to the 
end:



Paul Krugman: Twitter Thread: a€~As they say in the Patrick O'Brian novels, I give you joy of your 
victorya€!
Read more

5 months ago A- Brad DeLong
Share


One Image:

BookScan Weekly Sales

See your weekly sales report, which shows copies sold of
your bestselling books reported by BookScan for the time
period selected. It is likely that not all your books' sales
are reflected here; NPD BookScan estimates they report
85% of all retail print book sales. Learn More

BookScan Highlights

3,578 copies were sold between
9/3/2022 and 9/9/2022

T 3,578 copies from previous week
(8/27/2022 and 9/2/2022)


Choose a book

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of... ▼

Period: 2 Weeks 1 Month | 6 Months |

1 Year 2 Years

Total Units:


3,578

beptemoer iz, zuzu -

September 9, 2022

(updated Fridays by 12 am Pacific)

Formats

Total Sales
Q 2 Hardcover

(Excludes Kindle and other
eBooks)

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Michal Tomasky: The Middle Out: The Rise of Progressive Economics and a Return to Shared 
Prosperity: LIBRARY JOURNAL REVIEW: a€~Tomaskya€! convincingly argues that by embracing the 
essential role of the government in addressing the common good, the policies of the Biden 
Administration constitute a frontal assault on neoliberalism, the dominant paradigm influencing 
federal economic policy since the early 1980s...

•  Glory Liu: Adam Smitha€™ s America: How a Scottish Philosopher Became an Icon of American 
Capitalism: - LIBRARY JOURNAL REVIEW: a€~Using much archival material, Liu explains how Smitha€™ s 
1776 book The Wealth of Nations shaped American economic and political ideas in the 19th 
centurya€!. And after the Great Depression, the conservative Chicago School of Economics selected 
ideas from Smitha€™ s writing that they
used to advocate an economy of free trade and self-interest.

•  Slouching Towards Utopia - London School of Economics and Political Science: a€~Monday 10 
October 2022 6:00pm. Hosted by the Department of Economic History. Online public event, United 
Kingdoma€!


•  Accidental Tech Podcast: a€~Three nerds discussing tech, Apple, programming, and loosely related 
matters. Hosted by Marco Arment, Casey Liss, and John Siracusaa€!

• Economic History Association 2022 Annual Meeting
Leave a comment

AJs:

Adrian Hon: a€~It was amazing. Imagine Sapiens, but about the last 150 years of economic history, 
and actually gooda€”that's what DeLong has accomplished in this sweeping account of economic growth 
during the industrial and information revolutions, and the political changes that accompanied them. 
DeLong is an excellent, clear, and unusually, very funny storyteller. Phrases like "multiverse", 
"snark", and "permanent Steampunk world" enliven his tale
and make it more accessible, which focuses on individuals as well as ideas and statistics and 
sci-fi style counterfactuals. The chapters do get a little repetitive toward the end, and as DeLong 
admits, it's focused on the US. But those are minor dings on a very important booka€!

J.R.R. Tolkien: Unfinished Tales <https://archive.org/details/unfinishedtalesoOOOOtolk>: a€oeLong 
ago, ere Sauron deluded the smiths of Eregion, Galadriel came there, and she said to Celebrimbor, 
the chief of the Elven-smiths: a€~I am grieved in Middle-earth, for leaves fall and flowers fade 
that I have loved, so that the land of my dwelling is filled with regret that no Spring can 
redress.a€™
a€~How otherwise can it be for the Eldar, if they cling to Middle-earth?a€™ said Celebrimbor. 
a€~Will you then pass over Sea?a€™

a€~Nay,a€™ she said. a€~Angrod is gone, and Aegnor is gone, and Felagund is no more. Of Finarfina€™ 
s children I am the last. But my heart is still proud. What wrong did the golden house of Finarfin 
do that I should ask the pardon of the Valar, or be content with an isle in the sea whose native 
land was Aman the Blessed? Here I am mightier.a€™
a€~What would you then?a€™ said Celebrimbor.

a€~I would have trees and grass about me that do not die a€“ here in the land that is mine,a€™ she 
answered. a€~What has become of the skill of the Eldar?a€™
And Celebrimbor said: a€~Where now is the Stone of EA^rendil? And Enerdhil who made it is gone.a€™

a€~They have passed over Sea,a€™ said Galadriel, a€~with almost all fair things else. But must then 
Middle-earth fade and perish for ever?a€™

a€~That is its fate, I deem,a€™ said Celebrimbor. a€~But you know that I love you (though you 
turned to Celeborn of the Trees), and for that love I will do what I can, if haply by my art your 
grief can be lessened.a€™

But he did not say to Galadriel that he himself was of Gondolin long ago, and a friend of Enerdhil, 
though his friend in most things outrivalled him. Yet if Enerdhil had not been then Celebrimbor 
would have been more renowned. Therefore he took thought, and began a long and delicate labour, and 
so for Galadriel he made the greatest of his works(save the Three Rings only). And it is said that 
more subtle and clear wasthe green gem thathe made than that of
Enerdhil, but yet its light had less power. For whereas that of Enerdhil was lit by the Sun in its 
youth, already many years had passed ere Celebrimbor began his work, and nowhere in Middle-earth 
was the light as clear as it had been, for though Morgoth had been thrust out into the Void and 
could not enter again, his far shadow lay upon it.

Radiant nonetheless was the Elessar of Celebrimbor; and he set it within a great brooch of silver 
in the likeness of an eagle rising upon outspread wings. 21 Wielding the Elessar all things grew 
fair about Galadriel, until the coming of the Shadow to the Forest. But afterwards when Nenya, 
chief of the Three, 22 was sent to her by Celebrimbor, she needed it (as she thought) nomore, and 
she gave it to CelebrAan her daughter, and so it cameto Arwen and to
Aragorn who was called Elessara€!

Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

