Subscribe now
The passage is:

Things changed starting around 1870. Then we got the institutions for organization and research and 
the technologiesa€”we got full globalization, the
industrial research laboratory, and the modern corporation. These were the keys. These unlocked the 
gate that had previously kept humanity in dire poverty.
The problem of making humanity rich could now be posed to the market economy, because it now had a 
solution.

Arthur Goldhammer has a withering critique of how the theme of the industrial research lab is 
developeda€”or, rather, left undeveloped in the book:

Given your emphasis on the importance of the "industrial research lab" in this period, you might 
have devoted more space to this theme. Examples would
have been welcome, along with a deeper historical account of the evolving relationship between pure 
and applied research. World War II marked a turning
point here, and I'm thinking not just of the Manhattan Project but also of the MIT Radiation Lab, 
Lawrence's lab at Berkeley, Bell Labs, etc. University
science scaled up to industrial magnitude, while industry opened itself up to basic research as 
never before. Subsuming all this under the head of "industrial
research lab" (and without differentiation across your lengthy period) doesn't quite do it justice. 
I could have done with fewer pages devoted to rudimentary
solid-state physics and the doping of silicon and more on the sociological transformation of big 
science by postwar projects such as the SAGE radar
system,   early computer systems such as ENI AC and UNI VAC (which long predated integrated 
circuits), the development of FORTRAN, etc. The
Edison/Tesla duality is not enough to capture the complexity of this nascent knowledge economya€!

He is correct.

I wrote an email back to Art:

The only plea I can make is that the original very rough manuscript was twice as long (I am staring 
at various of its dismembered pieces as I write this), and throw myself upon the
mercy of the court.

Yes, there is a draft of a chapter on the drive for European unity after World War II, starting 
with Jean Monnet showing up in de Gaullea€™ s goals office after the fall of France; a
lot of talk about keeping the Americans in, the Russians out, and the Germans down; a deeper dive 
into the issues of Barry EichengreenaC™ s and my long-ago Marshall Plan
paper, and Paul-Henri Spaaka€™ s proposal to erect a 50-foot statue of Joe Stalin as the Architect 
of European Unity in front of the Berlaymont in Brussels.

Yes, the a€oevarieties of capitalisma€D literature is shamefully neglecteda€”Hall and Soskice, 
Esping-Anderson, and all their company. I feel particularly bad about this because
Peter A. Hall was one of the two people who gave me my summa, and thus convinced me that this was 
the business I ought to enter, rather than heading for Wall Street.

Yes, my neglect of industrial research labs (and corporate organizations) after having highlighted 
them at the beginning is, I think, a major misstep. It was supposed to be
corporations, IRLs, and globalization all falling into place as the last pieces of the necessary 
institutional configuration for Modern Economic Growth; MEGa€™ s rakea€™ s
progress, and all its political-economic and sociological vicissitudes. But I could not assemble a 
Grand Narrative for a book with that thrust.

Sol would up with von Hayek vs. Polanyi, with Keynes off whimpering in the corner, as my Grand 
Narrative because it was the least false one I could manage to execute.
But there are many other figures who ought to be as prominent in the book as Karl Polanyi and 
Friedrich von Hayek are:

• Karl Popper, Michael Polanyi, & Alasdair Macintyre on science and a€cerationalitya€D

• Michael Polanyi, Vaclav Smil, & Davis Landes on science and technology

• David Landes, Alfred Chandler, and Peter Drucker on technology & the corporation

• Josef Schumpeter, Theodore Veblen, & Ronald Coase on corporations & industries

• Karl Popper, Walter Lippmann, & Thomas Dewey on hopes for rational self-government

• William Beveridge on the taming of inequality through public provision and wealth redistribution

• A.C. Pigou & John Maynard Keynes on light-fingered and soft-touch central planning as ways of 
aligning the imperatives of the market with the needs of society
There will, I hope, be another booka€”or an extended metaverse apology tour of extended web notes 
this falla€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


