Subscribe now

FIRST: Yes, History Goes Barrelling Alonga€”or Perhaps Continues Its Circlea€!


This is not the kind of essay you feel you have to write if you are in fact at the End of History. 
This is the kind of essay you write if you had thought you were at the End of History, but then 
history ignored you, blew past the sign, and kept on goinga€’’perhaps at increasing speed:

Frank Fukuyama: More Proof That This Really Is the End of History: a€~Over the past year, it has 
become evident that there are key weaknesses at the core of seemingly strong authoritarian 
statesa€!. The concentration of powera€! all but guarantees low-quality decision makinga€!. The 
absence of public discussion and debatea€! and of any mechanism of accountability, means that the 
leadera€™ s support is shallowa€!. The long­
term progress of modern institutions is neither linear nor automatic. Over the years, we have seen 
huge setbacks to the progress of liberal and democratic institutions, with the rise of fascism and 
communism in the 1930s, or the military coups and oil crises of the 1960s and a€™ 70s. And yet, 
liberal democracy has endured and come back repeatedly, because the alternatives are so bada€!. 
Celebrations of the rise of strong states and the
decline of liberal democracy are thus very premature. Liberal democracy, precisely because it 
distributes power and relies on consent of the governed, is in much better shape globally than many 
people thinka€!.

Unfortunately, [in] the United Statesa€! 30 to 35 percent of its voters continue to believe the 
false narrative that the 2020 presidential election was stolen, and the Republican Party has been 
taken over by Donald Trumpa€™ s MAGA followers, who are doing their best to put election deniers in 
positions of power around the country. This group does not represent a majoritya€! but is likely to 
regain control of at least the House of
Representatives this November, and possibly the presidency in 2024. The partya€™ s putative leader, 
Trump, has fallen deeper and deeper into a conspiracy-fueled madnessa€!.

Liberal democracy will not make a comeback unless people are willing to struggle on its behalf. The 
problem is that many who grow up living in peaceful, prosperous liberal democracies begin to take 
their form of government for granteda€!. The Russian invasion of Ukrainea€! may serve to remind the 
current generation of what is at stakea€!. Ukrainiansa€! understand the true value of freedom, and 
are fighting a larger battle on our
behalf, a battle that all of us need to joina€!.

Now, let me stay most strongly, that history, so far at least, does have a direction. We are a good 
enough anthology intelligence that our technological prowess does grow over time. We are no longer 
ensorcelled by the devil of Malthus: we no longer see half our babies die before five, we are no 
longer stunted, we no longer spend hours each day focused on how good it would be to get more 
calories now, and it is no longer the case that only a relative few of us
have enough, and that those of us have enough because they are part of a force-and-fraud 
exploitation-and-domination machine composed of thugs-with-spears and their attendant bureaucrats, 
propagandists, and accountants.

That is real progress.

Alongsidea€”or maybe part ofa€”our repeated revolutions in our technologies of production have come 
revolutions in our technologies of communication and organization. We can assemble far larger 
groups of people to pull together in much more complicated ways to accomplish tasks now than was 
possible back earlier in history., Or maybe part of, our repeated revolutions in our technologies 
of production outcome, revolutions in our technologies of
communication and organization. We can assemble far larger groups of people to pull together in 
much more complicated ways to accomplish tasks now than was possible back earlier in history.

But has there been progress in modes of political order! And have we reached the End of History in 
the sense that such progress in modes has come to a halt? That is what Fukuyama claims he believes. 
But what he writes seems to me to strongly undermine that claim. The underlying structure of his 
thought appears to be to be not a progress, not a journey to a destination that we have reached, 
but rather that we need to work hard to arrest the turning of a
wheela€”the Wheel of Fortune, on which we are now at the good apex, and which, if it continues to 
turn, will carry us downward to less desirable modes of political order.

How else are we supposed to interpret him? For he does write:

Liberal democracy will not make a comeback unless people are willing to strugglea€! manya€! in 
peaceful, prosperous liberal democraciesa€! take their form of government for granteda€!. 
Ukrainiansa€! understand the true value of freedoma€! a battle that all of us need to joina€!.

Do we not hear echoes? Is this not: democracy decays into ochlocracy which creates pressures for 
monarchy which decays into tyranny overthrown by aristocracy which decays into oligarchy which 
creates pressures for democracy again? Are our modes of political order really that different than 
those of the Athens of Pericles or Demosthenes, or the Rome of the Gracchi? Nobody would go to Cato 
the Elder for advice about farming technologies today. But a lot
can still be learned about the a€oetechnologiesa€n of political order from examining the declines 
of the Roman Republic and of Classical Athens.

For, as Thucydides the Athenian did write, in his pitch for people to read his history, political 
history remains very relevant to us, while technological history is of only antiquarian interest:

The absence of the fabulous in my history will, I fear, detract somewhat from its interest; but if 
it be judged useful by those inquirers who desire an exact knowledge of the past as an aid to the 
interpretation of the future, which in the course of human things must resemble if it does not 
reflect it, I shall be content. In sum, I have written my work, not as a careerist ticket-punch or 
as a performance to win applause in the moment, but as a
treasure for all timea€!.

Share

Must-Read: &, Closely Related to Fukuyama:

But there have been some advances in the sciences of government, even if they are not as 
conseuentual as Madison and Hamilton, talking their book, claimed:

Adam Gurri: A Realist Defense of Legislative Supremacy: a€~Representative democracy is a moral 
achievement, but it is not just a moral achievement. Its great global success does not chiefly rest 
on its morality but on its realism. Centuries ago, the extremely militant societies of Europe 
established parliaments for their military and economic powers to peacefully agree upon mutually 
binding laws. As the age of agriculture gave way
to the age of industry and commerce, modern representative institutions developed out of the old 
ones, better reflecting the broadening distribution of social power.. This practical lens 
providesa€! concrete answersa€!. A single officeholder^! can afford to ignore quite a large portion 
of the population without much riska€!. A legislature is therefore superiora€! because it creates 
advocates for specific subdivisions of the populationa€!
[to] sit at the center of political power and participate in creating the countrya€™ s lawsa€!. We 
need to meet the authoritariana€™ s accusations of weakness and ineffectiveness with the confidence 
representative democracy has plainly earneda€!.

Representative democracy has clear advantages in the field of legitimation. The early European 
parliamentarism from which modern representative democracy springs owes its origin precisely to the 
need for regimes to obtain legitimacy in the eyes of those with the power to make trouble for 
thema€!. The great practical merit of representative democracy continues to be in the functiona€!. 
The ideal representative institutions ought to be
exclusively legislative, involve a truly competitive multiparty system in which the votes of a 
group comprising even 5-10 percent of the population can make a difference under the right 
conditions, yet still enable the governing coalition to regularly pass legislation that 
successfully molds the character of the political and legal systemsa€!.

Party-led representative democracy encompasses a wide range of potential institutional forms. Some 
work better in general than others, some are better for particular types of societies, and all have 
weaknessesa€!. The key thing is the interaction between the formal system with the structure of the 
underlying societya€!. Here in America, we often get the worst of both worlds in terms of 
responsiveness and effective action. There is a great
deal of low hanging fruit to be found in simply moving closer to the best institutional designs 
found elsewhere. We should do so, not just because it is righta€’’which it isa€”but because it is 
practicala€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Other Things Azt Went Whizzzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• Charlie Warzel: The Negative Appeal of the Metaverse: a€~An era of brute-forcing innovation (or 
why AI art is different than Web3): Perhaps, one day, wea€™ 11 all be trapped like legless rats in 
the a€oeinfinite officea€D of Metaa€™ s Horizon Worlds and toiling in a paradeof conferencecalls 
under stultifying virtualhalogen lights...

• Aura: a€~My litmus test for a€oeis your VR metaverse app even remotely as good as vrchat" is "are 
furries holding actual exercise classes in it?a€Ua€!

•  Nicholas Weaver: a€~The amount of bezzle in Tesla is huge. They are a second tier car-maker 
who's advantages have now disappeared, who's build quality is crap, and are about to get 
steamrollered by Ford, GM, Hyundai, BMW, Mercedes etc across all their current and future product 
linesa€!

• Brad Delong & Jacob Soli: Slouching towards a Free Market: a€~Thursday, October 20 at 4:00pm to 
5:30pm :: Zumberge Hall (ZHS), 352 3651 Trousdale Parkway, Los Angeles, CA 90089 :: Moderated book 
talk with authors Brad Delong and Jacob Solla€!

• Rana Faroohar: Globalism Failed to Deliver the Economy We Need: a€~Trade policy is shifting to 
better consider labor and environmental standards, with an understanding that cheap isna€™ t always 
cheap if products are degrading the environment or being made with a childa€™ s tiny hands.Therea€™ 
s also a rethink of tradein digital services to account for privacy and liberal valuesa€!. We 
dona€™ t yet have a new unified field theory for the
postneoliberal world. But that doesna€™ t mean we shouldna€™t continue to question the old 
philosophya€!

•  Adam Mead: No Grand Strategy: The Complete Financial History of Berkshire Hathaway: a€~Valuation 
confirms that it took investors until the mid-80s before they ascribed a premium to Buffetta€™ s 
skills and the value of the operating businesses accumulating within the Berkshire umbrella. 
Thata€™ s when the price to book ratio sustainably rose above 1 .Ox, meaning a dollar invested at 
Berkshire was ascribed more than a dollar of value by the
marketa€!

•  Baratunde Thurston: Rethinking Democracy After L.A.a€™ s Racism Scandal: a€~I was feeling pretty 
good about the story of my own newly-adopted city, Los Angeles, and had been looking forward to 
returning home when I received a distressing breaking-news alerta€!. Multiple people on the 
recording can be heard complaining about Black Angelenos, and openly discussing plans to divide up 
the city along racial lines in ways that would
protect their own power while doing little for the residents they are supposed to servea€!

Subscribe now



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 50% off a group subscription
Give a gift subscription

Leave a comment

