Subscribe now

FIRST: Will the Ukrainian Army Hold in Its East?

A very nice piece by Mark Hertling on why we should have hopes for the Ukraine Army during its 
current turn in the Inferno:

Mark Hertling: d€™ A few folks suggested Id€™ ve been d€ceboldd€\3in some of my predictions 
accompanying the analysis Ia€™ve provided on CNN regarding this conflict. Beyond tactical 
assessments, there are two primary reasons Ia€™ve said Ukraine would win this fight. Herea€™sa€! 
whya€!. Reason 1: Conventional joint and combined arms operations are hard. Real hard. Exceedingly 
harda€!. Doing so takes intense
training of individuals in their specific skills, exercises that build the capabilities of 
interprofessional teams who pull those skills together, the understanding of complex equipment & 
doctrine, communicating intenta€!and great leadership^!. All this takes time, determination, and 
repetitious traininga€! develops develops teamwork, trust, loyalty, and camaraderie. Good 
militaries understand all this, and good military leaders ensure it
happensa€!. Less-than-good militaries put conscripts under arms, field equipment with inherent 
faults, and allow corruption^!. The second reason Ia€™ ve been bold is because I had the chance to 
see how seemingly small things contribute to big failurea€!. I was assigned as the Commander of the 
Operations Groupa€! at our Armya€™ s National Training Centera€! fight[ing] mock battles against a 
tough opposing force for a couple of
weeksa€!. Good units polish their good things, fix their bad things, and the battle resumes. After 
three weeks units and their leaders are darned good. Not-so-good units dona€™ t accept critiques, 
dona€™ t fix broken processes, repeatedly allow small issues to turn into big problems, and dona€™ 
t reflect on their own leadership failuresa€!. A few years after serving at the NTC, and after a 
combat tour, I was assigned as a new Brigadier
General  to command the Armya€™ s European training center at Grafenwoehr Germanya€!. U[kraine 
]A[rmy] trained there & soon had their own training center at Yavoriva€!. The few times I observed 
the R[ussian] army in training and exercises, or talked to their leaders, they didna€™ t seem to be 
a€oegood units.a€D Comparing the 2 armies-even w/ seemingly different quantity of equipment-the 
expectations seemed obviousa€!.

Ia€™ 11 again be bold in saying Ukraine will persevere. I hope that isna€™ t seen as hubris, ita€™ 
s just an assessment based on my bias about who will best face the challenges of combined arms 
warfare & which is the learning Armya€!
LINK:

Mark Hertling @MarkHertling

A few folks suggested I've been "bold" in some of my predictions accompanying the analysis I've 
provided on @CNN regarding this conflict. Beyond tactical assessments, there are 2 primary reasons 
I've said Ukraine would win this fight. Here's a short dY§^ on why I say this. 1/17
2:56 PM r™ Apr 25,2022

9,479Likes2,155Retweets

I had a brief piece on the complexity of war-as-a-profession two months ago:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Modern Tactics & AMe Red Army in Ukraine

Bitter experience has shown us that a healthy public sphere can only be built on something other 
than click-baiting and eyeball-gluing advertisements. SubStack is now in there pitching to make 
things different. I wona€™ t command you to become a paying subscriber of this a€~Stack: I will 
command you to become a paying subscriber of some a€~Stack(sa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- 10 comments A- Brad DeLong

Ibn Khaldun called it assibayah'. understanding that it is your group, that you have a job to do in 
order for it to properly perform, and that your job requires the right kind of coordination. For 
most of history, a commander with assibayah handled logistics, inspiration, and delivered soldiers 
to the right battlefield; and soldiers with assibayah knew how to handle their weapons while 
protecting those standing next to them. And with assibayah, soldiers supplied who
trusted their leader and found themselves on the right battlefield were nearly invincible. 
Fa€”a€”a€” phalanx. Fa€”a€”a€” legion. Fa€”a€”a€” knights. Fa€”a€”a€” longbowmen. Fa€”a€”a€” 
pikemen. And, above all (usually), fa€”a€”a€” horse-archers.

But then, with the coming of personal firearms, it all became more complicated. It turned into rock 
af paper af scissors. Cavalry rode down musketeers. Musketeers rolled over pikemen. Pikemen drove 
off cavalry. And artillery was a joker that could break up the pike phalanx and disorder the other 
arms to render them combat ineffectivea€’’unless and until it was itself overrun. Tactical victory 
required combined arms, and the right kind of combined arms, so
that their cavalry faced your pikemen, their pikemen faced your musketeers, and their musketeers 
were ridden down by your cavalry. As time passed, things became more complex.

And in all of this, (fewer) professionals could easily defeat (more) amateurs. And professionals 
could be defeated by better professionals who understood the principles of combined-arms warfare 
better. How is it that Arthur Wellesley could win at, consecutively, RoliA§a, Vimeiro, Oporto, 
Talavera, BuA§aco, Fuentes de Onoro, Salamanca, Vitoria, the Pyrenees, Bidassoa, Nivelle, Toulouse, 
and Waterloo? (Note, however, that his siege efforts were often
unsuccessful.) As von Clausewitz wrote: a€oewar is very simple, but the simplest thing is very 
difficulta€D.

How much does the Ukrainian Army really know what it is doing? And how much of that knowledge can 
be transmitted quickly to replacements? We can hope.

Note: The best single thing I have read on all of this is: Daniel P. Bolger: Dragons at War: 2-34 
Infantry in the Mojave <https ://archive.org/details/dragonsatwar234i0000bolg/>
Share

One Audio:

Lyndon Baines Johnson: October 9,1964: Speech at the Jung Hotel, New Orleans 
<https://millercenter.org/the-presidencv/presidential-speeches/october-9-1964-speech-iung-hotel-new-
orleans>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Picture: The English Throne from Edward in Plantagenet to Henry VI TXidor:

The History of England Podcast Family Trees

The Wars of the Roses: Descendants of Edward III (simplified)

Edward III = Philippa of

1312-1377       Hainault

K. England 1327-1377 1311-1369


Edward

The Black Prince

Lionel

D. of Cl

Blanche  of  John  of  Gaunt  Catherine
Lancaster =D. of Lancaster = Swynford

Edmund

D. of York

Thomas

D. Gloucester


1330-1376. Joan of

“ Kent

I 1328-

1341-1369

1340-1399        1350-1403

1341-1402

1355-1397


Philippa _ Edmun

Henry IV

John

Joan

I

Edward

Richard

Anne


Richard II

1367 - 1400

1355-1

imer

E. March

1352-1381

1367-1413

Henry V

Beaufort

E. Somerset

Beaufort

1379-1440

D. York

E.Cambridge

1383-1438

Edward

E. Stafford


K. England 1377-1400

Roger Mortimer

E. March

1374-1398

1187-1422

Margaret

of Anjou:= Henry VI

Henry

John D.

Edmund

Richard

D. York

1378-1403

Humphrey


Edmund Mortimer

E. March

Anne =

1390-1411

1430-1482,

Richard
E.Cambri

1421-1471

Edward

1453-1471

E. Somerset

Somerset

1403-1444

Edmund

D. Somerset

1406-1455

1411-1460

D. Buckingham

1402-1460

Humphrey


1391-1425

Richard

ecily Neville

Margaret

Beaufort

Tudor

E. Richmond

1431-1456

Henry

Somerset

1431-1456

Edmund D.

Somerset

1438-1471

E. Stafford

1425-1458


Anne

D. York

1411-146

Edward IVth_ Elizabeth

1415-1495         Henry VII

1457-1509

Elizabeth

Margaret

George

Henry

D. Buckingham

1455-1483

Richard III =Anne Neville


D'ess Exeter

1439-1476

1442-1483 — Woodville

E. Rutland

1443-1460

C'ss Suffolk

1444-1503

D'ess of
Burgundy

D. Clare

1456-1485


Elizabeth of York

1466-1503

Henry VII

1457-1509

Edward Vth

1470-1483

Richard

D. York

1473-1483

Edward

E. Warwick

1479-1499

Edward

1473-1484

Blue lines are lines of a€celegitimatea€n succession. I have included Richard Duke of York because 
he was, briefly, a regent of a sort. And Henry VII Tudor appears in two placesa€”as the son of 
Margaret Beaufort and Edmund Tudor Earl of Richmond, and as the spouse of Elizabeth of York.

Very Briefly Noted:

• Matt Levine: The Stability of Algorithmic Stablecoins 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-04-19/the-stability-of-algorithmic-stablecoins>

• Timothy B. Lee: How Walmart & Googlea€™ s Wing Jumped Ahead of Amazon in Drone Delivery. a€~Drone 
delivery could be poised to take off in the United Statesa€! 
<https://fullstackeconomics.com/walmart-wing-amazon-drone-delivery/>

• Duncan Black: Finally An End To The Woke Baquet Era: a€~I have no idea about the new guy, but 
Ia€™ d bet the biggest criticism from upstairs is that he did too much 1619, not enough Ohio diner 
safaris: "New York (CNN Business)Joe Kahn, the managing editor of The New York Times, will succeed 
Dean Baquet as executive editor in Junea€! 
<https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/04/finally-end-to-woke-baquet-era.html>


• Pascal Michaillat & Emmanuel Saez: Figuring Out Efficient Unemployment 
<https://voxeu.org/article/figuring-out-efficient-unemployment>

•  Nicole Narea: The Michigan GOP Wants to Be Pro-Trump & Win the Midterms. Can It Do Both?'. 
a€~Michigan is an early test of the political potency of Trumpa€™ s election liesa€ 1 
<https://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/23035549/trump-michigan-republican-convention-deperno-karam
o>

•  Carl Bildt: What NAT0a€™ s Northern Expansion Means'. a€~Although the outcome of Russiaa€™ s war 
of aggression in Ukraine remains to be seen, it has already fundamentally changed the European 
security order. For the previously neutral Nordic countries, formal membership in NATO, long viewed 
as a strategic option for a later date, has become an urgent existential imperativea€! 
<https://www.pro ject-syndicate.org/commentary/sweden-
finland-nato-membership-expanded-european-defense-capacity-by-carl-bildt-2022-04?barrier=accesspaylo
g>

•  Mohamed A. El-Erian: The Growth Engines Are Sputtering: a€~As important as these 2022 effects 
area€! we also must pay attention to the IMFa€™ s 2023 outlooka€! a medium-terma€! lost potency of 
growth models worldwidea€l 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/imf-world-outlook-revision-growth-models-failing-by-mo
hamed-a-el-erian-2022-04>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Aaron Rupar: An Essential Insight About Propaganda: a€~Liars should be labeled as such, not 
amplifieda€!. The Putin regime lies as easily as is breathesa€!. Yet therea€™ s still a tendency 
among some in American media to treat what the Kremlin says as a a€cesidea€D of a debate, and to 
take it seriouslya€! LINK: <


iblic Notice

An essential insight about propaganda

This isna€™ t exactly breaking news, but the Putin regime lies as easily as is breathes. To cite 
one telling example, last month I detailed how Russian state TV tried to hoodwink viewers with 
easily debunked lies, including the absurd declaration that Ukraine was attacking itself. Back in 
reality, the Russian military had bombed civilian targets in Kharkiv. Ia€™ ve written hundreds of 
articles over the years about Trumpworlda€™ s shameless lying, but the
Kremlin takes that dark art form to new depthsa€!

Read more

10 months ago A- 20 likes A- 3 comments A- Aaron Rupar

• Aaron Rupar: Trumpa€™ s 2019 Meeting with Zelensky Was Disgraceful at the Time & Seems Even Worse 
Now. a€~Putina€™ s brutal invasion of Ukraine hasna€™ t shaken his position that the onus is on 
Zelensky to capitulatea€!



Trump's 2019 meeting with Zelensky was disgraceful at the time and seems even worse now

Living through the Trump administration was a disorienting blizzard of misinformation and scandal, 
so it can be hard to remember anything but the lowest of lowlights. But a statement Trump released 
on Monday helped in that respect. First, some context: Trump, you might recall, initiallya€l
Read more

10 months ago A- 26 likes A- 2 comments A- Aaron Rupar

• Andrew Prokop: d€™ Somebody borrowed $1B in crypto to steal $182M in crypto, probably profited 
$80M in crypto, laundered it through the crypto money laundering service. Also this is about 
a€cebeans.a€C I love cryptoa€l

Andrew Prokop @awprokop

Somebody borrowed $1B in crypto to steal $182M in crypto, probably profited $80M in crypto, 
laundered it through the crypto money laundering service. Also this is about "beans." I love crypto 
theverge.com/2022/4/18/2303a€!

The attack was made possible by another DeFi product called a “flash loan,"
which allows users to borrow large amounts of cryptocurrency for very short
periods of time (minutes or even seconds). Flash loans are meant to provide
liquidity                                                 or take advantage of price arbitrage 
opportunities but can also be used
for more nefarious purposes.


"DEVELOPERS AND
ADMINISTRATORS SHOULD
DE AWARE OF NEW POINTS
OF FAILURE THAT CAN DC
CREATED BY DEVELOPERS
OR DAO MEMBERS"

According to analysis from blockchain
security firm CertiK, the Beanstalk
attacker                     used a flash loan obtained
through the decentralized protocol Aave
to borrow close to $1 billion in
cryptocurrency assets and exchanged
these for enough beans to gain a 67
percent voting stake in the project. With
this supermajority stake, they were able

to approve the execution of code that transferred the assets to their own wallet.
The attacker then instantly repaid the flash loan, netting an $80 million profit.


Based on the duration of an Aave flash loan, the entire process took place in less
than 13 seconds.

In the project’s Discord server, many users claim to have lost tens of thousands of
dollars of invested cryptocurrency. Since the attack, the hacker has been moving
funds through Tornado Cash, a privacy-focused mixer service that has become a
go-to step in laundering stolen cryptocurrency funds. With much of the stolen
money now obscured, it’s unlikely to be traced and returned.

5:01 PM r™ Apr 20,2022

306Likes 108Retweets

•  Corin Faife: Beanstalk Cryptocurrency Project Robbed After Hacker Votes to Send Themself $182 
Million'. a€~The attacker used a flash loan to obtain a controlling stake in the projecta€l 
<https://www.theverge.eom/2022/4/18/23030754/beanstalk-crvptocurrencv-hack-182-million-dao-voting>

• Duncan Weldon: What Were Central Banks Supposed to Do?'. a€~I would also rather inflation was not 
as high as it currently is. But Ia€™m equally clear that hiking rates to 5a€“6% would be a 
mistakea€I. Ia€™m left wondering what the supposedly better counterfactual looks like?a€! A high 
Bank Rate would not have easeda€l energya€l preventedaCI Covid-related supply chain disruptiona€l 
eased the post-pandemic reshapinga€l away from
servicesa€l

\/oll IO ▲ /


Added R

WITH DUNCAN WELDON

Value Added

What were central banks supposed to do?

I almost feel sorry for central bankers. For a decade or so after 2009 inflation mostly undershot 
their targets. Policy-related academic macro working papers bewailed their inability to generate 
inflationary pressure. There was an active debate on whether generating higher inflation would 
require changed targets (average inflation targeting, price levela€l
Read more

10 months ago A- 7 likes A- Duncan Weldon

Paragraphs:

I am not so sure about what James Fallow calls the a€oebrave efforta€D of May 26,2004. It 
concludes: a€oeWe consider the story of Iraqa€™ s weapons, and of the pattern of misinformation, to 
be unfinished business. And we fully intend to continue aggressive reporting aimed at setting the 
record straight.a€D That seems to have been an unkept promise. And not-keeping this promise has led 
to a New York Times that for four years assured me, several times a
week, that Jared and Ivanka were horrified and were working diligently to save us all:

James Fallows: Two New Possibilities for the a€~Timesa€™: a€~In May, 2004, barely a year after the 
U.S. invaded Iraq, the paper ran a major editorial-page statement titled a€oeThe Times and 
Iraq.a€Da€! People could differ about this or that aspect of the Timesd€™ ^internal reckoning. But 
no one could doubt that it was a brave and serious effort. Bill Keller, executive editor at the 
time of the review, had earlier come out in favor of


the Iraq invasion, tie oversaw tnis report as part or personal and institutional accountability tor 
the role the paper had piayedafei

LINK:


Breaking the News

Two New Possibilities for the a€~Timesa€™
Read more

10 months ago A- 26 likes A- 8 comments A- James Fallows

People say that Kahn is not nearly as divorced from reality as Baquet was. But he is under the same 
institutional pressuresa€’’those that generated five years of a€oeJared and Ivanka are horrified, 
and are working diligently to save us alla€D storiesa€!

Suppose nothing systematic distinguishes workers from each other and jobs from each other other 
than their completely idiosyncratic matching values with jobs and workers, respectively. And 
suppose that workers searching for jobs and jobs searching for workers are symmetric. Then it is 
easy to see how this very nice result from Michaillat & Saez drop out. But do we really believe in 
these symmetries? And what non-symmetries do we think are important in
determining what the efficient point on the Beveridge curve is?

Pascal Michaillat & Emmanuel Saez: Figuring Out Efficient Unemployment’. a€~The unemployment rate 
is inversely related to the vacancy ratea€!. Servicing a job opening costs about as much as one job 
in terms of resourcesa€!. The labour market minimises waste when the unemployment rate equals the 
vacancy rate. It is too slack when the unemployment rate is higher and too tight when it is lower. 
Consequently, the efficient
unemployment rate is simply given by the geometric average of the current unemployment and vacancy 
ratesa€!

LINK: chttps ://voxeu .org/article/figuring-out-efficient-unemplovment>

And then there is the big question: what does thinking seriously about these asymmetries lead us 
to, in the way of policies to shift the Beveridge curve in a good direction?

Adam Davidson gives historya€™ s judgment on Dean Baqueta€™ s system to make the New York Timesa€™ 
s a€cereportinga€D the opposite of objective in order to better position himself for what he 
thought would be the future Hillary Rodham Clinton presidency:

Adam Davidson: d€™Dean Baquet and the N[ew ]Y[ork ]T[imes]a€\ used] power to OVER emphasize minor 
Democratic issues and to UNDER emphasize major GOP issuesa€!. Historians will remember this period 
in US history as a time in which a muscular anti-Democratic ethnonationalism emerged and sought to 
eliminate the countrya€™ s fundamental valuesa€!. [And during this] the N[ew ]Y[ork ]T[imesa€™ 
s]a€! lapel­
grabbing, attention shaping power has, largely, been used to focus the worlda€™ s attention on 
nothing issues, like her emails. Worsea€! Baquet has been explicit: if we report on things in such 
a way that more on a€cethe lefta€D consistently like and more on a€cethe righta€D consistently 
dona€™ t like, then we have faileda€! independent of the actual facts on the ground. This has 
directly impacted the day-to-day journalistic
decisions                                                                                           
                                                                                                of 
the N[ew ]Y[ork ]T[imes]a€!. Say Baquet had announced that the NYTa€™ s role is to pay close 
attention to important issues and to cover them factually, accurately, and fearlessly, with 
appropriate contexta€!. [Then] nearly every front page, every hero block on <http://nyt.com> for 
the last four years would have been different. The articles would have been different. Sharper. 
Better. More accuratea€!

LINK:

Adam Davidson @adamdavidson

TIL that people still don't understand why so many journalists are mad at Dean Baquet and the NYT. 
Yes! There has been much amazing reporting done. Yes! You can point to many articles about Trump 
and an anti-democratic GOP. But, 1/
12:01 PM r™ Apr 21,2022

6,369Likes 1,70 IRetweets


Read more

10 months ago A- 26 likes A- 8 comments A- James Fallows

People say that Kahn is not nearly as divorced from reality as Baquet was. But he is under the same 
institutional pressuresa€’’those that generated five years of a€oeJared and Ivanka are horrified, 
and are working diligently to save us alla€D storiesa€!

Suppose nothing systematic distinguishes workers from each other and jobs from each other other 
than their completely idiosyncratic matching values with jobs and workers, respectively. And 
suppose that workers searching for jobs and jobs searching for workers are symmetric. Then it is 
easy to see how this very nice result from Michaillat & Saez drop out. But do we really believe in 
these symmetries? And what non-symmetries do we think are important in
determining what the efficient point on the Beveridge curve is?

Pascal Michaillat & Emmanuel Saez: Figuring Out Efficient Unemployment’. a€~The unemployment rate 
is inversely related to the vacancy ratea€!. Servicing a job opening costs about as much as one job 
in terms of resourcesa€!. The labour market minimises waste when the unemployment rate equals the 
vacancy rate. It is too slack when the unemployment rate is higher and too tight when it is lower. 
Consequently, the efficient
unemployment rate is simply given by the geometric average of the current unemployment and vacancy 
ratesa€!

LINK: chttps://voxeu.org/article/figuring-out-efficient-unemployment>

And then there is the big question: what does thinking seriously about these asymmetries lead us 
to, in the way of policies to shift the Beveridge curve in a good direction?

Adam Davidson gives historya€™ s judgment on Dean Baqueta€™ s system to make the New York Timesa€™ 
s a€oereportinga€D the opposite of objective in order to better position himself for what he 
thought would be the future Hillary Rodham Clinton presidency:

Adam Davidson: a€™Dean Baquet and the N[ew ]Y[ork ]T[imes]^€\ used] power to OVER emphasize minor 
Democratic issues and to UNDER emphasize major GOP issuesa€!. Historians will remember this period 
in US history as a time in which a muscular anti-Democratic ethnonationalism emerged and sought to 
eliminate the countrya€™ s fundamental valuesa€!. [And during this] the N[ew ]Y[ork ]T[imesa€™ 
s]a€! lapel­
grabbing, attention shaping power has, largely, been used to focus the worlda€™ s attention on 
nothing issues, like her emails. Worsea€! Baquet has been explicit: if we report on things in such 
a way that more on aCcethe lefta€D consistently like and more on a€cethe righta€D consistently 
dona€™ t like, then we have faileda€! independent of the actual facts on the ground. This has 
directly impacted the day-to-day journalistic
decisions                                                                                           
                                                                                                of 
the N[ew ]Y[ork ]T[imes]a€!. Say Baquet had announced that the NYTa€™ s role is to pay close 
attention to important issues and to cover them factually, accurately, and fearlessly, with 
appropriate contexta€!. [Then] nearly every front page, every hero block on <http://nyt.com> for 
the last four years would have been different. The articles would have been different. Sharper. 
Better. More accuratea€!

LINK:

Adam Davidson @adamdavidson

TIL that people still don't understand why so many journalists are mad at Dean Baquet and the NYT. 
Yes! There has been much amazing reporting done. Yes! You can point to many articles about Trump 
and an anti-democratic GOP. But, 1/
12:01 PM r™ Apr 21,2022

6,369Likesl,701Retweets

The world is now much worse as a result of Baqueta€™ s a€oeleadershipa€n. And Dean Baquet cannot 
dare admit to othersa€”and perhaps not even to himselfa€”how profoundly he betrayed his people, and 
his profession.

Very nicely put by NYU Law Dean Trever Morrison:

David Lat: Dean Trevor Morrison Speaks Out About Anti-Semitism Controversy at NYU Law: a€~Dean 
Morrisona€!. "As members of a common educational community, we owe to one another duties that, in 
some respects, go beyond what we owe to the public at large. In particular, we are obliged to 
refrain from saying or doing things to other members of this community that entail a€oethreatening, 
tormenting, mocking, intimidating,
maliciously or inappropriately ridiculing anotheraC™ s work or comments beyond the scope of 
scholarly inquirya€Da€! treat fellow members of this community with respecta€!. The Coases thread 
at the heart of this controversy did not consistently live up to that standarda€!. Vigorous debate, 
disagreement, and dissent is vital to a university communitya€!. But within the NYU community, such 
debate cana€”indeed, musta€”be
conducted   in ways that demonstrate mutual respect, and that affirm that we all deserve to feel 
safe as fully fledged members of this communitya€!. Part of doing better is striving to find 
effective and respectful ways to have difficult, even painful conversations with those with whom we 
disagreea€!. The Coases listserv may itself be part of the problem herea€!. The administration may 
well choose to consider alternative communications
platformsa€!. In the meantime, I would urge that the use of Coases be limited to the kinds of 
simple informational exchanges for which it was initially intendeda€!

LINK:

Original Jurisdiction

Dean Trevor Morrison Speaks Out About Anti-Semitism Controversy At NYU Law

Welcome to Original Jurisdiction, the latest legal publication by me, David Lat. You can learn more 
about Original Jurisdiction by reading its About page, you can reach me by email at 
davidlat@substack.com, and you can subscribe by clicking on the button belowa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 11 likes A- 5 comments A- David Lat

I keep trying to write something about how a university needs to balance its role as a place where 
ideas are generated and put forward, a place where ideas are evaluated and assessed, and a place 
where scholars are trained and supported. I keep failing. Dean Morrison looks to be doing a better 
job than I do.
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Subscribe now


Original Jurisdiction

Dean Trevor Morrison Speaks Out About Anti-Semitism Controversy At NYU Law

Welcome to Original Jurisdiction, the latest legal publication by me, David Lat. You can learn more 
about Original Jurisdiction by reading its About page, you can reach me by email at 
davidlat@substack.com, and you can subscribe by clicking on the button belowa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 11 likes A- 5 comments A- David Lat

I keep trying to write something about how a university needs to balance its role as a place where 
ideas are generated and put forward, a place where ideas are evaluated and assessed, and a place 
where scholars are trained and supported. I keep failing. Dean Morrison looks to be doing a better 
job than I do.
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Subscribe now

