Subscribe now

Key Insights:


Share

1. The most recent round of Tech elephants, rhinoceroses, unicorns, and spiny lizardsa€”Netflix, 
Shopify, etc.a€”are very unlikely to payoff for those investors who stay on the ride to the very 
end.

2. That said, they were very much worth doing even if they never make their shareholders any money. 
The growth of communities of engineering, entrepreneurial, and organizational practice is a huge 
benefit for innovation and growtha€”and the overwhelming bulk of that becomes non-rival public 
knowledge, that nobody can make scarce and hence charge people through the nose for.

3. Having your rich and your superrich fund R&D for little return is not the worst thing to have 
happen.

4. The ideas behind a€oeWeb3a€na€”an end to the walled-garden Web2 internet, with the useful parts 
of the social graph trustable and publicly accessible to anyone who wants to communicatea€”are 
great ones.

5. The ideas behind a€oeWeb2a€na€”the clickbait-ad walled-gardensa€”are horrible. And it is not 
just Facebook and Twitter. Google and Amazon are manifestly less useful than they were a decade and 
a half ago. Why? Because using pixels to inform is less profitable than using them for selling ads, 
and the companies have decided to be evil.

6. Code is fundamental: a tech-finance drought is no reason not to learn to code. It is a reason to 
get a job working for a company that already has a real product, and, you know, profits.

7. At bottom, all of a€cecryptoa€D is very familiar. It is taking out a map, drawing property lots 
boundaries on them, and then trying to sell those lots to people by telling them that the railroad 
is coming through. And in the end everyone will be very happy If the railroad does come through, 
and does not decide to build its river-crossing bridge ten miles north.

8. Hexapodia!

Language-Path: Arbwyth->Trade 24->Cherguelen->Triskw
From: Twirlip of the Mists

Subject: Blighter Video thread


Keywords: Hexapoaia as me Key insignt

Distribution: Threat of the Blight
Approved: yes

Date: 8.68 days since Fall of Relay

I haven't had a chance to see the famous video from
Straumli Realm, except as an evocation. (My only
gateway onto the Net is very expensive.) Is it true
that humans have six legs? I wasn't sure from the

References:

• Scott Chipolina & George Steer: The Terr a/Luna Hall of Shame 
<https://www.ft.com/content/40cQ6a4f-3586-40be-b5ad-b836b5dcdc0d>

• BradDeLong: Teslaa€™ s Valuation(s)



>rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Teslaa€™ s Valuation(s), &

FIRST: Teslaa€™ s Valuation(s) There I was, noodling around, sitting outside in the morning 
California sunshine (66F, going up to 80F at 5 PM), picking up scraps of information for tonighta€™ 
s a€oeHexapodia Podcasta€D taping with Noah Smith on a€cecryptoa€D. I found myself looking at 
Teslaa€™ s stock price: after all, a€oecryptoa€D today appears highly correlated in its stock 
market valuation with a€oetecha€D, and Tesla is now looking like a
tech-factor stock rather than a manufacturing-factor stock. That is, Tesla is trading as if it is 
constructing a walled garden within which it will then leverage a piece of software written once 
that runs everywhere and harvests the activity of its users for some chain of actions vague in the 
middle that ends with a€oePROFITS LARGE FOREVER !a€D. It is not trading like a company whose 
profits depend on large-scale efficient execution of manufacturing
processesa€”a company that makes large things out of metal using technologies for which the 
knowledge is widely distributeda€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 4 likes A- 10 comments A- Brad DeLong

• Brad DeLong: Wonders ofA3Ae Invisible Crypto World


iBrad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Wonders of AMe Invisible Crypto World, &

FIRST: Matt Levine on Wonders of the Invisible Crypto World: The South Sea Company at least had a 
business plan: Matt Levine: Another Algorithmic Stablecoin Isna€™ t: a€~Terraa€!an algorithmic 
stablecoina€!. One UST can always be exchanged for a floating quantity of Luna with a market value 
of $la€!. On first principles this is insanea€!. If Luna trades at $0.01, you can print 10 million 
of them and buy 100,000 Terra and push the price up. But if
Luna trades at $0.00a€! it cannot be used to support the price of Terra. And because you just made 
it up, there is no particular reason for [Luna] to be worth anything, so there is no particular 
reason for [Terra] to be worth a dollara€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 1 like A- 8 comments A- Brad DeLong

• Adam Ozimek: Think Bigger About Remote Work


.                    

Think Bigger About Remote Work

"             “*•' Noahpinion

Ia€™ ve written a€” and I still believe a€” that the rise of remote work triggered by the Covid 
pandemic will end up changing the way we produce things in the modern world. It has the potential 
to do for white-collar industries what electricity did for factory jobs a€” to distribute 
production to less costly places and allow more flexibility in job tasks. But foa€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 54 likes A- 58 comments A- Noah Smith

• Noah Smith: Meme Stocks & Bitcoin Will Not Redistribute Wealth: Financio-Populism Is Built on 
Dreams & Smoke

Noahpinion

Meme stocks and Bitcoin will not redistribute wealth

a€oeThe percentage you're paying is too high priced/ While you're living beyond all your means/ And 
the man in the suit has just bought a new car/ From the profit he's made on your dreamsa€D a€” 
Traffic Ia€™ m trying to resist the urge to keep blogging obsessively about the Ukraine war. So 
instead today I thought Ia€™ d talk about something thata€™ s been nagging at me for a while a€” 
the rise of what I call a€oefinancio-populisma€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 44 likes A- 17 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Noah Smith: Suddenly Startups Are Having Trouble Raising Money. Why?: a€~A Few Reasons for the 
Big VC Funding Crunch

Noahpinion

Suddenly startups are having trouble raising money. Why?

About a month and a half ago, I started noticing my friends in the tech startup world getting 
grumpier. Founders were suddenly saying that they were having trouble raising money, and VCs were 
grumbling that they couldna€™ t find good deals. That got my attention, because for over a year the 
story had been the exact opposite. If you dona€™ t know a lot of people in startup-world, ita€™ s 
hard to imagine just how flush with cash the whole sector has been
since late 2020. Random people you sort-of know became billionaires overnight. People who used to 
talk about raising millions of dollars now talked about raising hundreds of millions of dollars. 
And so on. The word a€ceunicorna€D a€” a startup worth over a billion dollars a€” was no longer 
particularly impressive. Instead you heard words like a€oedecacorna€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 40 likes A- 16 comments A- Noah Smith

• Noah Smith: What Kind of Financial Asset Is Bitcoin?: Is It Money? Digital Gold? A Tech Stock? 
Recent Events Shed Some Light on The Question


What kind of financial asset is Bitcoin?

A lot of interesting things have been happening in crypto-world recently, mostly bad for crypto 
investors but interesting from a financial perspective. The whole asset class has fallen a lot 
recently, so that now all of crypto combined is estimated to be wortha€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 108 likes A- 58 comments A- Noah Smith

• Nicholas Weaver: Blockchains & Cryptocurrencies: Burn It With Fire 
<https://www.ischool.berkeley.edu/files/blockchains-and-crvptocurrencies-burn-it-fire-nicholas-weave
i>

+, of course:

• Vernor Vinge: A Fire Upon the Deep <https: //archive .org/details/fireupondeepOO ving_ 0/mode/1 
up>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

