Anthony McAuliffe: 1944'. a€~HEADQUARTERS 101ST AIRBORNE DIVISION :: Office of the Division 
Commander :: 24 December 1944

Whata€™ s Merry about all this, you ask? Wea€™re fighting a€” ita€™ s cold, we arena€™ t home. All 
true but what has the proud Eagle Division accomplished with its worthy comrades the 10th Armored 
Division, the 705th Tank Destroyer Battalion and all the rest? Just this: We have stopped cold 
everything that has been thrown at us from the
North, East, South and West. We have identifications from four German Panzer Divisions, two German 
Infantry Divisions and one German Parachute Division. These units, spearheading the last desperate 
German lunge, were headed straight west for key points when the Eagle Division was hurriedly 
ordered to stem the advance. How effectively this
was done will be written in history; not alone in our Divisiona€™ s glorious history but in World 
history. The Germans actually did surround us, their radios blared our doom. Their Commander 
demanded our surrender in the following imprudent arrogance:

December 22nd 1944 :: To the U. S. A. Commander of the encircled town of Bastogne.

The fortune of war is changing. This time the U. S. A. forces in and near Bastogne have been 
encircled by strong German armored units. More German armored units have crossed the river Ourthe 
near Ortheuville, have taken Marche and reached St. Hubert by passing through 
Hompres-Sibret-Tillet. Libramont is in German
hands.

There is only one possibility to save the encircled U.S.A. Troops from total annihilation: that is 
the honorable surrender of the encircled town. In order to think it over a term of two hours will 
be granted beginning with the presentation of this note.
If this proposal should be rejected the German Artillery Corps and six heavy A. A. Battalions are 
ready to annihilate the U.S.A. Troops in and near Bastogne. The order for firing will be given 
immediately after this two houra€™ s term.

All the serious civilian losses caused by this Artillery fire would not correspond with the well 
known American humanity.
The German Commander

The German Commander received the following reply:

22 December 1944 :: a€oeTo the German Commander:

NUTS !

The American Commander

Allied Troops are counterattacking in force. We continue to hold Bastogne. By holding Bastogne we 
assure the success of the Allied Armies. We know that our Division Commander, General Taylor, will 
say: a€oeWell Done!a€D
We are giving our country and our loved ones at home a worthy Christmas present and being 
privileged to take part in this gallant feat of arms are truly making for ourselves a Merry 
Christmas.

/s/ A. c. MCAULIFFE

/t/ MCAULIFFE

Commanding

LINK: <https://warontherocks .com/2021/12/nuts-mcauliffes-1944-christmas-letter-2/>


