Bitter experience has shown us that a healthy public sphere can only be built on something other 
than click-baiting and eyeball-gluing advertisements. SubStack is now in there pitching to make 
things different. I wona€™ t command you to become a paying subscriber of this a€~Stack: I
will command you to become a paying subscriber of some a€~Stack(s)

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: Hoping to Win Some Sort of Darwin Award?

Stephanie Mencimer: At CPAC2022a€l the last person I expected to run in to here is Alex Kozinski, 
former 9th circuit judgea€! [me too] casualtya€! just here a€oeto get some germsa€D for his immune 
system. Kozinski flew here with a friend on a private jet because he wona€™ t wear
a mask, is unvaccinateda€!

LINK:

Stephanie Mencimer @smencimer

Kozinski flew here with a friend on a private jet because he wona€™ t wear a mask, is unvaccinated, 
and in case you were wondering, says he does not know anything about Bidena€™ s pick for the 
Supreme Court. #CPAC2022
3:54 PM a~™ Feb 25,2022

36Likes5Retweets

Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...
Share

First: Georgia Senate Candidates Against Factories in Georgia

Is this really how you win a Republican senatorial primary these days?

Margaret Newkirk: Riviana€™s Soros Connection Becomes Issue in Georgia Governor Race: a€~A $5 
billion Rivian Automotive Inc. electric-vehicle plant planned for central Georgiaa€!. Former U.S. 
Senator David Perduea€! holding a Tuesday rallya€! to
protest the plant and investor George Sorosa€!. a€oeBrian Kemp is selling us out to George 
Sorosa€!. Hea€™ s pledged our tax dollars to lure a California company funded by George Soros to 
Georgia and is calling it a€~economic developments!. Kemp thought
he could get away with this under the guise of a€~economic development,a€™ but all he is doing here 
is selling us out and lining George Sorosa€™ s pockets.a€Da€! Soros Fund Managements! owns more 
than 2% of RivianS™ s sharesS! the lOth-largest
shareholders!.

PerdueS! has campaigned largely on his support from TrumpS”and his embrace of the ex-presidentS™ s 
false claims of a stolen 2020 elections!. The planned planS! 45 milesS! east of Atlanta, isS! 
promising to employ more than 7,500 people and pump
out 400,000 electric vehicles annuallyS!. The plan has local detractors, who complain that it would 
bring environmental problems and Atlanta-style sprawl to the community. TheyS™ ve launched a 
Facebook page and a GoFundMe site to raise money to hire a
lawyerS!. The companyS™s November IPO was the sixth biggest in U.S. history, generating $13.5 
billion in net proceedsS!

LINK: 
<https://thechicagodailytribune.com/rivians-soros-connection-becomes-issue-in-georgia-governor-race-
crains-chicago-business/>

As I understand it, Georgia will commit $125 million in subsidies. If the direct-employment number 
is an accurate forecast, that is a $10,000 state-tax capital cost per-job-created number. I see the 
substantive equities of the subsidies this way: They are almost surely not a good use of tax
money for the nation as a whole, for which industrial-location decisions are close to being 
zero-sum. But they are almost surely a good use of tax money, from the perspective of generating 
enough economic activity within Georgia to allow for lower state tax rates on George's current
residents. Brian KempS”and RivianS”are playing the subsidies-for-industrial-location game as it is 
currently played in America, which is not a very good game. And Brian Kemp is representing the 
narrow interests of his constituents (and not exhibiting much American civic virtue).

Brian Kemp is not cheating his constituents to enrich George Soros and other Rivian investors.
But David Perdue is trying to cheat his constituents.

It may well be that behind the scenes Purdue in these people are attempting to reassure Rivian, 
saying: DonS™ t worryS”this is only boob-bait for the bubbas; actually, we are not opposed to 
economic development in order to make Georgians richer. The problem, of course, is that there
is only one way to react when somebody says: IS™ m a liar, but IS™ m not lying to yowS’TS™ m lying 
to the other guy. The way to react is to think: There are low-wage areas of Maryland and Colorado, 
and even of New York and California, where we could locate, and not have to
worry about the state government going mushugannah against economic development because some 
wrong-kind-of-Black person from Atlanta might get a job, or some rootless-cosmopolite foreign-born 
liberal Jew might be involved.

One Video: Drone Warfare:

Rob Lee @RALee85

Another video of a Ukrainian TB2 UCAV strike, presumably with a MAM munition, on a Russian Buk 
system. Looks like the strike is on a Buk-M2 9A316 TEL/transloader with a 9A317 TELAR next to it. 
Notably, Syrian Buk-M2E had success against TB2 in Idlib,
t .me/milinfoli ve/7 7 S!


4:36 AM r™ Feb 28,2022

1,644Likes385Retweets


One Picture:

Rouble tumbles to record low

Exchange rate against US dollar


2000     2005

Rouble hits a low
of 118

2010     2015     2020

100

120

Scale inverted
Source: Refinitiv

©FT

Very Briefly Noted:

• Michael Worobey & al.: The Huanan Market Was the Epicenter of SARS-CoVa€ “2 Emergence: 
a€~Geographical clustering of the earliest known COVIDa€“19 cases and the proximity of positive 
environmental samples to live-animal vendors suggest that the Huanan
Seafood Wholesale Market in Wuhan was the site of origin of the COVIDa€“19 pandemica€l 
<https://zenodo.org/record/6299116#.Yh4vhi-B 1R9>

•  Martin Wolf: Putin Has Reignited The Conflict Between Tyranny & Liberal Democracy: a€~A war of 
choice on the children of a peaceful democracy is not an action we can allow ourselves to forgeta€l 
<https://www.ft.com/content/be932917-e467-4b7d-82b8-3ff4015874b3>

•  Ryan Best & Elena MejAa: The Lasting Legacy Of Redlining: a€~We looked at 138 formerly redlined 
cities and found most were still segregateda€”just like they were designed to bea€l <https ://pro 
jects .fivethirtyeight .com/redlining/>

• Sergei Guriev: The Implications of Sanctions on the Russian Economy 
<https://bcf.princeton.edu/events/sergei-guriev-on-the-implications-of-sanctions-on-the-russian-econ
omv/>

• Josh Marshall: d€™ The a€cenofly zoned€dslogan is just a feel-good phrase you learned from 
watching other wars on CNN but it means declaring war on the Russia over Ukraine. Thata€™ s nuts 
and you need to take a deep breath and think about what youa€™ re saying.
Enda€l

Josh Marshall @joshtpm

12/ territory. The 'no fly zone' slogan is just a feel good phrase you learned from watching other 
wars on CNN but it means declaring war on the Russia over Ukraine. That's nuts and you need to take 
a deep breath and think about what you're saying. End.
12:36 PM r™ Mar 1,2022

187Likes27Retweets

Paragraphs:

Paul Krugman: Overheaters, Skewers & the Nonlinear Economy: a€~If demand is skeweda€l people are 
buying much more of some things than usual, but less of others, so some parts of the economy are 
running hot while others run colda€l price increases in the booming sectorsa€l
outweigh price cuts in the slumping sectors, raising the average rate of inflation above what 
youa€™ d expect given the overall level of demanda€!. We agree that both overheating and skewed 
demand are driving inflation, [but] their relative importance matters. If you think ita€™ s mainly
overheating, you want the Federal Reserve to slam the brakea€l maybe even pushing us into 
recession. If you think ita€™ s mainly skewa€l you want a much milder response, easing off the gas 
pedal but mostly counting on supply and demand adjustments to bring inflation down. But an
argument about relative magnitudes isna€™ t the same as a fight over fundamentalsa€l. Therea€™ s 
far more consensus about inflation among serious thinkers than many people, including some of the 
participants in this debate, may realizea€l

LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2>

Trevon Logan: Slavery Was Never an American Economic Engine: a€~Assessments of efficiency and 
productivity consider only the perspective of the enslaversa€l takes the traditional logic of 
a€cefirms/ownersa€D and a€ceworkers/labora€D much further than it should goa€l.
Emancipation unlocked immense value for formerly enslaved Black people. Simply coming and going as 
they pleased during leisure time was a remarkable source of freedom and agency. Mundane tasks took 
on new meaning when done outside of chattel bondage. Neglecting to account


LINK: <https://www.bloombergquint.com/gadflv/slavery-was-never-an-american-economic-engine>

Tyler Cowen: Putin as a Man of Ideas'. a€~The Russian attack and possible dismemberment of Ukraine 
reflects the power of ideasa€!. Putin has embraced a coterie of Russian intellectuals, marketing 
what is sometimes called Eurasianism, who parrot and develop the notion of Russia as a
power-deserving Eurasian civilizationa€!. If you write books, whether good or bad ones, and wonder 
whether your work matters, I suggest the answer lies before you on your TV screen each evening. 
Russia is a nation of ideas, led by people who are obsessed with ideas. The rest of the
world, most of all Europe, will need better ideas in turna€!

LINK: <https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2022/02/putin-as-a-man-of-ideas .html>

Matt Yglesias: 23 Thoughts on the War in Ukraine'. a€~The westernizers were right then and right 
today. The high points of Russian culturea€’’Lermontov, Gogol, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Bely, Bulgakov, 
Tchaikovsky, Eisenstein, etc.a€”are firmly part of the western cultural tradition.
Liberal democracy now has firm roots in places as far afield as Japan and South Korea, and therea€™ 
s nothing about the orthodox soul that prohibits it from blossoming in Omsk and Perm and Nizhny 
Novgorod. Despite its considerable natural resource wealth, todaya€™ s Russia is
poorer than Latvia or Lithuania. With reform, peace, and integration into the European mainstream, 
Russia would be a richer, better place to be. On its current course, ita€™ 11 be the junior partner 
in an alliance with a China that has its own nationalist schemesa€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

23 thoughts on the war in Ukraine

I imagine that most of you have been reading and thinking a lot about Russia and Ukraine over the 
past week. Certainly I have. My thoughts are still a bit scattered, though, and I figured it would 
be better to present them non-traditionally than to try to strong-arm them into a column format.
Herea€™ s what Ia€™ ve been thinking abouta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 48 likes A- 59 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

Michael Kofman: a€™ The initial Russian operation was premised on terrible assumptions about 
Ukrainea€™ s ability & will to fight, and an unworkable concept of operations. Moscow badly 
miscalculated. The Russian operation was focused on getting to Kyiv quickly, forcing a
surrender, and pushing a small number of units forward quickly in a way that avoided large 
engagements with UKR forces. Theya€™ ve been skirting major cities, going for key road 
junctions/smaller towns, etc. Why did Moscow choose this course of action? A few theories: they
didna€™    t take Ukraine & its military seriously. They wanted to avoid attrition & devastation 
because of consequences for pol goals in Ukraine, costs of casualties, and they want to hide the 
costs from the public. It is also possible that Russian military planners genuinely wanted to avoid
inflicting high levels of destruction given how unpopular this war was going to be at home. Most 
Russian soldiers are young & have little interest in fighting Ukrainians as an opponenta€!. This 
isa€! unworkablea€!. It seems they tried to win quickly and cheaply via a€~thunder runs,a€™
hoping to avoid the worst of sanctions & Western outrage. Theya€™ ve ended up in the worst of all 
worlds, trickling more resources into a failed strategy. However, this is barely a few days into 
the wara€!. The bulk of the Russian military has yet to enter the fighta€!

LINK:

Michael Kofman @KofmanMichael

Long thread about how I think the first 96 hours have gone, still very early/incomplete 
impressions. The initial Russian operation was premised on terrible assumptions about Ukrainea€™ s 
ability & will to fight, and an unworkable concept of operations. Moscow badly miscalculated. 1/
7:37 PM a~™ Feb 28,2022

36,902Likes 10,271 Retweets
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA....
Share

