Subscribe now

First: Statistics or Calculus in High School?

I wish to concur in part with and to dissent in part from Matthew Yglesias here.

(1) Concur: Figuring out what people have learned and retained is absolutely essential to doing 
education successfully.

(2) Dissent: On the other hand, often scoring badly on standardized tests is used as an excuse to 
essentially give up.

(3) Dissent: And I really, really disagree that a€oeyou cana€™t really teach statistics properly 
without calculusa€D:

Matthew Yglesias: Californiaa€™ s Math Detracting Initiative Seems Pretty Misguided'. a€~One big 
problema€! is you cana€™t really teach statistics properly without calculus, which I think goes to 
underscore that this is not really a debate about the proper sequencing of matha€! [but] another 
manifestation of the dysfunctional tendency in some edu-left circles to
stigmatize all efforts at measurement. If you sort kids into different math tracks based on their 
test scores, that might reveal that Black and Latino kids are doing worse than white and Asian 
ones. If you refuse to sort, you can pretend youa€™ ve achieved equality. But will you provide 
useful education?a€! Lizzy Hull Barnes, who is in charge of San Francisco math
education, saying ita€™ s invalid to look at test outcomes to see whether kids are doing better or 
worse: a€oeln high school they take the test one time in 11th gradea€!. Ita€™ s difficult to use 
that as a measurement for success in all of mathematics .a€D 1100% understand that lots of 
perfectly normal parents and students got test fatigue in the heyday of No Child Left
Behind and that there is such a thing as too much assessment. But the authors of the proposed 
framework are trying to push the statea€™ s schools in a strange new direction with almost no valid 
research they can cite to indicate that ita€™ s likely to work. Ita€™ s particularly egregious 
because while California schools do exhibit a racial achievement gap, their results
are sub-par across the board. They should be trying to imitate other, better-performing states, not 
inventing a whole new way of doing high school matha€!

LINK:



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Ben Thompson: Intel vs. TSMC, How Samsung and TSMC Won, MAD Chips'. a€~Globalization generally, 
and chips specifically, are a sort of weapon of mutually assured economic destruction^! more 
comforting than you might expect when considered 
systematicallya€!<https://stratechery.com/2021/intel-vs-tsmc-how-samsung-and-tsmc-won-mad-chips/>

• Barry Ritholtz: Business Not As Usual: Foundations ofESG: a€~Robert Schwartz and Robert Zevin 
were Wall Street curiosities. At the height of an era defined by Ivan Boeskya€™ s mantra of greed, 
the two leftists pioneered what became known assustainable investinga€! 
<https://ritholtz.com/2021/12/business-not-as-usual-the-foundations-of-esg/>

• Philip Ball: The Chase for Fusion Energy. a€~An industry of nuclear-fusion firms promises to have 
commercial reactors ready in the next decadea€! <https ://www.nature 
.com/immersive/d41586-021-03401- w/index .html>

• Jay Daigle: What is the Axiom of Choice?: a€~One of the easiest ways to start a (friendly) fight 
in a group of mathematicians is to bring up the axiom of choicea€! 
<https://iavdaigle.net/blog/what-is-the-axiom-of-choice/>

•  Jim Baggott: a€~Shut Up & Calculatea€™ Does a Disservice to Quantum Mechanics'. a€~The clichA© 
has it that the Copenhagen interpretation demands adherence without deep enquiry. That does physics 
a disservicea€! 
<https://aeon.co/essavs/shut-up-and-calculate-does-a-disservice-to-quantum-mechanics>

• William Quinn & John D. Turner: Riding the Bubble or Taken for a Ride? Investors in the British 
Bicycle Mania_ : a€~A hand-collected sample of 12,000 investors during an asset price reversal in 
the shares of British bicycle companies between 1895 and 1900a€!. Informed investors reduced their 
holdings substantially during the crash, suggesting that they were riding the
bubble. Those who performed worst werea€! gentlemen living near a stock exchange, who had the most 
time, money, and opportunity to engage in speculation^ I 
<https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/246500/1/1776320050.pdf>

Paragraphs:

Cosma Shalizi: Review of Ashworth, Berry, & Bruno de Mesquita, Theory & Credibility. a€~The big 
point that the authors want to drive home is that rigorous formal modeling and careful analysis of 
empirical data ought to be seen as complementsa€!. It is by articulating formal models that we see 
what our ideas imply, and what assumptions are needed to reach various conclusionsa€!. The
a€oecredibility revolutiona€D, the rather self-congratulatory name given to the wide adoption of 
more careful methods for non-experimental causal inference in the social sciences since the 1980s. 
(I wish I could remember who joked that ita€™ s really been a revolution of in-credulity about 
everyone elsea€™ s identification assumptions.) Good courses in econometrics and data analysis for 
the
social sciences will now give these methods a lot of attentiona€!. Causal-inference techniques. 
Rather, theya€™re relevant here because they often give us way to estimate the quantities wea€™re 
theorizing about, and not other quantities which resemble our favorites only superficiallya€!

LINK: <http://bactra.org/reviews/theorv-and-credibility.html>

Rachel Donadio: LampedusaaC™ s a€~The Leopard,a€™ Fifty Years on: a€~One novel is the key to 
Sicily: aCceThe Leopard,a€D Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusaa€™ s masterpiecea€! the decline and fall 
of the house of Salina, a family of Sicilian aristocratsa€!. Don Fabrizio, the world-weary, 
cleareyed Prince of Salina, scion of an old feudal family and lover of astronomy. It opens in 1860
with the landing in Sicily of forces intent on unifying Italy and ends in 1910, when a priest comes 
to assess the reliquaries of the princea€™ s now aged spinster daughters. In between, it recounts 
the fortunes of the princea€™ s favorite nephew, Tancredi, who supports the unification efforts of 
Giuseppe Garibaldi more out of opportunism than idealism and eventually becomes a diplomat.

Tancredia€™ s career is made possible only by his marrying moneya€”which inevitably means marrying 
down. To the horror of his aunt, the devastation of a cousin who loves him and the wry 
comprehension of his uncle, Tancredi falls in love with Angelica, the beautiful daughter of an 
upwardly mobile landed peasant father and an illiterate mothera€!. Tancredia€! speaks the novela€™ 
s most
famous line: a€oelf we want things to stay as they are,a€D he tells his uncle, a€oethings will have 
to change. a€D Tancredia€™ s declaration lies at the heart of a€oeThe Leopard,a€D at once a loving 
portrait of a vanished society and a critique of its provincialisma€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes .com/2008/07/29/arts/29iht-booktue.1.14826755 .html>

Ellen Kushner: Hallelujah, Hallelujah a€\& Jewish Space Lasers: a€~I finally got my Introduction 
for the French centennial edition of THE WORM OUROBOROS done!a€! 3,900 words, which is longer than 
some papers I wrote in college. And possibly better-researched. God bless the internet!a€! Herea€™ 
s the most requested bit: "It took my friend Caroline Stevermer to show me the way
in to E.R.Eddisona€™ s world. We had met our first day at University, quickly discovered our love 
of the same books (which always makes a friendship!), and gradually admitted to each other that we 
both wanted to be writers of fantasy.l Caroline is much better-read than I. And happens to be one 
of the worlda€™ s great readers-aloud. She picked up my copy of The Worm, leafed through it a
little, and then began to read to me, her voice pitched low with amusement: a€~Then fared Juss to 
the guest-chamber, where Lord Brandoch Daha lay a-sleeping, and waked him and told him all. 
Brandoch Daha snuggled him under the bedclothes and said, a€ceLet me be and let me sleep yet two 
hours. Then will I rise and bathe and array myself and eat my morning meal, and thereafter will I
take rede with thee and tell thee somewhat for thine advantage. I have not slept in a goose-feather 
bed and sheets of lawn these many weeks. If thou plague me now, by God, I will incontinently take 
horse over the Stile to Krothering, and let thee and thine affairs go to the devil.a€da€™ And there 
it was at last! A hero I could recognize: the sharp-tongued, witty one who also just happened to be
the best swordsman in the worlda€!. In his company, I was willing to venture along with his 
companionsa€!

LINK:


Ellen Kushner's Bad Advice

Hallelujah, Hallelujah ...& Jewish Space Lasers

I finally got my Introduction for the French centennial edition of THE WORM OUROBOROS done! I 
thought it was going to be a couple of pages, but it turned into 3,900 words, which is longer than 
some papers I wrote in college. And possibly better-researched. God bless the interneta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- 7 comments A- Ellen Kushner

Steven Johnson: Seven Types of Serendipity: a€~So much of the creative process is about being open 
to happy accidents. But how do you make them more likely to happen?a€! Exaptationa€!. Gutenberg 
borrowing the screw press that hea€™ d observed winemakers using and applying it to his nascent 
printing technologya€!
LINK:



Adjacent Possible

Seven Types of Serendipity

[This is the latest post in my series on designing a workflow for thinking.] a€oeOne thing a person 
cannot do, no matter how rigorous his analysis or heroic his imagination ,a€D the Nobel laureate 
Thomas Schelling once observed, a€oeis to draw up a list of things that would never occur to 
him.a€D Schellinga€™ s original point was part of a larger argument defending the intellectual 
exercise of
wargaming. Well-designed war gamesa€”like the ones created by the RAND Corporation, where Schelling 
worked in the late 50sa€”were a way of helping military strategists stumble across new 
opportunities or vulnerabilities that would have never otherwise occurred to them. But therea€™ s a 
general applicability to Schellinga€™ s quip as well: so much of trying to think imaginatively is
figuring out ways to trick your brain into coming up with an idea that would have not occurred to 
it otherwise. Now, ita€™ s true that one way to do this is obvious: go reada€”or have conversations 
witha€’’other people, and borrow whatever interesting new ideas you uncover from those 
interactions. But I think therea€™ s a more general problem here, one that requires more devious 
methods
to get around. And it boils down to the question: how do you surprise yourself? What part of your 
workflow supports unplanned discoveriesa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 11 likes A- 3 comments A- Steven Johnson

David French: Deconstructing White Evangelical Politics'. a€~My response to the question of whether 
theology and doctrine were of primary importance to the movement was alwaya€! Republican Christian 
conservatism is mainly driven by deeply rooted, theologically coherent faith convictions and not by 
the perhaps more deeply rooted a€oefolkway sa€D or customs of a disproportionately
white, disproportionately rural, and disproportionately Southern American subculture. I no longer 
believe this to be truea€!. The theological convictions of Christian conservatism were put to a 
profound stress test, and the convictions failed. Partisanship prevailed. Populism prevailed. In 
some ways, the South prevaileda€!. Ia€™m old enough to remember the words and expressed beliefs of
even some of the most enthusiastic Trumpist Evangelicals before they supported Trump, and this much 
I know: If Ia€™ d told them in December 2014 that white Evangelicals would shortly vote in 
overwhelming numbers for a thrice-married man who bragged about grabbing women by their genitals, 
appeared in a Playboy movie, paid hush money to cover up an affair with a porn star, and was
facing multiple corroborated claims of sexual harassment and sexual assault, theya€™ d say that 
only Democrats were that hypocritical. Then, if I followed that up by saying that a 
disproportionate number of that same Evangelical community would shun pre-vaccine mask-wearing and 
social distancing in the midst of a deadly pandemic that would claim hundreds of thousands of 
American lives
and then disproportionately reject life-saving vaccines, theya€™ d think I was an anti-Christian 
bigot. If I capped off my prophecy by noting that white Evangelicals would be far more likely than 
virtually any other American community to embrace wild election conspiracy theories and then a 
subset of that community would literally storm the Capitol with prayers on their lips, then their
assessment of me would be clinched. Theya€™ d think Ia€™ d simply lost my mind. But thata€™ s where 
we are. And dona€™ t think for a minute that those views are the only Evangelical outliersa€!

LINK:


ACLLzAAA^ AAALLALAp/AV kzWAA V/17 V/A CLLV/VI VACLAAAAO V7A DVAUU1 11 CIA CIO OAAAV/AAL Cl A A VI 
DVAUU1 UDDUUll, LAAV J CIV^ VI OCIJ LAACIL V1AAAJ V/11AV7VA CILO YVVAV HAUL 11J p/V7VzA ALA VILA . 
111V11, AA A A VIA AVI VV Vz VI LAACIL Lip/ 17 J OUJ AAA^ L11UL Cl VLAOp/A V7p/V7A LA VIA A Cl LV/ 
11 Lilli 17 V/l V/A LAACIL O CIA A AV/ A-/V Clll^V/ll^Cll V/V/AAAAAA LL11A L J VVV7L1AVL Oil Lill 
p/A V/ V CIV/V/AAAV/ A A AUDIA VV VCLA AA A^ Cl A A VI OV7VACLA V1AO LClllVAll^ AAA LI IV/ 1111 
VIOL VIA Cl VIV/Cl VIA J p7 CIA AVIV/A A AA V/ LAACIL VVV7L1AV1 V/ACIAAAA A A Lil AVIA V/VIO VIA LA 
AVI LIO CIA A V

and then disproportionately reject life-saving vaccines, theya€™ d think I was an anti-Christian 
bigot. If I capped off my prophecy by noting that white Evangelicals would be far more likely than 
virtually any other American community to embrace wild election conspiracy theories and then a 
subset of that community would literally storm the Capitol with prayers on their lips, then their
assessment of me would be clinched. Theya€™ d think Ia€™ d simply lost my mind. But thata€™ s where 
we are. And dona€™ t think for a minute that those views are the only Evangelical outliersa€!

LINK:

Deconstructing White Evangelical Politics

One of the most important questions in American politics and culture is this: Is white Evangelical 
politics primarily a product of consistent theological conviction or primarily a product of 
culture, tradition, and history? I single out white Evangelicals because they are both the most 
important cona€!

Read more

a year ago A- 199 likes A- 464 comments A- David French
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

For Paid Subscribers Exclusively:

