Subscribe now

FIRST: The Stakes at Salamisa€!

Salamis, where it was decided in the year -480 that Greece would not become just another province 
of the Achaemenid Persian Empire.

I have long been fascinated by the Achaemenid Persian Empire of -550 to -320 
<https://delong.tvpepad.com/delong_long_form/2015/08/musings-on-thomas-malthus-the-hellenistic-age-t
he-loyal-spirit-great-kings-of-iran-550-330-bce-and-other-topics-the-hones.html>.

And I have just finished a very good book. But I found reading it very strange indeed. The book is: 
Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones: Persians: The Age of the Great Kings <https: //w w w.amazon 
.com/dp/1472277287/>, about the Achaemenid Persian Empire in the Near East, a€“550 to a€“320. The 
book is chock-full of wonderfully fascinating facts, connections, and interpretations of what was 
going on in the Near East in the Achaemenid Persian age.
I recommend it highly.

Yet it has been a long time since I read a book in which the text so undermined the proclaimed 
moral point-of-view of the book.

The proclaimed point-of-view is, basically, that Greeks have lied about the Persiansa€”created a 
discourse of a€ceOrientalisma€D designed to a€oerepresenta€! the a€~coloniesa€™ and cultures of the 
Middle Eastern world in a way that would justify and support the Westa€™ s colonial 
enterprisea€la€D. Greeks painted Persian as a€oea fantastical land of mystery, dark shadows, places 
of intrigue, despotic rulers, enslaved women, and wealth beyond
imagination^!a€D, a place of a€oedecadence, luxury, and a certain backwardness of thoughta€!a€D But 
this was a€oea European inventiona€! of romance, exotic beings, haunting memories and landscapes, 
remarkable experiencesa€la€D.

It is time, he says, to move away from an invented a€ceOrientala€D landscape in which:

The Great Kings area€! lustful, capricious, mad tyrants, and the empire is regarded as an 
oppressive challenge to the Greek ideals of a€~freedoma€™ (whatever that meant)a€! the Persiansa€! 
[are] cowardly, scheming, effeminate, vindictive, and dishonourablea€!. the epitome of 
barbarianisma€!

It is time, he says, to present the a€oePersian Versiona€D of history.
But the problem is that the book then tellsa€”creditsa€”stories in which:

• the Persian Achaemenid Emperors are lustful and capricious (if not quite mad);

•  the Persian Empire is an oppressive challenge to all who think that absolutist monarchy without 
any semblance of due process is a thing on the menu they would rather not order; and

• the Persiansa€”at least the Persian A©litea€”«re scheming, vindictive, and dishonorable (if no 
more cowardly or effeminate than the standard).
So I left the book thinking, rather, that more was at stake in the three battles of Marathon, 
Salamis, and Plataea than I had previously thought.

I left the book thinking more strongly that each day was a good day in which the tide of absolute 
monarchy and casually murderous politics was pushed back by ideas of rule-of-law, due process, and 
obedience-to-the-laws-we-prescribe-to-ourselves.
And I left the book thinking that when Llewellyn-Jones claims that:

Nothing is reported of Xerxes, Artaxerxes III, Bagoas, or Parysatis which does not find ready 
parallels in well-attested information about Henry VIII, Ivan IV (the Terrible), or Wu Zetiana€!


he is saying something that is (a) false, and (b) not to the point. To the extent that we want to 
proclaim ourselves adopted children of the Athenians, it is not because we see them as precursors 
of Henry VIII a€oeThe Six-Wiveda€D Tudor or of Ivan IV a€oeThe Dreadeda€D Rurik.

Now do not get me wrong. I do like and respect the achievements of the Achaemenid Empire. The Pax 
Persica was a wonderful thing for the Near East <https://delong.typepad.com/delong long 
form/2015/08/musings-on-thomas-malthus-the-hellenistic-age-the-loyal-spirit-great-kings-of-iran-550-
330-bce-and-other-topics-the-hones.html>. The artisans and artists are stunning. Their view of a 
cosmopolitan world was far ahead of its timea€”even if it was only
of a world ruled by one tribe, the Persians, and one dynasty, the Haxamanishya, and one guy in the 
dynasty, the emperor.

Nevertheless, the story of the Achaemenid Empire as it comes down to us greatly reinforces the 
following lessons:

• There are great benefits to a government of limited powers that must follow procedures.

•  There are great benefits to a society in which people have rights, and are not just all slaves 
of the Great King to be tortured and murdered at his pleasure, or just because he is having a bad 
day.

• a€oeFreedoma€n is not just something to put in scare quotes and dismiss with a a€oewhatever that 
meanta€D.

• The imperial Persian court was a shitshow.

It was a shitshow from the moment that Darius I overthrew the legitimate Emperor Bardiya, and then 
claimed that hea€”Dariusa€”(a) never lied, (b) was the Servant of Holy Truth, and that (c) the real 
Bardiya had actually been killed earlier by a shape-shifting magician.
Perhaps it was a shitshow even before thena€!

Share

There is a story about Achaemenid Persian Emperor Artaxerxes II, Empress Dowager Parysatis, and 
Artaxerxesa€™ s faithful and effective servant Mithridates. With a straight face, in his Persians: 
The Age of the Great Kings <https://www.amazon.com/dp/1472277287/>, Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones credits 
this story:


Mithridatesa€! came to a bad end through his own stupidity a€!.. Mithridatesa€! declared, a€~You 
lot can say what you like but I tell you, Cyrus was killed by this handa€!.a€™ A sudden hush filled 
the room as the other guests, already sensing Mithridatesa€™ s fate, bent their heads to the 
grounda€!.

Parysatisa€! told the kinga€!. With his arms and legs bound, Mithridates was placed into the boat 
on his back, his head propped up at, and out of, the prow. Three guards approached, carrying 
another small boata€!. They placed it over the skiff in the ground and made it to fit on top of the 
other and fastened both together with ropes. Then they covered the wholestructure in muda€!. 
Mithridatesa€™ s head was left projecting outside, the
rest of his body concealed inside the hollow buried chamber.

Over the next days, Mithridates was force-fed with all sorts of food, and plenty of ita€!. The 
guards forced him to swallow by pricking his eyes with splintersa€!. They gave him a mixture of 
milk and honey to drink and they liberally poured the mixture into his mouth and all over his 
facea€!. Swarms of flies, wasps, and bees covered his face, entered intohismouth and crawled uphis 
nostrils and filled his ears. His enforced milk-and-
honey diet caused severe diarrhoeaa€!. Slowly his living body began to decay and putrefy within the 
cocoon, as maggots and worms swarmed out of the excrement and began to consume him from the inside. 
More days passeda€!.

It had taken Mithridates seventeen days to die. The a€~Ordeal of the Boatsa€™ , as it was known, 
was one of several institutionalised forms of the death penalty in the Achaemenid eraa€!.
Mithridatesa€™ s crime? Boasting about the role he played in saving Artaxerxes II and his throne 
from the rebellion led by Artaxerxesa€™ s younger brother (and Parysatisa€™ s favorite son) Cyrus.
First, did this actually happen?

I believe that our only source for this story is Plutarch, writing 500 years after the events.

Plutarcha€™ s source may be a contemporary of the events: Ctesias. But Plutarch says that Ctesias 
a€oefilled his books with a perfect farrago of incredible and senseless fablesa€D.

I tend to think that this story belongs with the stories of the people who have only one leg, and 
hop about, and whose single foot is so large that at lunchtime they use it as a sunshade. With 
those about how Hillary Rodham Clinton had sexual congress with a two-headed alien and birthed a 
two-headed alien baby.
But Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones credits the story. And yet from it, and other stories, he draws this view 
of Empress Dowager Parysatis:

The powerful Achaemenid womena€![were] dynastic guard dogsa€!. They did indeed maim, hurt, or 
destroya€! protecting the household of the monarcha€!. Parysatisa€! was one of the great women of 
ancient historya€!. Parysatisa€™ tragedy lay in the fact that the Persian imperial system afforded 
no official space to women of her abilitya€!. She dominated court life for more than sixty years, 
and if no tears were wept openly at her
passing, the empire must have acknowledged that with the death of such a formidably great lady, an 
era had come to its enda€!

And he writes, about the torture, that:

The Persian Version of the punishment is far more complex and must relate to the Persian views of 
religious purity. The thought of slowly rotting away in onea€™ s own excrement, gnawed on by vermin 
and infested with worms, must have ranked as a hellish nightmare among the Persians, who valued the 
religious connotations of cleanliness and purity so very highly. It was an ending to life deserved 
by those who had willingly
followed the Liea€’’traitors, rebels, and other perverters of Arta. Death through scaphism, with 
its flies, faeces, milk, and honey, effectively brought about a hell on eartha€!

And so Llewelyn-Jones calls on us to reject:

an Orientalist reading of the execution processa€! [as] cruel despots concocting sublime, elaborate 
punishments to thrill and delighta€!

To this I say: NO!!!! No matter what your view of a€oereligious puritya€D is, this is not just 
something you do, like saving 15% or more on car insurance. This is not just something you do even 
to a servant of the Great Lie.
But there is more! Indeed, Llewellyn-Jones credits many more Empress Dowager Parysatis stories:

Without [Artaxerxes IIa€™ s ] acknowledge, [Parysatis] acquireda€! names of persons she held 
accountable for her son [Cyrusa€™ s] demise. Their persecution could begina€!. The Carian was put 
on the rack for ten days as his body was stretched and broken to the point of death; his eyes were 
gouged out and, finally, molten bronze was poured into his mouth and ears until he died in agonised 
convulsionsa€!


And:

Plus:

Tithraustesa€! cut off [Tissaphernesa€™ s] head and sent it to the king. The king sent it to his 
mother, Parysatisa€!. Tissaphernes had been the most loyal a€! a nobleman of great honour and 
renown who, sadlya€! [had] made a deadly enemy of Parysatis. Artaxerxes made no move to protect the 
mana€!

Parysatisa€! played boardgamesa€!. She suggesteda€! the stakea€! a eunuch, who would become part of 
the winnera€™ s household staff. Artaxerxes consenteda€!. The dice fell in her favoura€!. She 
claimed Masabatesa€! handed the eunuch over to the executioners and gave them the order to flay him 
alive, impale his body sideways on three stakes, and separately peg out his stretched-out skina€!. 
When Artaxerxes finally plucked up
enough courage to rebuke his mothera€! she feigned ignorance and with a smile (so Ctesias puts it) 
said cheerfully, a€~How sweet you are! Good for you that you get angry on account of a useless old 
eunuch! On the other hand, I lost 1,000 gold darics at dice, and have just accepted my loss without 
saying a worda€™ a€!

Remember: Ctesias. People with one foot, who hop around. And the one foot is big enough to serve as 
a sunshade at noon.
And there is the bonus queen-poisoning by Parysatis of her daughter-in-law-Stateira:

Parysatis invited Stateira to an informal dinner to confirm their new-found harmonya€! ordered a€! 
Gigis to cut the precious roast bird in two with a small knifea€! smeared with poison on one side, 
and Gigis wiped the poison off on just one part of the birda€!.. Back in her own bedchambera€! 
Stateira died, writhing in convulsions of pain. Parysatis had bided her time, carefully and 
purposefully choosing a poison that would cause
Stateira a leisurely and wretched death so that she would be fully conscious of the fate that had 
befallen hera€!

Yet in the same book in which he tells these Parysatis stories, Lloyd Llewellyn-Jones denounces 
histories that take:

an orientalist glossa€! castigatea€! Persian monarchs fora€! having been ruled from the harem by 
the machinations of castrati and courtesansa€!

We have, in Parysatis, not a courtesan but an Empress Dowager. How about the castrati? 
Llewellyn-Jones credits the stories of the eunuch Bagoas:

Prince Arshua€! began to itch for more substantial royal dutiesa€!. Late in the second year of his 
reign, in the summer of 336 BCE, Arshu was assassinated at the hand of the very disgruntled Bagoas. 
For good measure, Arshua€™ s wives, sons, and daughters were slain tooa€!

And, I confess, I have never read a more a€ceOrientalizinga€D paragraph than this one:

Artaxerxes IIIa€! the victim of a bold plot hatched by a high-ranking court eunuch named Bagoas, a 
veritable creature of the court, born to corruption, whose ambitions were for the very highest 
office of state. He murdered the kinga€!. In spite of the authority and affluence he enjoyed 
through Artaxerxesa€™ kindness, Bagoas yearned for morea€!. The eunucha€™ s chosen weapon was 
poison, which was applied liberally in one deadly
draught to the kinga€™ s wine. The old man perished slowly and agonisingly. His throat contracted, 
then closed, and within minutes the Conqueror of Egypt asphyxiated and dieda€!

Indeed:

Physical proximity to the Achaemenid kings gave eunuchs an unrivalled opportunity to act as 
assassins. Rivalry was endemic at the Achaemenid courta€!

But, says, Llewelyn-Jones, a€oenone of this was unique to Persiaa€!a€D So we should not 
a€oecontinu[e]a€! to indulge the Orientalist fantasy of eunuch a€~puppet-mastersa€™ a€!a€D

However, I do think that of English kings, starting with William I of Normandy, less than 1/4 wound 
up assassinated or executed. That is a ratio far, far short of the "at least seven of the twelve 
Achaemenid Great Kings [who] met their deaths at the hands of an assassina€! and to this we can add 
the murder (or execution) of at least two crown princesa€!a€D
And we have not yet gotten to the harem politics, or to:

Ochus took the throne name Artaxerxes IIIa€! commanded the execution of all of his nearest kina€!. 
In one day alone, eighty of his brothers were killed. On another day, more than a hundred 
Achaemenid princesa€! were herded into an empty courtyard and massacred in a hail of arrows. 
Atossa, the calculating sister who had worked so hard at putting Ochus into favour with the late 
king, was not made queen. She was buried alive on the
instructions of her brother-lovera€!

Do note that Liewellyn-Jonesa€™ s narrative accepts thisa€’’accepts all thesea€”at face value, as 
things that happened more-or-less as we are told by our sources.

Now it would be one thing to say that our sources are hopelessly corrupt, and full of malicious 
lies. It would be one thing to say that history a€oeas it really happeneda€D is unrecoverable. It 
would be one thing to say that we can work with Livy and Tacitus (although perhaps not Seutonius) 
and Thucydides, but not with Herodotus and Ctesias. It would be one thing to say that to get a 
clear view of Persia we can only go through the archaeology, through the
stonesa€”not the recopied manuscripts.

(Of course, if we do that, we still have to deal with Darius Ia€™ s Behistun inscription, 80a€™ x 
50a€™: declaring that he, Darius, never lies, is the Servant of the Truth, did not kill the 
legitimate Emperor Bardiya, but instead killed the shape-shifting magician who had earlier killed 
Bardiya, and that all who say otherwise serve the Lie.)
But Llewellyn-Jonesa€™ s attitude to his sources is, by and large, to credit them (shape-shifting 
magicians, one-footed hopping people, and two-headed alien babies aside). And yet he then denounces 
previous historians who drew what seem to me to have been very natural conclusions from the same 
stories:

The classical authorsa€! [who] depict Persia in an almost wholly negative lighta€! Great Kingsa€! 
lustful, capricious, mad tyrantsa€! the empire is regarded as an oppressive challenge to the Greek 
ideals of a€~freedoma€™ (whatever that meant)a€!

What is he denouncing them fori

It is, rather, someone who is not horrified by Parysatisa€”who, instead, regards her as a mere 
a€oedynastic guard doga€! protecting the householda€!a€D as she deals death and terror and torment 
to the loyal servants of her son Artaxerxes IIa€”who needs to rethink things.

Anri I thint        rwnld t^ll I Irwd T lAWAllvn-Trinf'C cnmAtliincT ahrmt               I


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Tobias Adrian & al.: The Great Carbon Arbitrage: a€~The world can realise a net gain of $77.89 
trillion by shifting to renewable energy. The benefits from ending coal are so largea€! 
<https://voxeu.org/article/great-carbon-arbitrage>

•  Konrad Putzier: Dreaded Commute to the City Is Keeping Offices Mostly Empty: a€~Urban areas 
where people live closer to work have a higher return-to-office rate, WSJ analysis shows: It isna€™ 
t the office that workers heading into the city despise. Ita€™ s the commutea€! 
<https://www.wsj.com/articles/dreaded-commute-to-the-city-is-keeping-offices-mostly-empty-1165398958
1>

•  Joshua J. Mark: Behistun Inscription: a€~A relief with accompanying text carved 330 feet (100 
meters) up a cliff in Kermanshah Province, Western Iran. The work tells the story of the victory of 
the Persian king Darius I (the Great, r. 522a€“486 BCE) over his rebellious satraps when he took 
the throne of the Achaemenid Empire (c. 550a€“330 BCE) in 522 BCEa€! [in] Old Persian, Elamite, and 
Akkadiana€!

<https://www.worldhistory.org/Behistun Inscription^

•  Doug Irwin: Explaining the Trade Reform Wave of 1985d€“1995: a€~Ideas were changing about the 
merits of exchange rate adjustment over import controlsa€! more economists were appointed as senior 
policymakersa€! the a€~third wavea€™ of democratisationa€! 
<https://voxeu.org/article/explaining-trade-reform-wave-1985-1995>

•  Chris Anstey: Biden Team Debates Removing China Tariffs: a€~Tariff relief could slow inflation 
by at least a few tenths of a percentage point, a€oeif not more,a€D Rouse saida€!. On the other 
hand, China hawks both inside and outside the administration want to keep the pressure on the US 
rival even if it hasna€™ t changed Beijinga€™ s own economic behaviora€”or shrunk the trade 
deficita€!

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-06-0l/global-economy-latest-biden-team-debates-remo
ving-china-tariffs?cmpid=BBD060122 NEF>

• Ran Abramitzky & Leah Boustan: Why the Children of Immigrants Get Ahead 
<https://time.com/6182715/immigrants-children-us-mobility/>

•  Dylan Matthews: About 200 years ago, the world started getting rich. Why? - Vox_: a€~bout 200 
years ago, the world started getting rich. Why? Two economic historians [Mark Koyama and Jared 
Rubin] explain what made the Industrial Revolution, and modern life, possiblea€! 
<https://www.vox.eom/future-perfect/2022/6/l/23138463/how-the-world-became-rich-industrial-revolutio
n-koyama-rubin>

• Duncan Black: Happy dCceSuck On Thisa€dDay: a€~[Tom Friedman:] a€oel think it [the invasion of 
Iraq] was unquestionably worth doing, Charliea€! 
<https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/05/happv-suck-on-this-dav.html>

• Jen Wieczner: The Rise and Fall of Cathie Wood 
<https://nvmag.com/intelligencer/2022/05/the-rise-and-fall-of-cathie-wood.html>

• Nicholas Bloom & al.: Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?<https://www.aeaweb 
.org/articles?id=10.1257/aer.2O180338>

•  John Winthrop: A Model of Christian Charity: a€™ He shall make us a praise and glory that men 
shall say of succeeding plantations, a€oemay the Lord make it like that of New Englanda€Ua€! 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20110705134913/https://www.winthropsociety.com/doc charity .php>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Noah Smith: Ideas to Boost Japanese Growth

Noahpinion

Ideas to boost Japanese growth (Part 1)

Greetings from Tokyo! This is the second in my series of Japan-related posts. The first one was 
about how Japanese living standards are too low. I recommended that Japan address its high poverty 
rate by creating a cash-based redistributive welfare state, on top of the creaky, failing corporate 
welfare state that it has traditionally relied ona€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 90 likes A- 35 comments A- Noah Smith

• Ed Brophy: Ukrainskii Mir: a€~Given the stakes for the world, would a flawed peace be preferable 
to a prolonged conflict?a€!



Fault Lines

Fault Lines #7: Ukrainskii Mir

Endgame Three months after Putina€™ s illegal invasion, we have learned much we did not fully 
understand at the time. Russiaa€™ s military campaign has been incompetent at best, a fiasco at 
worst. It has sacrificed huge numbers of lives and materiel for no meaningful advance on the 
territories it controlled on February 24th. For now, it has dialled its war aima€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 2 likes A- Ed Brophy

•  Dylan Matthews: a€™ This is a really incredible year for economic history targeted at laypeople: 
Koyama and Rubina€™ s a€oeHow the World Became Rich,a€D Leah Boustan and Ran Abramitzkya€™ s 
a€oeStreets of Gold,a€D Brad DeLonga€™ s a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€Da€!

dylan matthews @dylanmatt

This is a really incredible year for economic history targeted at laypeople: Koyama and Rubin's 
"How the World Became Rich," @leah_boustan and Ran Abramitzky's "Streets of Gold," @delong's 
"Slouching Towards Utopia"

dylan matthews @dylanmatt

I talked to @MarkKoyama and @jaredcrubin about the factors that enabled economic growth to take off 
200 years ago (and for us to add decades to our lives, dramatically reduce extreme poverty, etc) 
https://t.co/dppUMX6pvX
4:36 PM a'™ Jun 1,2022

20Likes2Retweets

Paragraphs:

Dylan Matthews interviews Jared Rubin and Mark Koyama as they give their take on why the world is 
now rich and is every day becoming more rich:

Dylan Matthews: About 200 Years Ago, The World Started Getting Rich. Why?\ a€~In the United 
Kingdoma€! GDP per capita grew about 40 percent between 1700 and 1800. It more than doubled between 
1800 and 1900. And between 1900 and 2000, it grew more than fourfold. What today wea€™ d 
characterize as extreme poverty was until a few centuries ago the condition of almost every human 
on Earth. In 1820, some 94 percent
of humans lived on less than $2 a daya€!. In 2018, the World Bank estimated that 8.6 percent of 
people lived on less than $1.90 a day. And the gains were not solely economic. Before 1800, average 
lifespans didna€™ t exceed 40 years anywhere in the world. Today, the average human life expectancy 
is more like 73a€!. [Jared Rubin:] "The question is why it took so long for the rate of 
technological innovation to growa€!. There is not
one a€oesilver bulleta€D answera€!. Institutions that limit confiscation by the government (and 
protect other property rights more generally)a€! cultural values that support innovation and 
encourage understanding of how the world works. Societies in which work is looked down upon are 
unlikely to experience sustained innovationa€!. It took a while for all of these preconditions to 
coalesce in one nation. But once it did, economic
growth took offa€!. Colonization likely played some role, and it likely played a much greater role 
in keeping large parts of the formerly colonized world poor. But there are many key features of the 
onset of growth that cannot really be accounted for by colonization. Most importantly, explaining 
how the world became rich requires an explanation for why the rate of technological change rose so 
rapidlya€!. One thing the history of
technology has taught us is that as long as the incentives are there for innovators to innovate, we 
will continue to be [positively] surpriseda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.vox.eom/future-perfect/2022/6/l/23138463/how-the-world-became-rich-industrial-revolutio
n-kovama-rubin>

Invading a country and casually putting it through a decade of increased hell just because we 
could. And Tom Friedman approved, sadistically:

Duncan Black: Happy a€oeSuck On Thisd€dDay: a€~Almost forgot. 19 years ago today!: [Tom Friedman:] 
a€oel think it [the invasion of Iraq] was unquestionably worth doing, Charliea€!. We needed to go 
over there, basically, um, and um, uh, take out a very big stick right in the heart of that world 
and burst that bubble, and there was only one way to do ita€!. What they needed to see was American 
boys and girls going house to
house, from Basra to Baghdad, um and basically saying, a€Da€~ Which part of this sentence dona€™ t 
you understand?a€™ You dona€™ t think, you know, we care about our open society, you think this 
bubble fantasy, wea€™ re just gonna let it grow? Well Suck. On. This.a€™ Okay. That Charlie was 
what this war was about. We coulda€™ ve hit Saudi Arabia, it was part of that bubble. We coulda hit 
Pakistan. We hit Iraq because
we could. Thata€™ s the real trutha€!

LINK: <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2Q22/Q5/happv-suck-on-this-day.html>

Grifters gotta grift, and gotta double-down on grifting:

Jen Wieczner: The Rise and Fall of Cathie Wood: a€~Cathie Wood sat onstage at the storied 
Fontainebleau hotel in Miamia€!. ARK Innovation ETF had lost roughly half of its value over the 
prior yeara€!. A year earlier, shea€™ d thought her firm, ARK Invest, would deliver annualized 
returns of 15 percent, she acknowledged, setting up what seemed like a mea culpa for her poor 
performance. Instead, she doubled down: a€oeNow we
think 50 percent.a€D So far, shea€™ s been wronga€”her main fund is down another 34 percent since 
her commentsa€”but her firm still has more than $16 billion in assetsa€!

LINK: <https://nymag .com/intelligencer/2022/05/the-rise-and-fall-of-cathie-wood.html>

Yes: our R&D labor force is so much greater now than it was in 1870, when it was so much greater 
than it was in 1000, that ideas must be massively harder to fight. If they were not, we would have 
been talking "singularity" a generation or two ago:

Nicholas Bloom & al.: Are Ideas Getting Harder to Find?: a€~Research effort is rising substantially 
while research productivity is declining sharply. A good example is Moorea€™ s Law. The number of 
researchers required today to achieve the famous doubling of computer chip density is more than 18 
times larger than the number required in the early 1970s. More generally, everywhere we look we 
find that ideas, and the exponential


LINK: <https7/www₁aeaweb₁prg/articles?id^l04257/aei\20180338>

So, Noah, why hasna€™ t Japan already done ALL THE THINGS?:

Noah Smith: Ideas to Boost Japanese Growth: a€~Redistribution isna€™ t going to be enough to give 
Japanese people the kind of material welfare they deservea€!. Low-ish per capita GDP means there 
are just fewer resources to redistribute^!. Growth policy is hard, especially for rich countries 
that are close to the technological frontiera€!. Fixinga€! broken corporate culture is an important 
part of the storya€!. But ita€™ s only part
of the puzzlea€!. I want to list some steps I think Japan can take to boost growth above and beyond 
corporate culture reforma€!. 1. Export morea€!. 2. Build a globally competitive alternative energy 
industrya€!. 3. Create a defense-research-industrial complexa€!. 4. Increase late-stage funding for 
new companiesa€!. 5. Institutionalize the immigration systema€!. Bonus Idea: Create a Japanese Hong 
Konga€!. Though this idea is
probably too wild and wacky to ever happen, the others on the list are all very feasible and 
definitely worth doinga€!

LINK:

Ideas to boost Japanese growth (Part 1)

Greetings from Tokyo! This is the second in my series of Japan-related posts. The first one was 
about how Japanese living standards are too low. I recommended that Japan address its high poverty 
rate by creating a cash-based redistributive welfare state, on top of the creaky, failing corporate 
welfare state that it has traditionally relied ona€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 90 likes A- 35 comments A- Noah Smith

Roots of American exceptionalism:

John Winthrop: A Model of Christian Charity. a€™ We shall find thata€! He shall make us a praise 
and glory that men shall say of succeeding plantations, a€oemay the Lord make it like that of New 
Engl and. a€D For we must consider that we shall be as a city upon a hill. The eyes of all people 
are upon usa€!. Therefore let us choose life, that we and our seed may live, by obeying His voice 
and cleaving to Him, for He is our life and
our prosperity a€!

LINK: <https ://web .archive.org/web/20110705134913/https://www.winthropsocietv.com/doc_charitv.php>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

