Six Paragraphs:

Andrew Sprung: What Change Looks Like in America'. a€~Cohn takes us back to a long time ago, in a 
galaxy far, far away, in which Democrats still hoped to win Republican support for major 
legislation. Notwithstanding that by early 2009,
Mitch McConnell had already announced the Republican minoritya€™ s intentions to block any 
legislative achievements, many Democrats in Congress had a history of co-authoring legislation with 
Republicans and put more stock in that past
personal experienced!. Cohn reports that Democrats never seriously considered passing health care 
reform using budget reconciliation^!. Several administration officials shared Baucusa€™ s belief 
that bipartisan reform would be easier to
sustaina€!. Moving quickly to reconciliation could alienate more conservative Democrats, who 
desperately craved the political cover a bipartisan bill would provide. a€oeThere were a whole 
bunch of senators who were hoping that this would
be bipartisan both substantively and politically for their own electoral outcomes ,a€D Peter Orszag 
said to me latera€!

LINK: https://prospect.org/culture/books/what-change-looks-like-in-america-cohn-ten-vear-war/

Dennis Roddy: Just Our Bill [Rehnquist]'. a€~Charlie Stevens, then the head of the local Young 
Republicans, said he got a phone calla€!. The guy wanted to know why Charlie hadna€™ t joined 
Operation Eagle Eye. a€oel think they called
them flying squads,a€D Stevens said. a€oelt was perfectly legal. The law at the time was that you 
had to be able to read English and interpret what you read.a€D But he didna€™ t like the idea and 
he told Bill this. a€oeMy parents were


immigrants ,a^Li Stevens said, ineya^1"1 d settled in Cleveland, onio, a pair ot creeks driven out 
ot Turkey wno arrived in me united states witn broken ungiisnafei. cnariie isoukaias became cnariie 
Stevens, acoet didnac *“t tninK it was

proper to challenge my dad or my mother to interpret the Constitution ,a€D Stevens said. a€oeEven 
people who are born here have trouble interpreting the Constitution. Lawyers have trouble 
interpreting it.a€Da€! Eventually, Arizona changed
the laws that had allowed the kind of challenges that had devolved into bullyinga€!. Stevens became 
a prosperous and well-regarded lawyera€! helped Sandra Day Oa€™ Connor get her start in lawa€!. 
Bill Rehnquista€l chief justice of the
Supreme Court of the United Statesa€! denied personally intimidating voters and gave the 
explanation that he might have been called to polling places on Election Day to arbitrate disputes 
over voter qualifications. Fifteen years later, three more
witnesses, including a deputy U.S. attorney, told of being called to polling places and having 
angry voters point to Rehnquist as their tormentor. His defenders suggested it was a case of 
mistaken identitya€!

LINK: <http://old.post-gazette.com/columnists/20001202roddy.asp>

Eric Phipps: Diary 1935-04-01: a€~Over two years have now elapsed since the electorate of this 
country, stam- peded by the Reichstag fire, voted for the abolition of the Parliamentary rA©gime 
and the establishment of a National Socialist
dictatorship. During these two years, Adolf Hitler, without losing the loyalty of his old followers 
to any alarming extent, has won over the great mass of the Opposition to himself and his policy 
both internal and externala€!. He has obtained
work                                                                                                
             (or what amounts to work so far as the individual is concerned) for 3 million 
peoplea€! torn up Part V of the Treaty of Versaillesa€! liberated Germany from the clutches of his 
own National Socialist gangstersa€!. The return to more
normal conditions during the last six months has indeed been so rapid and so marked that the great 
bulk of Hitlera€™ s one-time opponents are now, to say the least of it, reconciled to his rule if 
not to National Socialisma€!. It is now dawning
upon friends and enemies alike that a benevolent despotism has immeasurable advantagesa€! over the 
travesty of a parliamentary system known as the Weimar Republica€!. Many intelligent Germans are 
now of opinion that it is preferable to
the French and British systems of representative governmental. A countrya€! anxious to free itself 
from the shackles of an oppressive treaty has better prospects if it is prepared to accept a 
restriction of individual liberty and a concentration of
all powers in one hand, provided of course the hand be firm and wisea€!. His mysterious programme 
for coping with unemployment^! consists not merely of public works of the normal kind but of the 
very important work of rearming
Germanya€!. Now that Hitler has put his bold plan into execution his influence is highest in those 
very quarters where it was at first regarded with most suspicion, namely the Reichswehr Higher 
Command, the Ministry for Foreign Affairs,

permanent officialdom and responsible circles generally. The Germans are not disposed to minimise 
their difficulties. But they regard Herr Hitler as a prophet and the majority expect with calm 
obedience that he will find the way to the promised
landa€!. So far as I can see, only economics and finance can be expected to counter these proud 
plans, but economics and finance have in the past proved so elastic as to defy all expert 
prophecya€!

LINK: <https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/book-phipps-diary.pdf>

CatRambo: Opinion: On Baen Books, Moderating Discussion Boards, & Political Expression'. a€~Boards 
have to have moderators and rulesa€!. Talking about politics has always been fraughta€!. There are 
plenty of places online where
people can talk politicsa€!. Free speech is a great ideal, up to the point where ita€™ s being used 
to promote killing people. Poppera€™ s Paradox appliesa€!. Some people are getting pretty hot under 
the collar about an attack on the publisher,
when ita€™ s an article that talks specifically about the message boards and the behavior happening 
on thema€!. Stochastic terrorism is a thing, and ita€™ s one that some of the a€oemy wishing you 
were dead wasna€™ t really a death threat

because I didna€™ t say Ia€™ d do it personallya€D yahoos are hoping for. That hope that someone 
will be hurt as a result of their rhetoric flickers dimly in the depths of their creepy little 
souls, even when they claim otherwise, because here in
America, ita€™ s a possibility every time they stir up an audience to think of their opponents as 
NPCs rather than peoplea€!

LINK: 
http://www.kittywumpus.net/blog/2021/02/18/opinion-on-baen-books-moderating-discussion-boards-politi
cal-expression/

Ray Dalio: Are We In a Stock Market Bubble?'. a€~A bubble is an unsustainably high price, and how I 
measure it is with the following six measures. (1) How high are prices relative to traditional 
measures? (2) Are prices discounting
unsustainable conditions? (3) How many new buyers (i.e., those who werena€™t previously in the 
market) have entered the market? (4) How broadly bullish is sentiment? (5) Are purchases being 
financed by high leverage? (6) Have buyers
made exceptionally extended forward purchases (e.g., built inventory, contracted forward purchases, 
etc.) to speculate or protect themselves against future price gains? Each of these six influences 
is measured using a number of stats that are
combined into gaugesa€!. In brief, the aggregate bubble gauge is around the 77th percentile today 
for the US stock market overall. In the bubble of 2000 and the bubble of 1929 this aggregate gauge 
had a 100th percentile reada€!

LINK: https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/we-stock-market-bubble-ray-dalio/

Erik Schatzker: Cathie Wood Sees Control Fight Ending, Lifting Cloud Over Ark'. a€~Tesla, Bitcoin 
Bull Cathie Wood Targets 20% ETF Returnsa€!. In addition to the $30.5 billion of assets in its 
seven ETFs, Ark manages accounts for retail
and institutional clients as well as funds in non-U .S. markets. Its ETF revenue alone adds up to 
at least $225 million a year. That puts Ark, founded in 2014, in a league with long-established 
firms such as Mario Gabellia€™ s Gamco Investors
Inc. and underscores the stakes in Wooda€™ s fight with Resolute Investment Managersa€!. Her $16.4 
billion Ark Innovation ETF has returned 152% in 2020. Three other ETFs have more than doubleda€!. 
Wood, 65, founded the firm
expressly to invest in disruptive innovation^! artificial intelligence, robotics, energy storage, 
DNA sequencing and blockchaina€!. a€oeThe biggest upside surprises are going to come from the 
genomic space,a€D Wood said in the interview.
a€oeThata€™ s because the convergence of DNA sequencing, artificial intelligence and gene 
therapies, importantly Crispr gene editing, is going to cure disease.a€Da€! The idea for active 
ETFs based on disruptive technology first occurred to
Wood  while she was chief investment officer for global thematic strategies at AllianceBernstein 
Holding LPa€!

LINK: https://www.bloomberg 
.com/news/articles/2020-12-18/cathie-wood-sees-control-fight-ending-lifting-cloud-over-ark

Hoisted from the Archives

2019: A Note on Reading Big, Difficult Booksa€\ 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2019/12/a-note-on-reading-big-difficult-books,html>: Knowledge 
system and cognitive science guru Andy Matuschak writes a rant called Why Books
Dona€™ t Workhttps://andymatuschak.org/books/, about big, difficult books that take him six to nine 
hours each to reada€I.

His points have strong relevance for students in U.C. Berkeleya€™ s Econ 105: History of Economic 
Thought: Do we live in a Smithian, Marxian or Keynesian World? The core of the course is an 
assisted reading of three big books that
are da€”-ably difficult: Adam Smitha€™ s An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of 
Nations, Karl Marxa€™ s Capital, and John Maynard Keynesa€™ s The General Theory of Employment, 
Interest and Money.

These are all big, difficult, flawed, incredibly insightful, genius books. And it is a principal 
task of a successful modern university to teach people how to read such things. Indeed, it might be 
said that one of the few key competencies we here at
the university have to teacha€”our counterpart or the medieval triad of rhetoric, logic, grammar 
and then quadriad of arithmetic, geometry, music and astrologya€”is how to read and absorb a 
theoretical argument made by a hard, worthwhile,
flawed book. People need to understand what an argument is, and the only way to do that is actually 
go through an argumenta€”to read the argument and try to make sense of it. People need to be able 
to tell the difference between an argument
and  an assertion. People need to be able to do more than just say whether they liked the 
conclusion or not: they need to be able to specify whether the argument hangs together given the 
premises, and where it is the premises, and where it is the
premises themselves that need to be challenged. People need to learn that while you can disagree, 
you need to be able to specify why and how you disagree.

The first order task is to teach people how to read difficult books. Teaching people five facts 
about some thinker's theoretical perspective is subordinate: those five facts will not stick with 
them over the years. Teaching them how to read difficult
books will stick with them over the years. Knowing what to do with a book that makes an important, 
an interesting, but also a flawed argumenta€”that is a key skilla€!. We have our recommended 
ten-stage process for reading such big books:

1. Figure out beforehand what the author is trying to accomplish in the book.

2. Orient yourself by becoming the kind of reader the book is directed ata€”the kind of person with 
whom the arguments would resonate.

3. Read through the book actively, taking notes.

4. a€ceSteelmana€D the argument, reworking it so that you find it as convincing and clear as you 
can possibly make it.

5. Find someone elsea€’’usually a roommatea€”and bore them to death by making them listen to you 
set out your a€cesteelmanneda€D version of the argument.

6. Go back over the book again, giving it a sympathetic but not credulous reading


IHCSC cue cui uig, UHUVUII, iidwcu, niuicaiuiy uisiguuui, genius uuuiks. mu ii is a piiiivipcu 
UISA. ui ci suuuussiui iiiuuuiu uiuvcisiiy LU luaun pcupic now IU icciu SUCH tilings. muccu, it 
iingiii uc saiu men unu ui me icw Key competencies we iicic cu

the university have to teacha€”our counterpart or the medieval triad of rhetoric, logic, grammar 
and then quadriad of arithmetic, geometry, music and astrologya€”is how to read and absorb a 
theoretical argument made by a hard, worthwhile,
flawed book. People need to understand what an argument is, and the only way to do that is actually 
go through an argumenta€”to read the argument and try to make sense of it. People need to be able 
to tell the difference between an argument
and an assertion. People need to be able to do more than just say whether they liked the conclusion 
or not: they need to be able to specify whether the argument hangs together given the premises, and 
where it is the premises, and where it is the
premises themselves that need to be challenged. People need to learn that while you can disagree, 
you need to be able to specify why and how you disagree.

The first order task is to teach people how to read difficult books. Teaching people five facts 
about some thinker's theoretical perspective is subordinate: those five facts will not stick with 
them over the years. Teaching them how to read difficult
books will stick with them over the years. Knowing what to do with a book that makes an important, 
an interesting, but also a flawed argumenta€”that is a key skilla€!. We have our recommended 
ten-stage process for reading such big books:

1. Figure out beforehand what the author is trying to accomplish in the book.

2. Orient yourself by becoming the kind of reader the book is directed ata€”the kind of person with 
whom the arguments would resonate.

3. Read through the book actively, taking notes.

4. a€ceSteelmana€D the argument, reworking it so that you find it as convincing and clear as you 
can possibly make it.

5. Find someone elsea€’’usually a roommatea€”and bore them to death by making them listen to you 
set out your a€cesteelmanneda€D version of the argument.

6. Go back over the book again, giving it a sympathetic but not credulous reading

7. Then you will be in a good position to figure out what the weak points of this 
strongest-possible argument version might be.

8. Test the major assertions and interpretations against reality: do they actually make sense of 
and in the context of the world as it truly is?

9. Decide what you think of the whole.

10. Then comes the task of cementing your interpretation, your reading, into your mind so that it 
becomes part of your intellectual panoply for the future.

Follow this process, and your reading becomes active. Then you have the greatest possible chance of 
learning the booksa€”of thereafter being able to summon up sub-Turing instantiations of the 
thinkers Adam Smith, Karl Marx, and John
Maynard Keynes and then running them on your wetwarea€!.

From Smith, Marx, Keynes: Cement Your Knowledge: https://www.icloud.com/pages/0vyHboa030OEohMkflw 
YE 1 u5 w

