Dangerous & Unpatriotic Republican Grifters Are a Serious National Menace:

Jonathan V. Last: This is what I wrote on 10-8-20: "Go write this down: After November 3, the price 
of admission to GOP politics is going to be an insistence that, actually, Donald Trump did win the 
election and/or would have won if it hadna€™ t been stolen/rigged."


Noem refuses to say whether Biden victory was free and fair: PIERRE, S.D. (AP) a€” South Dakota 
Gov. Kristi Noem refused to acknowledge Thursday that Democrat Joe Biden defeated her close 
Republican ally Donald Trump in a free and fair election, instead using...
Dave Troy: Hey guys, remember that time Steve Bannon ran an army of game virtual currency miners in 
Asia, for sale to westerners at discount prices, arbitraging attention for profit? That was 
awesome...

Trump's Campaign CEO's Little Known World of Warcraft Career. WIRED covered Bannon's career in 
gaming back in 2008.

GameStop:

James Medlock: Always find the "you've never actually spoken to poor people" argument funny, like 
how are we measuring this? My dad lived in a trailer for a good part of my childhood, and did buy 
lotto tickets, but was not a retail stock trader because that's not something many poor people do


Yakkity Sachs @WeedPopular

ita€™ s very hard for people who have never actually spoken to a poor person to believe, but lots 
of poor people gamble, ita€™ s not that irrational if you actually have no chance in life, they all 
def love to be lectured about unionizing by ppi who went to Harvard tho.

James Medlock @ jdcmedlock

"The retail trader" != "The little guy"
5:12 AMT™ Jan29,2021

Jake George, Son of Henry (a°"a'©i14(Ea--»ae2»a1<aD): Next week wea€™re going to be seeing lots of 
stories of a€oeaverage Joesa€D who lost lots of money in the mania. GME is a nationwide pump & dump 
right now and the boiler room is WSB subReddit. Winners: WSB finance bros, long hedge funds; 
losers: a few HF shorts, many randos holding bag

Josh Barro: A lot of takes about how the $GME trade is just a lark for lots of investors, they are 
having fun. Say the company is overvalued by $20 bn. When that comes back to earth, the losses 
accruing to investors will equal about nine months of the entire national loss on lotto games.

Matt O'Brien: This is just a pump-and-dump where you try to convince the victims that they 
shouldna€™ t feel bad about being victims

Josh Barro: A lot of takes about how the $GME trade is just a lark for lots of investors, they are 
having fun. Say the company is overvalued by $20 bn. When that comes back to earth, the losses 
accruing to investors will equal about nine months of the entire national loss on lotto games.

Julian Sanchez: Wait until Elon hears about an arcane financial tool called a a€oeloana€D. You 
borrow other peoplea€™ s money and then, get this, you SPEND IT even though you have to give it 
back eventually.

Elon Musk: u cana€™ t sell houses u dona€™ t own u cana€™ t sell cars u dona€™ t own but u *can* 
sell stock u dona€™ t own!? this is bs a€“ shorting is a scam legal only for vestigial reasons

Skott with a K: Wait til he realizes hea€™ s selling car futures on his website. Literally selling 
cars that dona€™ t exist yet.

Matthew Yglesias: Yeah this is a fun story but it seems overwhelmingly likely to have a sad ending

Josh Barro: Retail investors have bought into a $20 billion bubble with GameStop. A lot of them are 
going to lose a lot of money. Why are people cheering this on like the little guy is sticking it to 
the man? 
https://businessinsider.com/the-gamestop-wallstreetbets-reddit-thing-isnt-funny-its-stupid-2021-la€!


The Biden Administration

Matthew Segal: I am enjoying this new thing where a problem arises and then people ask what the 
President will do to fix it instead of asking what he did to cause it.

The New York Times: An Embarrassment to Journalism, & a Danger to Freedom Worldwide

Dr. Leah Stokes: Ease up on the editorials, @nytimes. We're kinda busy over here trying to save the 
planet with our new President.

Ease Up on the Executive Actions, Joe

President Biden is right to not let his agenda be held hostage, but
legislating through Congress is a better path.

By The Editorial Board

The editorial board is a group of opinion journalists whose views are informed by
expertise, research, debate and certain longstanding values. It is separate from the
newsroom.

Jan. 27, 2021, 7:30 p.m. ET

Max Moran: There is so much to unpack in this paragraph. So much carefully chosen language to imply 
an untrue argument the writer clearly wishes they could make, while still technically being 
interpretable in an accurate way. It's low argumentation that's beneath the NYT Editorial Board.

But this is no way to make law. A polarized, narrowly divided


Congress may offer Mr. Biden little choice but to employ executive

actions or see his entire agenda held hostage. These directives,
however, are a flawed substitute for legislation. They are intended
to  provide guidance to the government and need to work within the
discretion granted the executive by existing law or the
Constitution.     They do not create new law — though executive
orders       carry the force of law — and they are not meant to serve as
an  end run around the will of Congress. By design, such actions are
more limited in what they can achieve than legislation, and
presidents who overreach invite intervention by the courts.

Max Moran: Apparently the paper of record's Editorial Board thinks the president doing his literal 
job so much is bad optics

Opinion

Ease Un on the Executive Actions. Joe


President Biden is right to not let his agenda be held hostage, but
legislating through Congress is a better path.

By The Editorial Board

The editorial board is a group of opinion journalists whose views are informed by
expertise, research, debate and certain longstanding values. It is separate from the
newsroom.

Jan. 27, 2021, 7:30 p.m. ET

Sun: Reminder. They've always had terribly shitty takes. This puff piece was 11 days before the 
invasion of Poland.

She J^eW J] ork Samos

HERR HITLER AT

HOME IN THE CLOUDS;


High up on his favorite
mountain he finds time for
politics, solitude and
frequent official parties.

HERR HITLER IN THE
CLOUDS

f ©       * A

By Hedwig Mauer Simpsonr.d.v. From European and
Times Wide World

Aug. 20, 1939


