a€\most trouble with. So advice & comments are very seriously genuinely welcomed, & badly needed:

Slouching Towards Utopia?:

An Economic History of the Long Twentieth Century

XI. Fascism

J. Bradford DeLong

Alexander Solzhenitsyn wrote:

Macbetha€™ s self-justifications were feeblea€!. Iago was a little lamb.a€! The imagination and the 
spiritual strength of Shakespearea€™ s evildoers
stopped short at a dozen corpses. Because they had no ideology. Ideology a€’’that is what gives 
evildoing its long-sought justification and gives the evildoer
the necessary steadfastness and determination. That is the social theory which helps to make his 
acts seem good instead of bad in his own and othersa€™
eyes, so that he wona€™t hear reproaches and curses but will receive praise and honorsa€! invoking 
Christianitya€! the grandeur of their Motherlands I
civilizations! racea€! equality, brotherhood, and the happiness of future generations. Thanks to 
ideology, the twentieth century was fated to experience
evildoing                                                                       on a scale 
calculated in the millions. This cannot be denied, nor passed over, nor suppressedS!

To see a utopian future in your minda€™ s eye and think that it is almost within your grasp, and 
that your actionsa€”even if ScesevereSD, even if cruel and brutala€”can bring it
closer within your grasp, out of fantasy and down here on eartha€”that is the curse of ideology. In 
it, crimes become thrills: SoeThe just citya€! or the suicide pact?a€! To-morrow
for the young the poetsS! walks by the lakea€! perfect communionS! bicycle racesS!. But to-day the 
struggle. To-day the deliberate increase in the chances of death. The
conscious acceptance of guilt in the necessary murderS !SD wrote poet W.H. Auden in the late 1930s.

I tend to want to be pragmatic: a would-be student of Daniel "end of ideology" Bell: work today 
given what we know so that tomorrows’’real tomorrow, 24 hours from now, not
some metaphor of the futureS”is, concretely, better in a way you can point to. But many are 
ideological. And in the period between the world wars three great ideologies
confronted each other, demanding the fundamental reworking of economy and society.

We met one even before World War I: the market giveth, the market taketh away; blessed be the name 
of the market. In the words of American steelmaster and philanthropist
Andrew Carnegie: Seethe law of competitions! we cannot evadeS! sometimes hard for the individual, 
it is best for the race, because it insures the survival of the fittesta€!a€D
Social darwinism is a hell of a drug. And there were many between the world wars who wanted to 
rewind the clock back to the semi-classical semi-liberal order that they imagined
had prevailed before the coming of the socialists and the radical democrats and the world wars. It 
was an ideology that saw it necessary that immense effort be put forward in order
to reconfigure the economyS”in this case, to restore and purify what they thought the pre-WWI 
economy had been.

We met the second of the ideologies last chapter: the really-existing-socialism of Lenin and 
Stalin. It, too, was an ideology that saw it necessary that immense effort be put forward
in order to reconfigure the economyS”in this case, to eliminate the market as a system, for that 
was what blocked using the material abundance of industrialization to build a utopia
that would really exist.

That Lenin and StalinS™ s really-existing-socialism was to be the winner, and would ultimately 
accumulate the largest butcherS™ s bill of any ideology was not obvious at the
start of the 20th century. It was not obvious by the end of World War I. And it was not obvious 
during the years leading up to the start of World War Two.

A great many thoughtful, observant, passionate individuals would have without hesitation put their 
money in that race on the third horseman of ideology: fascism. They had good
cause to do so. It indeed looked to be the most terrible and most destructive. In truth, had not 
all othersS’’pragmatists, socialists, market worshipers, true liberalsS’’gathered
together to stop it, it would have have won that race of terror.

Fascism was also, in a sense, at its root, an ideology that saw great effort as needed to 
reconfigure the economy. For one thing, the economy as it was currently organized divided
people into classes and created a politics of interest-group bargaining and conflict, when what was 
needed was a national people unified and a politics of solidarity and common
purpose. For another thing, the economy needed a redistribution of global resources. The big 
problem was not that there were proletarians’’poor, working,
overburdenedS”cZa55e5  but rather proletarian nations. And the major purpose of a fascist leader 
was to make the world economy work for the benefit of the people of his nation,
and        not for some transnational global elite of rootless cosmopolites.

Fascism as a movement was led by Benito Mussolini of Italy.

Benito Mussolini was, up until World War II in Europe began, the leader of world fascism. He 
started out as the editor of a Italian socialist newspaper: Av anti!. He was, in our
terms, something like a left-wing Proud Boy. He agitated Italian workers in Switzerland to start a 
general strike. He was arrested and deported. He agitator for socialism in the
mostly Italian with some German-speaking alpine regions of the then-Austro-Hungarian Empire. He 
protested against ItalyS™ s imperial adventure conquering Libya. By the eve
of World War I he had become one of ItalyS™ s most prominent socialist journalist-politicians.

On July 29,1914, the day after the Austro-Hungarian Empire declared war on Serbia, while the armies 
were mobilizing for World War I, EuropeS™ s socialist leaders were
mobilizing too. They came to Brussels for a meeting of the worlds™ s Second Socialist 
International. At previous meetings in 1912 and 1907 all had agreed on this: the working
class  knew no country; a threat of war should be met by a general strike; workers would put down 
their tools, bring the machines to a halt, stop the railroads literally on their tracks,
and force war munitions factories to shutter their doors; then diplomats could do their work and 
maintain the peace.

But that day in Brussels, Austrian socialist leader Viktor Adler announced that the workers of 
Vienna were in the streets not demonstrating for peace but chanting for war. Scelt is
better to be wrong with the working classes than right against them,SD Adler said. The Austrian 
socialists would support their Kaiser.

In France, the President of the Council of Ministers, Rene Vivian!, was a socialist. Echoing Adler, 
Viviani called on French workers to defend their country.

Outside of ItalyS”where few indeed wanted to joinS”only a handful of socialist leaders stood 
against this war: Hugo Hasse, Rosa Luxemburg, and Karl Leibknecht from
Germany; and Vladimir Lenin from Russia.

The socialists of Italy were not subject to this dilemma. They did not then have to choose between 
their pacifist principles and a government urging war for the sake of the nation.
Italy had in 1882 had formed a defensive military alliance with Germany and Austria. The Italian 
government announced that Germany and Austria were not defenders, but
aggressors. Consequently Italy would stay neutral. The Italian socialists applauded the government.

Benito Mussolini was profoundly shaken by what had happened in Brussels, and what he saw in the 
countries around him. The Second International had come up against the forces
of nationalism, and had collapsed. Seel see no parties, only GermansSD declared German Kaiser 
Wilhelm II Hohenzollern. And he was, for that moment, right. What did it mean
that, when push had come to shove, the international working class dissolved and what crystalized 
instead were nations within whom class divisions receded in importance?

Then Italian socialists Mussolini knew and liked jumped onto the horns of the dilemma, and chose 
the nationalist horn. They began to clamor to enter the war on the allied side with
the aim of conquering Austrias™ s Italian-speaking regions SoeCardi, Corridoni, la Rygier,a€D 
Mussolini called them out by name, Soeapologists for war! It is a contagion that
spares no one! But I want to hold the rampart to the end.SD

But Mussolini wanted to be a leader of a mass movement. Mussolini was no George Orwell, who thought 
that one had a duty to go against the crowd when it was wrong, even when
Sceto see what is in front of oneS™ s nose needs a constant struggle .SC Not for him any admiration 
of Henrik IbsenS™ s characters who learn that Seethe strongest man is he

who stands most alone .SC That was not who Mussolini wanted to be.

And so, in the third month of the war, Mussolini abandoned the rampart. If the Italian workers he 
wanted to lead were going to be nationalists first and socialists second, he would
join them. By the late fall of 1914 Mussolini had drawn a lesson from the collapse of the Second 
International and the mass enthusiasm of the working classes for war. Class had
shattered under moderate pressure, and so could not carry the weight needed for a strong and 
durable mass movement. By contrast, the ethno-nation might well be strong enough.


Benito Mussolini had become convinced ot the psychological inadequacy ot Marxian socialism It 
inspired nothing like the enormous outpourmg ot nationalist enthusiasm that he

saw during the war. It offered no counterweight able to even through sand into the gears that drove 
the struggle among nations. Socialisma€™ s leaders seemed incapable of fully
recognizing the fact that solidarity was associated with onea€™ s national communitya€’’not with 
one's international class or with humanity in general.

Being a socialist seemed inconsistent with leading a mass movement. So Mussolini started his own 
new newspaper, Il Popolo da€™ Italia, calling for intervention on the side of
France and Britain. His ex-comrades denounced him as having been bribed by the French intelligence 
service. (He probably had not been before his change; he surely was
supported aftera€”just what they were backing mattered less to the French than that they were 
backing a nascent Italian movement that wanted Italy to come into the war on
Francea€™  s side.) On November 24,1914, Mussolini was expelled from the Italian socialist party. 
The bridges had been burned. He had become an ex-socialist. He had become
the  leader of a nascent movement that would be different, and stronger.

But what might that movement be?

Originally Mussolini had just a placeholder, the word a€cefascism.a€D Originally he had just an 
observation: that while the working classes were hard to mobilize for a largely -
economic internal struggle of protests, demonstrations, strikes, and votes to obtain respect and an 
end to poverty, they were easy to mobilize for a bloody and destructive war to
reclaim,                                                                                  or rather 
claim, Alto Adige, Trentino, Frulia, Udine, and the city of Trieste. Appeals to ethno-nation drove 
masses to act in force in ways that trumped abstract ideals, moral
principles, and appeals to human cosmopolite solidarity that lacked roots in the blood and the soil 
did not. Mussolini therefore felt his way forward into his doctrine. And many have
followed him since.

But followed them into what?

* * * *

At the core of fascism as an ideology was that semi-liberal industrial capitalism and parliamentary 
government had had its chance, and had failed. The failures were several and
along several different dimensions, but they were seen asa€”somehowa€’’linked together.

The first was a macroeconomic failure: semi-liberal capitalism had failed to guarantee high 
employment and rapid economic growth.

A second was a distributional failure. Either semi-liberal capitalism made the rich richer while 
everyone else stayed poor, or liberal capitalism failed to preserve an adequate income
differential between the more-educated, more-respectable lower middle class and the unskilled 
industrial proletariat. Depending on which aspect of income distribution was
highlighted, either industrial capitalism produced an income distribution that was either too 
unequal (rich get richer, the rest stay poor) or not unequal enough (respected lower
middle  classes slip into joining the unskilled proletariat). That the charge of not-unequal-enough 
carried an implied or explicit racial distinction^’’too much equality with Jews, or
Poles, or Slavs, or (insert your minority here) was unacceptablea€”lent it even greater ability to 
inspire the national masses. Fascism could and did play both ends against the
middle: under liberal democratic capitalism, equals were treated unequally, while unequalsa€’’those 
who were not really part of the ethnic communitya€’’were treated equally.

The third failure was a moral failure. The market economy reduced all human relationshipsa€”or at 
any event many human relationships^”to arms-length market transactions: you
do this for me, and I will pay you. But people are not comfortable dealing with each other as 
nothing but machines for transforming your money into useful commodities, or vice
versa your labor into money. Contests and gift-exchanges have more psychological resonance. FOR 
EXAMPLEa€! By ignoring and trying to suppress the contest and gift­
exchange dimensions of economic relationships, the market society dehumanized much of life.

Fourth, the semi-classical semi-liberal capitalist order ignored the fact that we (by which was 
meant all us citizens bound together by culture and contained within our borders) are
in this together: that inhabitants of an ethnic nation have common interests that are much more 
powerful than any one individual's interest. Thus, economic policy needs to be made
in a a€oesyndicalista€n or a€cecorporatista€D mode. This meant that the state needed to mediate 
between employers and unions, and the state needed to crack heads when
necessary to make sure that employers and unions did the right thing. Not market forces but 
government regulation would set the price of labor and the quantity of employment, for
those were too important for the health of society to be determined by the distribution of property 
and the workings of the market.

Fifth, not only the liberal economy flawed, but so too was the semi-liberal government. Parliaments 
were incompetent. Cretinous. They were composed either of (a) time-servers
with no initiative, (b) corrupt distributors of favors to special interests, or (c) ideological 
champions who focused not on the public interest but on what made their own narrow slice
of supporters feel good. They were a swamp. The swamp needed to be drained. A strong leader who 
would say what he thought and do what was needed without paying attention to
norms or niceties was needed to do the job.

Many of these real and declared shortcomings resulted in simmering to boiling discontent. Giving it 
form and direction helped decide the first two planks of Fascisma€™ s
platform.

Nationalist assertion became Mussolinia€™ s first plank. He demanded that Italy be a€oerespecteda€™ 
. He demanded that the Italian border be moved north into the Alps and east
into what would become Yugoslavia. Moved how far? As far as possible. Anti-socialism became his 
second plank: recruiting groups of young thugs and sending them out into the
streets to beat up socialists and disrupt working-class organizations. Fisticuffs and enmity has 
long worked both to solidify your in-group and to keep obscured commonalities with
others you wish to keep outgroups. In sending his thugs to engage with their thugs Mussolini was 
appealing to the same sources of discontent and energy that the socialists were. He
needed to sharpen the contradictions to keep his own recruits from drifting left.

Back in the early second century St. John the Evangelist had needed his congregation to stop 
dividing their contributions between church and synagogue, hence his gospel
demonized the Jews. Mussolinia€™ sa€”and Hitlera€™ sa€”gospels needed to do something analogous to 
recruit cadres.

a€ceCorporatism,a€O or the replacement of the anarchy of the market by some form of 
government-administered planning, at least of wage levels and incomes, became his third
plank. Fascism would embrace the dignity of work and of occupations, and not value every form of 
work and every worker solely by what the market wanted to pay them. Policy
needed to be made in a a€cesyndicalista€D or a€cecorporatista€D mode, with the state mediating 
between those who thought they had opposed interests, for example employers
and unions, and remind them that they had much more in common as ethnic Italians than what divided 
them as members of different classes.

And to make people sit up and behavea€’’subordinate their class interests to their ethno-national 
interesta€”there needed to be a strong leader: Mussolini. This was less plank than
precondition. People did not have interests that politicians existed to satisfy. Instead, people 
needed to be led and given a sense of national purpose by having their leader tell them
what their interests were. Rulers should not listen and obey, but speak and command.

Was fascism real, or was this just a con game?

Perhaps it was just a confidence trick. A normal political movement is based on interest groups who 
see their well-being as part of a good society, adds to that a view of how the
world works that suggests certain policies will advance that well-being, and then attempts the 
assembly of coalitions to implement such policies. Fascism certainly was not a normal
political movement.

To seize power Mussolini needed to perform the role of the prophet of a new ideology, he then 
needed a doctrine to cloak his personal despotism, and he needed to keep his
opponents divided and off-balance. To claim that his doctrine was a€cefascisma€D, and then to at 
every moment define a€cefascisma€O as what seemed tactically opportune, and
then  to play the trump card of asserting that contradictions and inconsistencies were in fact the 
point of the leadership principle that was at the core of fascism.

Thus one point of view is that there is no there there, there was no there there, there never was 
any there there: that fascism was always a confidence game run by con artists. The
goal of the one promoting fascism was to become a leader in order to gain status, wealth, and 
power. In order to do that, he needed to find people who wanted to be led. And then he
had to undertake a delicate psychological negotiation with them to figure out where they wanted to 
be led to. Only then could he enthrall them, and then pick their pockets.

It is tempting to declare that the greatest trick Mussolini ever pulled was convincing the world, 
or at least much of all Italy, that he and fascism were the real deal. Unquestionably
he succeeded for a time. Initially, Italya€™ s elected politicians tried alternately to suppress 
and to ally with fascism. In 1922, after winning some electoral successes, Mussolini
threatened to make Italy ungovernable through large-scale political violencea€”unless he was named 
prime minister. The king named him prime minister. From there he became
dictator  of Italy: Il Duce, or a€oeThe Leadera€D. By judicious murders, imprisonments, and 
political wheeling-dealing, he remained at the top of Italy until the western allied
armies                                                                              of Britain and 
America came knocking in 1943.

But while it is certainly true that a€cefascisma€D was disorganized, self-contradictory, confused, 
and vague, most political movements are disorganized, self-contradictory,
confused, and vague. In forming a coalition or a party the goal is to maintain friendships and 
alliances by the blurring of differences and avoiding conceptual clarity. Both tend to
drive wedges among your followers.

Fascisma€™ s claim to be something real rests on another, incontrovertible fact: in the twentieth 
century it has had too many adherents to be a nonexistent illusionary confidence


incK, even n most rascisis most or me nme were clearer on wnai mey were against man wnat mey were 
tor. i count six elements usually tounaa^ in naiy ana eisewnerea^ in

regimes that called themselves a€cefascista€D: a leadership commanding rather than representing, a 
unified community based on ties of blood and soil (and rejecting and degrading
those who are not of the community), coordination and propaganda, support for at least some 
traditional hierarchies, hatred of socialists and liberals, anda€”almost alwaysa€”
hatred                                                                                of 
a€oerootless cosmopolitesa€D in some form or other.

It is certainly true that some fascists are con artists. But I think happy is the land whose chief 
fascist is simply and solely a con artist simply out for the cash. For there is something
deeper to fascism, and a true believer in it who is not just a con artist running a confidence game 
is likely to be more effective at plumbing the depths and creating something ugly.

Neither Mussolini nor Hitlera€”nor Franco, nor Pinochet were, nor Urban, nor Modhi, nor any of a 
number of others are only con artists. The right question is not a€oeis?a€D but
a€oehow much?a€D

Fascism was also, often, considered to be the only game in town. This is certainly true if you do 
not approve of liberal democracy, or if you fear socialism and believe that liberal
democracy will inevitably lead to really-existing socialism once the working class realizes its 
voting strength. For many after World War I it seemed clear that restoring the Old
Order   was impossible. For many anti-socialists, therefore, fascism appeared to them to be the 
only choice left standing. Monarchy was out. An aristocracy of birth and rank was out.
Theocracy was out. Plutocracy hada€! difficulties keeping a mass base. Fascism was it. And a lot of 
people were and are willing to endorse and support it.

Indeed, if you took a look at European and Latin American governments between the World Wars, you 
could easily convince yourself that fascism was the wave of the future.
Nearly everywhere democracy was in retreat, unable to provide answers to the economic problems of 
the Great Depression or to resolve social conflicts. On the eve of World War II
democracies in the world were few and far between: Great Britain and its Dominions (Australia, New 
Zealand, Canada, and perhaps South Africa), the United States (if you were
white), Ireland, France, Belgium, Holland, and Scandinavia (Sweden, Norway, and Denmark). That was 
it. Everywhere else you had authoritarian, non- or anti-democratic
governments                                                                                of the 
left or the right.

* * * *

In Germany after World War I, supporters of the German Socialist Party were called Sozisa€ ’’the 
first two syllables of Socialist.

For some reason, urban Bavarians made fun of people named Ignatz The name was a stand-in for a what 
in English is a country bumpkin: someone rural, foolish, and awkward.
There was a diminutive nickname for Ignatz: Nazi.

Hence the political enemies of Adolf Hitler and his National Socialist German Workers Party in 
Bavaria in the 1920s began calling them a mash up of Sozis and Nazi, or
a€ceNazisa€D. The name stuck.

Once Adolf Hitler seized power in 1933 and consolidated it in 1934, he was by and large popular. 
With reason. Germany had recovered from the Great Depression relatively rapidly
once Hitler had taken power and broken adherence to monetary and fiscal orthodoxy. With the Gestapo 
in the background to suppress agitation for higher wages, better working
conditions, or the right to strike, and with strong demand from the government for public works and 
military programs, unemployment fell rapidly during the 1930s. The Great
Depression  in Germany had been the deepest in the world save for the United States. Recovery in 
Germany was fastest, save for Japan and Scandinavia.

Hitler in power during peacetime appears to have been focused on boosting employment and building 
weapons, not adding to industrial capacity and increasing national wealth.
Build national highways, yesa€”but build them not by building individual city-to-city or 
resources-to-industry links, but by building as much as possible first where it would be
seen as many as possible. Political effectiveness and military capacity were the priorities.

Political effectiveness we understand: The Nazi movement was still a minority movement. Even at its 
high point it could command a majority in the Reichstag, the legislature, only
with the socialist and communist deputies were excluded from the room. And even then this rump 
legislature was only willing to vote Hitler emergency and dictatorial powers in
the panic that followed the a€cemysteriousa€D burning of the Reichstaga€™ s building. In part 
because of their minority-majority, Hitler and his party did see building more and
stronger political support as a priority a€’’hence jobs, and at least the appearance of a 
government building large infrastructure projects.

But weapons? Armies? How do we understand these as priorities? Had not World War I taught the 
Germans, and even the Nazis, and even Hitler, not to do that again?
In a word, no.

Hitlera€™ s experiences during World War I do not seem to add up to what a normal person would 
regard as a a€oegood wara€D. But he thought they did.

He enlisteda€”untraineda€”in the Bavarian Army in August 1914, after having been rejected by his 
Austrian homeland as unfit for military service. In October he joined the 16
(List) Bavarian reserve regiment, part of nine newly-enlisted largely-untrained infantry divisions 
that were thrown immediately into combat on an emergency basis. It was the first
battle of Ypres. The Germans faced the British. And it was the first mauling the 16 (List) Bavarian 
reserve regiment underwent.

The Germans call this the Kindermord, the child-death. That is an explicit reference to the 
Biblical massacre of the innocent babies of Bethlehem by King Herod of Judea. For the
Hitlera€™ s regiment it is apt. 40,000 of 90,000 were killed or wounded in 20 days. By the end of 
the battle Hitler's company of 250 had only 42 men alive, out of the hospital, and
able to present for further duty.

The 16 (List) Bavarian reserve regiment, like so many others during World War I, followed a 
predictable pattern: inexperienced, they were sent into the fight where they were
chewed up, a decent precent were thrown away, a modest percent were regrouped, repeat. The 16 
(List) Bavarian was sacrificed over and over again in the battles of the Somme
(1916), Fromelles (196), Arras (1917), and Passchendaele (1917). The casualties were horrifying, in 
the hundreds of thousandsa€”in each battle. Hitler was wounded in the thigh in
1916                                                                                  by a shell 
exploding at his dugout entrance. He was hospitalized for two months. He was then ordered to the 
reserves behind the line in Munich. He could not stand it. With his
comrades under fire, he begged to be recalled back to the front. His wish was granted. He was then 
(temporarily) blinded and struck dumb by a British gas attack in October 1918.
He spent the last 25 days of the war in the hospital.

Yet these experiences did not put him off war.

Hitler was then demobilized and set adrift. No matter his dedication, Hitlera€™ s conduct had not 
been such that e wa one of those soldiers the General Staff wanted to keep for the
peacetime army. But intelligence Major Karl Mayr picked him up as an undercover operative in 
mid-1919. Mayr sent him to spy on socialists. One small socialist group he was sent
to spy on was Anton Wexler's Germany Workers Party. Drexler found Hitler to be a€oean absurd little 
man.a€D But Drexler was also impressed with Hitlera€™ s ability to speak.
Drexler invited Hitler to join his party on September 1919.

It became the Nazi Party five months later, when a€ceNationala€D and a€oeSocialista€n were added at 
the front of its name, a€ceNationala€D with Hitlera€™ s enthusiastic
support, and a€oeSocialista€D over his objection. The idea seems to have been that the full name 
change might lure Germans looking for a socialist meeting to wander in and
perhaps stick. Since the Nazis were, like the socialists, recruiting from the groups for whom the 
system was not working, such wanderers-in might stay. Later it was too late to
change the name of the party. And by that point it had become the party of Hitler first and 
foremost, mooting the name.

A sliver, albeit a highly telling sliver, of what the party of Hitler stood for can be glimpsed in 
how it treated the men who gave Hitler his first legs up into it.

The man who invited Hitler into the party and thereafter mentored him, Anton Drexler, Hitler pushed 
out of the Nazi leadership in 1921. Drexler resigned from the party in 1923. In

Mein Kampf, published in 1925 and years after Drexler had done all that he could for his mentee, 
Hitler described Drexler as:

a simple worker, as speaker not very gifted, moreover no soldiera€! weak and uncertaina€! not a 
real leadera€! nota€! fanatical enough to carry the
movement in their hearts, nora€! to use brutal means to overcome the opposition to a new ideaa€!

Drexler died of natural causes in the Bavarian city of Munich in 1942. He got off relatively easy.

The man who recruited Hitler to spy on Drexlera€™ s party, Karl Mayr, started out on the German 
right and steadily moved left. In 1925 he joined the Socialist Party, where he led
some of the socialist left-wing paramilitary street bullies. In 1933, after Hitler assumed 
dictatorial power , Myer fled to France. When the Nazis conquered France in 1940, he was
on the Gestapoa€™ s list. He was sent first to the Sachsenhausen and then to the Buchenwald 
concentration camp. There Mayr was murdered on February 9,1945.

Compared to the millions of victims of Hitlera€™ s party, he got off relatively easy.

Most of what Nazism stood for can be grasped by understanding Adolf Hitlera€™ s deadly serious 
appreciation for the turn of the nineteenth century economist Thomas Robert
Malthus.


It has been chapters since we last crossed paths with Malthus, the pessimist who gloomily predicted 
that human populations would outrun their food supply. When people and food
got out of balance, too much of the former given not enough of the latter, Malthus argued nature or 
mankind would provide a corrective. It would come in the forms, one or all, of
war, famine, disease, and death; or (a better alternative) a€oemoral restraint.a€D This would be 
evidenced by late marriages and infrequent sex supported by strong religious faith,
practices Malthus believed allow a small gap between the edge of starvation and average living 
standards.

From those earlier chapters we know Malthus as someone whose doctrines provided a good description 
of life before he wrote, but were a bad guide (so far) to subsequent history.
When looking backwards, the lesson he drew was less a lesson than a trap, and an inevitable one at 
that: population growth checked by insufficient foodstuffs producing povertya€”
and the more sexual liberty society allowed women, the more poverty. But in post-Malthus history 
the rationalization and routinization of scientific discovery, technological
innovation, and mass-scale deployment banished the Malthusian Devil.

Hitler, however, drew different lessons from Malthus. The Malthusian trap was, he argued, useful 
for thinking about foreign policy:

Germany has an annual increase in population of nearly nine hundred thousand souls. The difficulty 
of feeding this army of new citizens must grow greater
from year to year and ultimately end in catastrophe...

Hitler saw four options. One was birth control to reduce population growth. But Hitler saw any 
check on the number of Germans as weakening the German race. See: social
darwinism. A second was to increase agricultural productivity, but Hitler saw this as doomed for 
the same reason as Malthus did: diminishing returns. A third was to purchase food
from abroad by a€ceproduc[ing] for foreign needs through industry and commercea€D. Hitler deemed 
this a€ceunhealthya€D. Moreover, Hitler saw it as unrealistic: Britain would
never allow Germany to become the dominant industrial and mercantile power without a fight, and if 
it could wield the hunger weapon againa€”as it had with the World War I
blockadea€”Britain would win.

What was left? The fourth way: territorial expansion. Thus Hitler goes on to write:

We must... coolly and objectively, adopt the standpoint that it can certainly not be the intention 
of Heaven to give one people fifty times as much land and
soil in this world as another. [We must not let political boundaries obscure for us the boundaries 
of internal justicea€!. The law of self-preservation goes

into effect; and what is refused to amicable methods it is up to the fist to takea€! If land was 
desired in Europe, it could be obtained by and large only at the
expense of Russia, and this meant that the new Reich must again set itself on the march along the 
road of the Teutonic knights of old, to obtain by the
German sword sod for the German plow and daily bread for the nationa€!

Standing atop historical inaccuracies and mystical justifications, Hitler concluded that Germany 
must:

take up where we broke off six hundred years ago. We stop the endless German movement to the south 
and west, and turn our gaze toward the land in the
east. At long last we break off the colonial and commercial policy of the pre-War period and shift 
to the soil policy of the futurea€!

But how could Germany expand to the east? Here Hitler was certain that Fate (or heaven, or internal 
justice, or the laws of self-preservation) had already intervened on
Germanya€™ s behalf. a€oeBy handing Russia to Bolshevism, it robbed the Russian nation of thata€! 
Germanic nucleus of its upper leading strata [which]a€! todaya€! has been
replaced                                                                               by the 
[Bolshevik] Jewa€!a€D See again: social darwinism, but now lace it with thousands of years of 
anti-Semitic hate, fear, and loathing. Hitler declared, a€oe[I]t is...
impossible for the Jew to maintain the mighty [Russian] empire forever.  The giant empire in the 
east is ripe for collapsea€!a€D

All Germany had to do was make sure that it had an army large enough to be prepared for when the 
collapse would come. Be prepared, but also be impatient. As Hitler said in June
1941 when he launched the Nazi armies into Russia: a€oeYou only have to kick in the door and the 
whole rotten structure will come crashing down.a€D

Focus on this to see the core of Nazism with clarity and brevity: Really-existing-socialism in the 
Soviet Union started with utopian expectations, the inevitable proletarian paradise
promised by Karl Marx, only to end up in dystopian horrors. Nazism began with dystopian 
expectations, the inevitable and inevitably violent contests of races and nations, to end up
in dystopian horrors. Thus we see the four braided assumptions at Nazisma€™ s center.

1. A very strong dose of German antisemitism (with a paranoid belief in a conspiracy among Jewish 
financiers, who controlled the economy to rob German wealth, Jewish
liberal intellectuals, who preached humanism to enfeeble the Germans, and Jewish communists, who 
sought to enslave the Germans.

1. A belief in the German nation and the a€ceAryana€D German race as an entity with a special, 
heroic destiny.

1. The understanding that war was the ultimate test of national and racial strength and worth.

1. Conquest, which explicitly required the extermination or removal of populations, was necessary 
to create more a€oeliving spacea€D for the German people and larger
fields and agricultural production, overseen by German farmers, to feed them.

Essential to this braided core were three presumptions:

1. The leadership principle. This was not just the belief that a good political order sees an 
inspired leader giving people vision and command, but the active disdain even
hatred of parliamentary institutions, which engage in ineffectual even disgraceful haggle and 
compromise on behalf of interest groups.

1. The use of terror to obtain obedience.

1. The desire to make sure that all of society, from its citizens to its organizations, serve the 
national cause.
And there you have Nazism.

Hitler took his Malthusian economics-based Aryan-racial-domination ideology, Nazism, seriously on 
March 15,1939, when German tanks rolled (unopposed) into Prague and
Germany annexed Czechoslovakia. He took it in dead earnest on September 1,1939, when German tanks 
rolled (opposed) across the Polish border, crushed the Polish army in less
than three weeks, and began the European phase of World War II. He took it in existential earnest 
on June 22,1941, when German tanks rolled (opposed) across the Soviet border
and Germanya€’’still engaged in a brutal war with Britaina€”took on the Soviet Union as as well. 
The entire point of Hitler's foreign policy, after all, was the drive to the east to
win by the sword bread for the German nation and sod for the German plow. In so doing he sought and 
hoped to exterminate, expel, or enslave all the Slavic peoples who lived to
Germanya€™ s east.

And he took it in genocidal earnest in the Final Solution to the a€oe Jewish Problem.a€D

Perhaps 50 million people died in consequence to Hitlera€™ s war. But had the Nazis won their 
wara€’’conquered Europe up to the Urals and filled the land with ethic German
landlord-farmer-estatesa€”that number would have been more than triple. And afterwards, what would 
race-maddened victorious Nazis have done in Africa? And in Asia east and
south of the Urals?

* * * *

Have I committed an error in lumping fascists in with Nazis?

A great many people did (and some still do) applaud fascists, after all.

The University of Chicagoa€™ s political philosopher Leo Strauss, teacher of some and darling of 
many on Americaa€™ s political right, proudly stated that even though the Nazis
were misapplying them, his own principles remained: a€oefascist, authoritarian and imperial.a€D

Economist and darling of the far right Ludwig von Mises wrote in 1927 of fascism: a€oeFascism and 
similar movements aiming at the establishment of dictatorships are full of the
best intentionsa€! [and] their intervention has, for the moment, saved European civilization. The 
merit that Fascism has thereby won for itself will live on eternally in history .a€D
(He did in the same work call it an a€oeemergency makeshifta€D, warn that a€oeview[ing] it as 
something more would be a fatal errora€D, and denounce it for a€oeits complete
faith in the decisive power of violencea€Da€”for in his view it needed ideas rather than fists and 
clubs to decisively scotch socialism.)

Libertarian darling Friedrich von Hayek urged Margaret Thatcher to hew more closely to the methods 
of Augusto Pinochet in scotching Labour opposition to her policies. I have
nowhere been able to find a CODV of the document in which he ursed this. But we catch his intent in 
her nolitelv worded renlv. She wrote. a€oesome of the measures adooted in


Chile are quite unacceptablea€!. We shall achieve our reforms in our own way and in our own 
time.a€D

Or step further back, and recognize that there has been a dialectical engagement between the ideas 
of human liberty, of self-government, and of the necessity of popular unity in a
mode that at least echoes fascism for 2500 years. Around the year -425 Herodotos of Hallikarnassos 
put these words into the mouth of exiled Spartan King Demaratos, who told
Persian King of Kings Khshayarsha (a€ceXerxesa€D): he Greeks were a€oefreea€! buta€! with a 
mastera€! [the] Law, which they fear much more than your subjects fear you.

Whatever this master commands they doa€!a€D On the wall behind Nancy Pelosia€™ s rostrum in the 
U.S. House of Representatives are the symbols from which Mussolini took
his partya€™ s name. There you see two eight foot-tall/asces: the bundles of rods and axes tied 
together with thongs that were carried by the attendants of Roman magistrates,
providing a visual lesson that although individually Romans were weak united they were strong. And 
you can also see the fasces in the bannisters of Janet Yellena€™ s U.S.
Treasury building.

In seeing historya€™ s fascists, as they have cropped up across continents and over decades, as 
part of the same species as Hitler and his company of genocidal madmen, am I
illegitimately tarring their views? Von Mises, after all, saw fascisma€™ s violent orientation as 
a€oeemotional reflex actions evoked by indignation at the deeds of the Bolsheviks
and Communists. As soon as the first flush of anger had passed, their policy took a more moderate 
course and will probably become even more so with the passage of timea€!a€D

It is certainly true that if fascists are all of the same species, they were much tamer versions of 
Nazis. Most fascistsa€™ economic doctrine was largely negative: they were not
socialists, and they did not believe that the Marxist platform of the nationalization of industry 
and the expropriation of the capitalist class was the right way to run an economy. But
most did not buy into the a€oenational living spacea€D, a€celebensrauma€D doctrines of Hitler. They 
were less anti-semitic fascists than the Nazis. And most of the species
tended  to do their killing on a retail rather than a wholesale scale.

But fascists were identifiably of the same ideological genus as Nazis. They recognized each other. 
It is no accident that Hitler writes of his aCceprofoundist admiration for the great
man south of the Alps,a€D Benito Mussolini, the founder of fascism. It is no accident that 
Mussolini allied with Hitler during World War II, and no accident that both Hitler and
Mussolini sent aid to Francisco Franco's royalist rebels in the Spanish Civil War of the late 
1930s. Any more than it was accidental that Nazis fleeing Europe after the collapse of
Hitlera€™ s Third Reich found a welcome in Juan Perona€™ s Argentina.

Have I committed an error in not lumping fascists in with really-existing-socialists here? After 
all, how much difference exists between the fascist and the really-existing-socialist?

A distressing number of people, starting with Mussolini himself, seem to have transited from one to 
the other directly. That suggests not a left-right political spectrum but rather a
color wheel. Red and blue are as far apart in terms of visual spectrum wavelength as colors can be. 
Yet if you take magenta paint and add a little bit of cyan you get blue; if you take
magenta and add a little bit of yellow you get red. George Orwella€™ s famously asked, a€oebut 
arena€™ t we all socialists?a€D He was in Barcelona, it was 1937, and was
watching   as the Stalinist-backed socialists exterminated the POUM faction that he had joined when 
he arrived in the city. All the while, Francoa€™ s fascists waited outside the
city.. Comparing Orwella€™ s question to a€oearena€™t we all Christians?a€D asked at the 
sixteenth-century massacre of Protestants in Paris on St. Bartholemew's Day,

historian Felipe Fernandez-Armesto put it eloquently:

The extremists at both ends seemed close enough to touch. Individuals moved between fascism and 
militant socialism as if by connecting channelsa€!.

My father. carried a communist card and wore a [fascist] Falangist uniform [in Spain] at different 
moments in the 1930sa€!

There were important differences in the way of policy.

As Hermann Rauschning claimed Hitler had said to him, a€oeWhy need we trouble to socialize banks 
and factories? We socialize human beings!a€D The focus on control over
institutions and commodity flows as primary and control over what people think, say, and do as 
secondary in really existing socialism is a difference. But how profound a
difference?                                                                           And while 
status inequality was important to really existing socialists, material inequality and ruling-class 
luxury wasa€! embarrassing. By contrast, for fascists, if
material inequality and ruling-class luxury bothered you, it only demonstrated that you were not 
really with the program.

But do these make up a difference in species, or just variation within a species properly called 
a€cetotalitariana€D?

The British socialist historian Eric Hobsbawma€”a card-carrying communist from before World War II 
to 1956a€”has a couple of asides in his histories that strike me as revealing.
The first comes in his history of the short twentieth century, the Age of Extremes: Hobsbawm, 
writing in his old age, still sees that joining a:

Moscow aligned Communist party... offered both to interpret the world and to change it, or looked 
better able to do so. It was, for most of the

worlda€™ s believers in the need for global revolution, the only game in towna€!. Lenina€™ s 
a€~party of a new typea€™ a€! gave even small
organizations disproportionate effectiveness, because the party could command extraordinary 
devotion and self-sacrifice from its members, more than
military discipline and cohesiveness, and a total concentration on carrying out party decisions at 
all costs. This impressed even hostile observers
profoundlya€!

The assumption that unthinking obedience to the dictator in Moscowa€’’whoever he might bea€”was 
appropriate because it was the way to change the world begs the question.
The question is: what kind of change, and what kind of world? This is not even a haira€™ s breadth 
away from a fascist worship of force and the leader. To accept that being a
follower meant devotion and self-sacrifice at all costs would absolutely have earned Mussolinia€™ s 
and Hitlera€™ s approval.

And did the party discipline of the really-existing socialists impress or horrify hostile 
observers?

For Hobsbawm (as well as for many others) a principal attraction of communism was its glorification 
of force and effectiveness. Recall that when World War II broke out, Stalin
and Hitler were allieda€”and world communist doctrine was that the British and French were the bad 
guys in trying to stop Hitlera€™ s expansion. This seemingly awful
awkwardness was not felt by Hobsbawm, who saw it as:

heroica€!. Nationalism, political calculation, even common sense, pulled one way, yet they 
unhesitatingly chose to put the interests of the international
movement firsta€!. They were tragically and absurdly wrong. But their error. should not lead us to 
ridicule the spirit of their action. This is how the

socialists of Europe should have acted... carrying out the decisions of the International. It was 
not their fault that the International should have told them

to do something elsea€!

But if was not Hobsbawm and his fellow unthinking-follower cadresa€™ fault that the Third Socialist 
International master they served as willing and enthusiastic slaves was itself
the puppet of a paranoid dictator in Moscow and not the pathfinder of humanitya€™ s progress toward 
utopia, whose fault could it possibly have been?

* * * *

Before the twentieth century, ideology did not kill people by the millions and tens of millions, as 
aristocratic militarism, really-existing socialism, fascism, and market
fundamentalism have. The truly mass murder before the New Jerusalem descends remained in the land 
of fantasy: Saint John the Theologian only imagined the giant locusts with
scorpionsa€™ tails, lionsa€™ teeth, and womena€™ s hair who stung multitudes for five months so 
that they sought death but could not find it. It was only in the twentieth
century    that utopian aspirations about how the economy should be organized led nations and 
global movements to build dystopias now in order to try to bring the utopian future
closer. And then they turned around, and justified the dystopia as: we must make compromises, and 
this is as good as it is going to get.

My view is that too much mental and historical energy spent parsing differences between movements 
that are justly classified as dystopian and even totalitarian in aspiration is time
wasted given the commonalities not in formal doctrine but in modes of operation. The guards of 
Auschwitz, Majdanek, Treblinka, Dachau, and the rest were very like the guards of
the Gulag Archipelago, and both were much more terrible and deadly than any fantasy woman-haired 
lion-toothed scorpion-tailed giant locusts.

Rather, mental and historical energy should be focused on where these movements got their energy. 
Why was the world unable to offer people a society in which they could live
good lives? Why was a total reconfiguration necessary? Polanyi saw fascism and socialism as 
reactions against market societya€™ s inability or unwillingness to satisfy
peoplea€™  s Polanyian rights: It could not guarantee them a comfortable community in which to live 
because the use to which land was put had to pass a profitability test. It could
not  offer them an income commensurate with what they deserved because the wage paid to their 
occupation had to pass a profitability test. And it could not offer them stability of
employment because the finance to support whatever value chain they were embedded in also had to 
pass a profitability test. They all thought that there needed to be a fundamental
reconfiguration of economy and society that would respect peoplea€™ s Polanyian rights, and so 
offer them respect. And the hope of millions was that fascism and really-existing
socialism would do so.

But both turned out to erase peoplea€™ s rights, and peoplea€™ s fives, by the millions, in the 
most brutal and absolute ways. So why were people so gullible? German socialist
Rosa Luxemburg in 1919 could see the path Lenin was embarked upon: a€oean elite of the working 
classa€! applaud[s] the speeches of the leadersa€! approve[s] proposed
resolutions unanimouslya€! the dictatorship of a handful of politiciansa€!. Such conditions must 
inevitably cause a brutalization of public life: attempted assassinations, shooting of
hostages. etca€l.a€D German liberal Max Weber could see in 1918 that Lenina€™ s would be a 
sociological experiment that would end in a€oea laboratorv with heaos of human


corpsesa€!a€D and a a€oebondage which men will perhaps be forced to inhabit as powerless as the 
fellahs of ancient Egypta€!a€D British ambassador Eric Phipps wrote in 1935
that if Britain were to take Hitlera€™ s Mein Kampf either seriously or literally a€oewe should 
logically be bound to adopt the policy of a a€~preventivea€™ wara€!a€D The
dangers were clear and the unlikelihood of success at any of the goals seems, to me at least, to 
ought to have been obvious. Utopian faith is a helluva drug.

How was the struggle over the how humanity was to organize itself that really started with World 
War I to proceed? Here we again cease to be able to track history via the logic of
economic imperatives and mass movements. With the coming of World War II, history moves back from 
broad currents and deep forces assembled out of the deeds and thoughts of
hundreds and millions. History moves back to decisions of smaller numbers. History becomes what we 
have to regard as luck, or chance, or contingency. He broad currents and
deep forces make it relatively hard to imagine how, after the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, the 
economic history of the global north in the 1920s could have been that different. But it is
much easier to imagine how the Great Depression could have been avoided, or could have been 
differenta€’’even though it does not seem surprising that the Great Depression was
much like it was.

But once again high, personal politics and war took the center stage. History once again became one 
very damned unlikely thing after another.

