Subscribe now

Condition: Time to Start Planning for Spring 2023 Econ 210a: a€oelntroduction to Economic 
Historya€D (for First-Year Graduate Students)

1. Introduction & Malthusian Economies 2023-01-18 (DeLong)

2. Technology & Growth 2023-01-25 (DeLong)

3. The Commercial-Agricultural Revolution 2023-02-01 (DeLong)

4. Freedom & Unfreedom 2023-02-08 (DeLong)

5. The Industrial Revolution 2023-02-15 (Eichengreen)

6. American Exceptionalism 2023-02-22 (Eichengreen)

7. 19th Century Capital Markets 2023-03-01 (Eichengreen)

8. 19th Century Labor Markets 2023-03-08 (Eichengreen)

9. Globalization & the Gold Standard 2023-03-15 (Eichengreen)

10. The Great Depression 2023-03-22 (Eichengreen)

11. Technological Revolutions during Modern Economic Growth (second industrial revolution, mass 
production, global value, chains, info and biotech) 2023-04-05 (DeLong)

12. Global North Political Economy: The a€oeNew Deala€D & a€oeNeoliberala€D Orders 2023-04-12 
(DeLong)

13. Paper Presentations 2023-04-19 (DeLong & Eichengreen)

14. Paper Presentations 2023-04-26 (DeLong & Eichengreen)
So what should we put on the reading list this year?

Share

Must-Read: a€oeSlouchinga€C Makes a€oeFive Booksa€d:

Sophie Roell: Nonfiction of 2022: Fall Roundup: a€~The Story of Russia by Orlando Figesa€! 
Existential Physics: A Scientista€™ s Guide to Lifea€™ s Biggest Questions by Sabine 
Hossenfeldera€! Two Wheels Good: The History and Mystery of the Bicycle by Jody Rosena€! Slouching 
Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century by Brad
DeLonga€! The Facemaker: A Visionary Surgeon's Battle to Mend the Disfigured Soldiers of World War 
I by Lindsey Fitzharrisa€!. Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century 
by Brad DeLong: A book thata€™ s received a lot of co veragea€’’including from Paul Krugman in the 
New York Times, who called it a€oemagisteriala€na€’’
is Slouching Towards Utopia by Brad DeLong. a€~Slouchinga€™ is one of my favourite words, so I was 
happy to see it in a book title, though I dona€™ t think it does justice to whata€™ s been achieved 
in economic terms over the long 20th century he covers. Ita€™ s been more of an exciting hurdle 
race with frequent and sometimes catastrophic crashes. DeLong
is a macroeconomist at UC Berkeley who is also very interested in history (he first came to my 
attention for his a€~Liveblogginga€™ of World War II), and this book is valuable because ita€™ s a 
global history of the 20th century told by someone who understands economics. Over more than 500 
pages, youa€™ 11 get historical details (eg why the Nazis were called
the Nazis) but also his analysis of why, for example, China was economically behind Japan in the 
early 20th century or Argentina has not been able to join the ranks of the wealthiest nations. 
After reading this book, youa€™ 11 want to read some Hayek and Polanyi, if you havena€™ t 
alreadya€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Matt Yglesias: Columbus Day was the original woke holiday: a€~On Thursday at 8:30 p.m. Eastern, 
we are going to have the second meeting of the Slow Boring Book Club. Wea€™ 11 be joined by author 
Brad DeLong to discuss his new book a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia,a€D with an audience Q&A to 
follow. Subscribers can register here....

• Edward N. Wolff: Heterogenous Rates of Return on Homes and Other Real Estate: Do the Rich Do 
Better? Do Black Households Do Worse?: a€~ Accrued capital gains on homes and other real estateaCI 
[suggest] returns on homes vary directly with wealth level and are considerably higher for the very 
wealthy compared to the middle class and lower
wealth households. However, there is no evidence from the preferred specification that Black or 
Hispanic families receive lower returns on their property once controlling for factors such as 
years of occupancy and overall house price movements...

•  Steve Randy Waldman: Liberalism vs democracy: a€~Ita€™ s a habit, almost a tic, for many of us 
to put liberalism and democracy togethera€!. [But] liberalisma€! stands in real tension with 
democracya€l valorizes and places above interference by the demos certain freedoms that have 
profound effects beyond the individuals who consent and
choosea€!

•  Nancy Qian: How Xi Jinping Can Strengthen the Chinese Economy: a€~Indicators that were improving 
continued to improve, and the problems that were hard to fix remained unfixed. The biggest change 
has been in Xia€™ s execution, which has left much to be desireda€!

•  Ana Palacio: The Westa€™ s Role in the Global Food Crisis: a€~Contrary to the Kremlina€™ s 
claims, the West is not to blame for current food shortages in the developing world. But it does 
have a responsibility to help address them, rather than leaving these countries to fend for 
themselvesa€!

• Nick Timiraos: Feda€™ s Inflation Fight Has Some Economists Fearing an Unnecessarily Deep 
Downturna€!

•  Alex Heath: Metaa€™ s VR social network Horizon is too buggy and employees are barely using it: 
a€~Employees still werena€™ t using Horizon enougha€! a plan was being made to a€oehold managers 
accountablea€D for having their teams use Horizon at least once a weeka€!

•  Bill Emmott: What we know, and don't know, about the new geopolitical and geoeconomic order: 
a€~This is not just the Sam Goldwyn or Yogi Berra joke that we should never prophesy, especially 
about the future. I anyway have long preferred the dismissal about clairvoyant expertise sent to us 
by the late Peter Drucker when at some point in the 1990s
we at The Economist described him as a a€cemanagement gurua€D. Drucker wrote back that he had long 
believed that he had gained the title a€cegurua€D simply because the word a€cecharlatana€D was too 
long for a newspaper headlinea€!

•  Rana Foroohar: New rules for business in a post-neoliberal world: a€~a€oeReimagining the 
Economya€D, a Harvard Kennedy School initiative led by economists Dani Rodrik and Gordon HansonaCI 
aims to replace neoliberal policy paradigmsa€!. Another big shindig last week, sponsored by the 
Roosevelt Institute, in which progressive politicos
(many from within the administration) gathered to discuss the details of Americaa€™ s industrial 
policy. While these arena€™ t completely clear yet, one thing isa€”all of this is the opposite of 
trickle-downa€!

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

