Subscribe now

UTOPIA

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY

j BRADFORD •


FIRST: The Long 20th Century Comes to a Shuddering End

Foreign Policy is kind enough to publish an excerpta€”the middle third of my conclusion, in 
slightly-edited form:

Brad DeLong: The Long 20th Century Comes to a Shuddering End: An era of once-undreamt-of progress 
is overa€”and you wona€™ t like what comes next:

The history of the long 20th century, stretching from 1870 to 2010, is primarily the history of 
four things:

• technology-fueled growth,

• globalization,

• an exceptional America, and

• confidence that humanity could at least slouch toward utopia as governments could solve 
political-economic problems. And even that slouch was going to be done at uneven, unequal, and 
unfair rates, depending on skin tone and gender.
Still, twice in that long century, 1870-1914 and 1945-75, something every preceding generation 
would have called near-utopia came nearer, rapidly. But these generation-long episodes of economic 
El Dorados were not sustaineda€!.

[In 1914] World War I camea€!.

The global north was lucky enough to rediscover after World War II what it thought was the path to 
utopia. The pace of economic growth during the Thirty Glorious Years that followed made, by its end 
in the 1970s, people dizzy with success: expecting more and tremendously upset at what seem in 
retrospect to be relatively minor speed bumps and roadblocks. But mere rapid growth did not satisfy 
those of a right-wing temperament, who felt that a prosperity
that was shared too equally was unfair and degrading. And mere rapid growth did not satisfy those 
of a left-wing temperament, either, for they felt that the problems that the market, even tweaked 
and managed by social democrats, solved did not produce even a partial version of the utopia they 
sought. And so the world took its neoliberal turn. But the neoliberal policy prescriptions did not 
produce a slouching toward utopia that was more rapid in any sensea€!

Share

And two nice reviews: one at the Independent .ie and the other at Open Letters Review.

•  Steve Donoghue: a€~Historical asides are so winningly conversational that they very much help to 
make the booka€™ s 600 pages surprisingly easy readinga€! [DeLong] has written the most 
entertaining End Times narrative since The Late Great Planet Eartha€\a€.™

• David Chance: a€~At 600-plus pagesa€! not for the faint-hearted, but therea€™ s little in the way 
of jargona€! the booked is laced with interesting anecdotes, although DeLong does get a bit 
wordya€!a€™
a€oeA bit wordy.a€D Hah! At over 600 pages, it is not a book for a flight from Dublin to Frankfurt 
or a ferry ride to Liverpool. Think a€cetransoceanica€D instead.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Must-Read:

Jacob Soil: How Christianity Influenced the Development of Capitalism in Medieval Europe: a€~The 
challenge facing Franciscans was enormous. If they accidentally owned wealth or used it beyond 
their bare necessitiesa€! they would be damned for breaking their sacred vows. The Franciscan Order 
began to study pricing and valuation mechanisms to be sure their members remained in a€oetotal 
poverty.a€Da€l Groups of radical mendicant friarsa€!
periodically led powerful and violent movements to overthrow the social order and destroy the 
Church as an institution of private propertya€!. In 1307a€! Fra Dulcino wasa€! burned at the 
stakea€!. Duns Scotusa€! propos[ed] that prices came neither from balanced exchange nor from moral 
rulesa€! [but] from a freely working secular market processa€! from quantity and from the value of 
labor and expertisea€! a€oediligence, prudence, care, as well as the risk
one accepts in doing such business.a€D Therefore, it was very difficult for churchmen to calculate 
market pricesa€! for Franciscans to be sure that they were truly obeying their vow of povertya€!. 
They needed to consult with merchants and those expert in secular market pricesa€!

Leave a comment

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!


Very Briefly Noted:

•  Michael Nielsen: Notes on Effective Altruism: a€~I personally often find many new EAs a little 
self-righteous and overconfident, and sometimes overly evangelical... ("why are you wasting your 
time doing that, you should be working on AI safety", said by someone who thinks they know about 
AI, but does not, and has no ideas of any value about AI safety). This varies from amusing to 
mildly annoying to infuriating...

•  Martin Farrer: A Ponzi scheme by any other name: the bursting of China property bubble: 
a€'Nearly a third of all property loans are now classed as bad debtsa€!. S&P said at least 800bn 
yuan would be needed a€“ or even 10 times that much in the worst-case scenario a€“ to rescue a 
property market...

• Jeff Herf: Reactionary modernism: technology, culture, and politics in Weimar and the Third Reich

• Stefan J. Link: Forging Global Fordism: Nazi Germany, Soviet Russia, and the Contest over the 
Industrial Order

•  Ilya Somin: a€~Ukraine seems likely to bag thousands of prisoners in Lyman, and another pocket 
could collapse in Kherson, in the next few weeks, yielding many more. In both cases, Putin refused 
permission to withdrawa€!

• Matthew C. Klein: The Covid Recovery Looks Different Now: a€~The latest revisionsa€! have closed 
most of the gap between thea€! valuea€! produceda€! and the incomea€! generateda€!. GDP as of 
2022Q2 has been revised up by 1.1 %a€! GDI has been revised down by 1.5%a€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Alex: Keynes' General Theory Ch. 19: a€~Usually arguments against... status quo receive the answer 
a€oeit takes a model to beat a model.This is necessary, but not sufficient. It takes institutions 
to displace institutions, and it takes alternative sources of legitimacy to displace existing 
sources of legitimacy. The NK edifice took decades of dedicated work by thousands of people to 
arrive in the shape ita€™ s in now. I dona€™ t have a comparable
administrative-intellectual edifice to slot in place.... [But] the issue here should be clear to 
longtime readers of this substack: none of this has anything to do with Keynes or the General 
Theory at all. What Keynes would have to say about it may well be worse than anything Ia€™ ve said 
above...

Noah Smith: A concrete vision of the liberal democratic future: a€~The final thing... the liberal 
democratic vision needs is a way to accommodate conservatives.  A great many people within any 
society, including liberal democratic ones, are socially conservative to a greater or lesser 
degree. If the vision of the future that liberal democracies present is one where conservative 
values have been wiped from the Earth, then conservatives will feel they have no

choice but to embrace reactionary illiberalism.... Abortion bans and fights over trans rights show 
that the culture wars wona€™ t be swept under the rug.... Key pieces of the liberal democratic 
future vision remain to be filled in, and doing so will be a difficult and fraught process.... But 
ita€™ s something we need to do, or we will leave the future to the people with darker, more 
dramatic visions that are sure to lead to nowhere good...

The Economist: A study of lights at night suggests dictators lie about economic growth: a€~Part of 
what makes dictatorships dictatorships is that questioning the official line is dangerous. At the 
same time, autocratic regimes have a strong incentive to report healthy growth.  Citizens in 
dictatorships often assume they are being lied to. Outsiders should be similarly sceptical, a- 
Chart sources: a€ceHow much should we trust the dictatora€™s GDP growth

estimates?a€H by LR. Martinez, 2022; Freedom House; World Bank...

Doug Jones: The world at 1000 BCE: a€~The world population is about 50 million.... The Bantu 
expansion is just beginning.... Seafarers with roots in the Lapita culture have already reached 
Western Polynesia.... The Olmec are flourishing in Meso-America.... In China... from the Shang... 
to the Zhou. In the Near East and Eastern Mediterranean, the Late Bronze Age collapse has opened up 
space for smaller states. Tyre and other Phoenician city-states are
sailing the Mediterranean.... People are now learning to make effective use of cavalry... 
beginning... 2500 years in which the division between Steppe and Sown will be central to Eurasian 
history...

Nicole Barbaro: The Cognitive Gap Between Humans and Everything Else: a€~Evolutionarily, we see the 
first hints of foresight over the last couple million years in extinct human species. Creating 
complex tools, coordinating hunting attacks, burial ceremonies, agriculture, time keeping devices, 
writing and symbolism, and eventually full blow cities. Foresight combined with cumulative culture 
and innovation to jump start and feedback loop process over
evolution that is unique to humansa€!. The Invention of Tomorrow is a phenomenal book on a 
cognitive topic that I hadna€™ t much thought about until reading ita€!

Felix Martin: Free Market: The History of an Idea by Jacob Soil: Review: a€~This rich history of 
economic thought shows that the concept of completely unfettered trade is an extremely recent 
inventiona€!. Free Market offers a rich and valuable antidote to narrower and more traditional 
accounts of the liberal economic traditiona€!. It is firmly a work of intellectual history, not of 
economicsa€!


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

