I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription

Subscribe now

Ezra Klein once said that we webloggers understood very well how to create and manage "the flow" of 
what we wrote, but that we were really lousy at figuring out how to maintain, revisit, and use the 
stock of our past writing.
Here is a piece of a€oethe Stocka€D that I like to resurface and rethink about every once in a 
while:

Share

Understanding Karl Marx; Hoisted from the Archives from Four Years Ago May Day Weblogging

In the beginning was Karl Marx, with his vision of how the Industrial Revolution would transform 
everything and be followed by a Great Communist Social Revolution^’’greater than the political 
French Revolution^’’that would wash us up on the shores of Utopia.

The mature Marx saw the economy as the key to history: every forecast and historical interpretation 
must be based on the economy's logic of development. This project as carried forward by others ran 
dry. Sometimes—as in, say, Eric Hobsbawm's books on the history of the nineteenth century—this 
works relatively well. But sometimes it led nowhere. The writing of western European history as the 
rise, fall, and succession of ancient, feudal, and bourgeois modes
of production is a fascinating project. But the only person to try it seriously soon throws the 
Marxist apparatus over the side, where it splashes and sinks to the bottom of the sea. Perry 
Anderson's Passages from Antiquity to Feudalism and Lineages of the Absolutist State are great and 
fascinating books, but they are not "Marxist". They are Weberian. The key processes in Anderson's 
books concern not a€oemodes of productiona€D but rather a€oemodes of
domination .a€ □

Stanford Talk: Understanding Karl Marx.pdf

And when Marx and Engels's writings became sacred texts for the world religion called Communism, 
things passed beyond the absurd into tragedy and beyond tragedy into horror: the belief that the 
logic of development of the economy was the most important thing about society became entangled in 
the belief that Joe Stalin or Mao Zedong or Pol Pot or Kim II Sung or Fidel Castro was our 
benevolent master and ever-wise guide.
But let us go back to a time before Marxism lost its innocence. Let us go back and look at the 
thinker, Karl Marx, and what he actually wrote and thoughta€!

Karl Marx had a three part intellectual trajectory. He started out as a German philosopher; became 
a French-style political activist, political analyst, and political historian; and ended up trying 
to become a British- style economist and economic historian. At the start of his career he believed 
that all we had to due to attain true human emancipation was to think correctly about freedom and 
necessity. Later on he recognized that thought was not enough: that we had
to organize, politically. And then in the final stage he thought that the political organization 
had to be with and not against the grain of the truly decisive factor, the extraordinary economic 
changes that the coming of the industrial revolution was bringing to the world.

At each stage Marx had the enthusiasm of the true-believing convert: it was never the case that 
philosophy alone could bring utopia, it was never the case that after the revolution all problems 
will be resolved, and it was never the case that the underlying economic mode of production was the 
base and that its evolution drove the shape of the superstructure.

Karl Marx never completed the intellectual trajectory he set himself on. He tried as hard as he 
could to become a British-style classical economist—a "minor post-Ricardian theorist" as Paul 
Samuelson once joked—but he did not make it: the late, mature Marx is mostly an economist and 
economic historian, but he is also part political activist—and also part prophet.
Marx the prophet, here is a sample: Marx on India:

The ruling classes of Great Britain.... The aristocracy wanted to conquer [India], the moneyocracy 
to plunder it, and the millocracy to undersell it. But now the... millocracy have discovered that 
the transformation of India into a reproductive country has become of vital importance.... They 
intend now drawing a net of railroads over India... exclusive view of extracting at diminished 
expenses the cotton and other raw materials for their
manufactures....

You cannot maintain a net of railways over an immense country without introducing all those 
industrial processes necessary to meet the immediate and current wants of railway locomotion, and 
out of which there must grow the application of machinery to those branches of industry not 
immediately connected with railways. The railway-system will therefore become, in India, truly the 
forerunner of modern industry.  All the English

bourgeoisie may be forced to do will neither emancipate nor materially mend the social condition of 
the mass of the people, depending not only on the development of the productive powers, but on 
their appropriation by the people. But what they will not fail to do is to lay down the material 
premises.  Has the bourgeoisie ever done more? Has it ever effected a progress without dragging 
individuals and people through blood and dirt,

through misery and degradation?...

The bourgeois period of history has to create the material basis of the new world... universal 
intercourse founded upon the mutual dependency of mankind... the development of the productive 
powers of man.... When a great social revolution shall have mastered the results of the bourgeois 
epoch. and subjected them to the common control of the most advanced peoples, then only will human 
progress cease to resemble that hideous,

pagan idol, who would not drink the nectar but from the skulls of the slain...

Large-scale prophecy of a glorious utopian future is bound to be false when applied to this world. 
The New Jerusalem does not descend from the clouds "prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband." 
And a Great Voice does not declare: "I shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall 
be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former 
things are passed away. " But Marx clearly thought at some level that

it would: he never got to the island of Patmos on which John the Divine lived, but there is a sense 
that he got too much into the magic mushrooms.
Marx the political activist. As I see it, he had three big ideas:

1. that while previous systems of hierarchy and domination maintained control by hypnotizing the 
poor into believing that the rich in some sense a€cedeserveda€D their high seats in the temple of 
civilization, capitalism woulda€“replace masked exploitation by naked exploitation. Then the scales 
would fall from people's eyes, for without its masking ideological legitimations unequal class 
society could not survive. This idea seems to me to be


uoinpiciciy wwug. vi. Z-MILUIHU VJIOHISUI, passim, wu icgiuniauuii auu Hegemony, occ aisu ruA news.

2. that even though the ruling class could appease the working class by using the state to 
redistribute and share the fruits of economic growth it would never do so. They would be trapped by 
their own ideological legitimations—they really do believe that it is in some sense a€ceunjusta€D 
for a factor of production to earn more than its marginal product. Hence social democracy would 
inevitably collapse before an ideologically-based right-wing assault,
income inequality would rise, and the system would collapse or be overthrown. The Wall Street 
Journal editorial page works day and night 365 days a year to make Marxa€™ s prediction come true. 
But I think this, too, is wrong.

3. that factory work was the wave of the future, and factory work— lots of people living in cities 
living alongside each other working alongside each other—would lead people to develop a sense of 
their common interest. Hence people would organize, revolt, and establish a free and just society 
in a way that they could not back in the old days when the peasants of this village were suspicious 
of the peasants of that one, and peasants formed not a class for
themselves but, rather, a sack of potatoes which can attain no organization but simply remains a 
sack of potatoes. Here I think Marx mistook a passing phase for an enduring trend. Active 
working-class consciousness as a primary source of loyalty and political allegiance was never that 
strong. Nation and ethnos trump class, never more so that when the socialists of Germany told their 
emperor in 1914 that they were Germans first and Marxists
second.

Add to these the fact that Marx's idea of the "dictatorship of the proletariat" was clearly not the 
brightest light on humanity's tree of ideas, and I see very little in Marx the political activist 
that is worthwhile today.

Marx the economist—well, Marx the economist had six big things to say, some of which are very 
valuable even today across more than a century and a half, and some of which are not. I would call 
them the three goods and the three bads:

1. Marx the economist was among the very first to recognize that the fever-fits of financial crisis 
and depression that afflict modern market economies were not a passing phase or something that 
could be easily cured, but rather a deep disability of the system—as we are being reminded once 
again right now, this time with Ben Bernanke, Tim Geithner, and Larry Summers in the Hot Seats. 
Marx pointed the spotlight in the right direction here. However, I
don't think that his theory of business cycles and financial crises holds up. Marx thought that 
business cycles and financial crises were evidence of the long-term unsustainability of the system. 
We modern neoliberal economists view it not as a fatal lymphoma but rather like malaria: 
Keynesianism—or monetarism, if you prefer—gives us the tools to transform the business cycle from a 
life- threatening economic yellow fever of the society into the
occasional night sweats and fevers: that with economic policy quinine we can manage if not banish 
the disease.

2. Marx the economist was among the very first to get the industrial revolution right: to 
understand what it meant for human possibilities and the human destiny in a sense that people like 
Adam Smith did not. In his Politics Aristotle observed that it was not possible to run a household 
in a way that permitted its head enough leisure and freedom to, say, become a lover of wisdom 
unless the household owned slaves, and that this would be true unless and
until we had instruments like "the statues of Daedalus, or the tripods of Hephaestus, which, says 
the poet, 'of their own accord entered the assembly of the Gods;' if, in like manner, the shuttle 
would weave and the plectrum touch the lyre without a hand to guide them, chief workmen would not 
want servants, nor masters slaves..." Karl Marx was among the very first to see that the industrial 
revolution was giving us the statues of Daedalus, the tripods
of Hephaestus, looms that weave and lyres that play by themselves—and thus opens the possibility of 
a society in which we people can be lovers of wisdom without being supported by the labor of a mass 
of illiterate, brutalized, half-starved, and overworkedslaves.

3. Marx the economist got a lot about the economic history of the development of modern capitalism 
in England right—not everything, but he is still very much worth grappling with as an economic 
historian of 1500-1850. Most important, I think, are his observations that the benefits of 
industrialization do take a long time—generations—to kick in, while the costs of redistributions 
and power grabs in the interest of market efficiency and the politically-
powerful rising mercantile classes kick in immediately. You have to take seriously the idea that 
the industrial revolution did not make most or even many people better off right away. Reflect also 
that, as Tyler Cowen observes, capitalist systems can produce less autonomy than small scale 
production. Standards of living do rise from industrialization—which can undercut the cultures and 
networks of suppliers that make the choice of a petit bourgeois
lifestyle sustainable.

Now on to the three bads:

1. Marx believed that capital is not a complement to but a substitute for labor. Thus technological 
progress and capital accumulation that raise average labor productivity also lower the 
working-class wage. Hence the market system simply could not deliver a good or half-good society 
but only a combination of obscene luxury and mass poverty. This is an empirical question. Marx's 
belief seems to me to be simply wrong.

2. Marx the economist did not like the society of the cash nexus. He believed that a system that 
reduced people to some form of prostitution—working for wages and wages alone—was bad. He saw a 
society growing in which worked for money, and their real life began only when the five oa€™ clock 
whistle blows—and saw such an economy as an insult, delivering low utility, and also sociologically 
and psychologically unsustainable in the long run.
Instead, he thought, people should view their jobs as expressions of their species-being: ways to 
gain honor or professions that they were born or designed to do or as ways to serve their fellow- 
human. Here, I think, Marx mistook the effects of capitalism for the effects of poverty. The demand 
for a world in which people do things for each other purely out of beneficence rather than out of 
interest and incentives leads you down a very dangerous road,
for societies that try to abolish the cash nexus in favor of public- spirited benevolence do not 
wind up in their happy place. We neoliberal economists shrug our shoulders and say that we are in 
favor of a market economy but not of a market society, and that there is no reason why people 
cannot find jobs they like or insist on differentials that compensate them for jobs they dona€™ t.

3. Marx believed that the capitalist market economy was incapable of delivering an acceptable 
distribution of income for anything but the briefest of historical intervals. As best as I can see, 
he was pushed to that position by watching the French Second Republic of 1848-1851, where the 
ruling class comes to prefer a charismatic mountebank for a dictator—"Napoleon III"—over a 
democracy because dictatorship promises to safeguard their property in a
way that democracy will not. Hence Marx saw political democracy as only surviving for as long as 
the rulers could pull the wool over the workers' eyes, and then collapsing. I think that Western 
Europe over the past fifty years serves as a significant counterexample. It may be difficult to 
maintain a democratic capitalist market system with an acceptable distribution of income. But 
"incapable" is surely too strong. Beveridgism or Myrdalism—social
democracy, progressive income taxes, a very large and well-established safety net, public education 
to a high standard, channels for upward mobility, and all the panoply of the twentieth-century 
social- democratic mixed-economy democratic state can banish all Marxa€™ s fears that capitalist 
prosperity must be accompanied by great inequality and great misery.

The good things that Marx was able to think must, I believe, be credited to his own account—to his 
thoughtfulness, his industry, his intelligence, and his desperate desire to try to get things 
right. The bad things have, I believe, two of his intellectual origins: Marx's beginnings in German 
philosophy, and the fact that he hooked up in the 1840s with Friedrich Engels whose family owned 
textile factories in Manchester.
Start with German philosophy, or perhaps rather Hegel. I remember reading Capital for the first 
time. The first three sections of chapter 1 seemed (a) boring, and (b) tautological. For example:

When, at the beginning of this chapter, we said in common parlance that a commodity is both a use 
value and an exchange value, we were, accurately speaking, wrong. A commodity is a use value or 
object of utility and a value. It manifests itself as this twofold thing that it is as soon as its 
value assumes an independent form a€“ viz., the form of exchange value. It never assumes this form 
when isolated but only when placed in a value or
exchange relation with another commodity of a different kind. When once we know this such a mode of 
expression does no harm...

And then I hit section 4: "The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret Thereof":

A commodity is... a mysterious thing... in it the social character of mena€™ s labour appears to 
them as an objective character stamped upon the product... the relation of the producers to the sum 
total of their own labour is presented... as a social relation... not between themselves but 
between the products.  In the same way the light from an object is perceived by us not as the 
subjective excitation of our optic nerve but as the objective

form of something outside the eye.  But in the act of seeing there is at all events an actual 
passage of light from one thing to another, from the external object to the eye. There is a 
physical relation between physical things. But it is different with commodities. There the 
existence of the things quA0 commodities and the value relation between the products of labour 
which stamps them as commodities have absolutely no connection with

their physical properties... [I]t is a definite social relation between men that assumes in their 
eyes the fantastic form of a relation between things... we must have recourse to the mist-enveloped 
regions of the religious world. the productions of the human brain appear as independent beings 
endowed with life and entering into relations both with one another and the human race. So it is in 
the world of commodities with the products of

mena€™ s hands. This I call the Fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour so soon 
as they are produced as commodities.... This Fetishism of commodities has its origin, as the 
foregoing analysis has already shown, in the peculiar social character of the labour that produces 
them...

Marx describes this as "coquett[ing] with the modes of expression peculiar to [Hegel]."
Put me on record as saying that this a€oecoquettinga€D is profoundly unhelpful.

What is going on here? What I think is going on inside Marx's head is something strange. To say 
that "the value relation[s] between the products of labour. have absolutely no connection with 
their physical properties" is simply wrong: if the coffee beans are rotten—or if their caffeine 
level is low—they have no value at all, for nobody will buy them. Marx says that the value of a 
good is something inscribed within it and attached to it—the socially-necessary labor

time for its production^’’that then bosses people around. And it is the values—not the prices at 
which things are actually bought and sold—that are the elements of the real important reality. And 
those values: "appear as independent beings endowed with life and entering into relation both with 
one another and the human race."
Now I have never found anybody who thinks this way.

Nobody I talk to believes that "values" are objective quantities inherent in goods by virtue of the 
time it took to produce them.

Everybody I talk to believes that things are both (a) useful to me and (b) useful to other people, 
and moreover (c) we live in a society where we exchange stuff—where we, in Adam Smith's words, 
truck, barter, and exchange. If the combination of my wealth and its usefulness to me makes me 
value it the most, then I use it—it is to me what Marx calls a use value. If there is somebody else 
out there whose combination of their wealth and its usefulness to them
makes them value it more than I do, then I trade it away to them directly or indirectly for stuff 
that I value more—they consume it, and it is to me what Marx calls an exchange value. But what Marx 
calls exchange values are really use values to others: a combination of (a) bargaining 
power—wealth—and (b) utility to actual concrete breathing humans. Things have value not because of 
the abstraction that socially-necessary labor time is needed to produce them but
because of the concretion that somebody somewhere wants to use it and has something ese that others 
find useful to trade in turn. What Marx calls the mysterious and bizarre dual character of 
commodities is nothing mysterious or bizarre: it is simply the fact that I am not the only person 
in the world, and that things very useful to me may be less useful to others, and vice versa.

Moreover, capitalist production has nothing to do with what Marx describes as this mysterious dual 
character of commodities. The distinction between use-value and exchange-value is not something 
invented by or peculiar to the capitalist mode of production: it is found in all human societies, 
no matter how large or small, no matter what the glue that holds them together. The cattle 
slaughtered and cooked by the thralls of Hrothgar, King of the Geats, have use­
value to Hrothgar: He and his family can eat (some of) them. The cattle have exchange-value to 
Hrothgar as well: He feeds them to his warriors at their nightly banquets in his great hall of 
Heorot. In exchange for livery and maintenance, the warriors fight Hrothgar's wars. Success in war 
gains Hrothgar more thralls, more cattle, and a bigger and better reputation as a great drighten 
worth following—until Grendel comes along and makes eating Hrothgar's cattle in
exchange for following him into battle too hazardous to life and limb.

In my view, Marx has trapped himself. He has been primed to expect a deeper layer of real reality 
underneath mere appearances. And he has chosen the wrong model of the underlying real reality—the 
labor theory of value, which is simply not a very good model of the averages around which prices 
fluctuate. Socially-necessary labor power usually serves as an upper bound to value—if something 
sells for more, then a lot of people are going to start making more
of them, and the prices at which it trades are going to fall. But lots of things sell for much less 
than the prices corresponding to their socially-necessary labor power lots of the time. And so Marx 
vanishes into the swamp which is the attempt to reconcile the labor theory of value with economic 
reality, and never comes out.

This matters because one conclusion Marx reaches is that markets and their prices are a source of 
oppression—that they aren't sources of opportunity (to trade your stuff or the stuff you make to 
people who value it more) but rather of domination by others and unfreedom: the system forces you 
to sell your labor-power for its value which is less than the value of the goods you make. And it 
is that conclusion that human freedom is totally incompatible with wage­
labor or market exchange that leads the political movements that Marx founded down very strange and 
very destructive roads.

I've done Hegel. Now let me do Manchester.

The British interests of the German partnership of Ermen and Engels were not in London or in 
Birmingham but instead in Manchester. Engels's 1845 Condition of the Working Class in England, 
cribbed for section 1 of the Manifesto, was about the condition of the working class in Manchester. 
Yet as Asa Briggs (1963) stressed most strongly, Manchester was not typical of England. Briggs 
quotes Tocqueville's descriptions of Manchester as a city with "a few
great capitalists, thousands of poor workmen and little middle class" compared to Birmingham with 
"few large industries, many small industrialists... workers work in their own houses or in little 
workshops in company with the master himself... the working people of Birmingham seem more healthy, 
better off, more orderly and more moral than those of Manchester. " Briggs speculated that Engels's 
book would have been very different indeed had Ermen and

Engels's interests been elsewhere than Manchester: "his conception of a€~classa€™ and his theories 
of the role of class in history might have been very different.... Marx might have been not a 
communist but a currency reformer. " Back in 1998, we got George Boyer of Cornell to take a look at 
the historical circumstances of the composition of the Manifesto:

[A]verage age of death of "mechanics, labourers, and their families" in Manchester was 17, as 
compared to 38 in rural Rutlandshire... despite the fact that laborersaC™ wages were at least twice 
as high in Manchester... 57 percent of children born in Manchester to working class parents died 
before their fifth birthday.  Engels arrived in Manchester in the late fall of 1842, Britain was 
just beginning to recover from the deep depression of

1841-42... "crowds of unemployed working men at every street corner, and many mills were still 
standing idle" (Engels, 1845 [1987], pp. 121 a€“ 22).... The Economist reported that in the first 
six months of 1848 [as the Manifesto was being written], 18.6 percent of the workforce in 
ManchesteraC™ s cotton mills was unemployed, and another 9.5 percent was on short time (Boyer, 
1990, p. 235)....
John Stuart Mill (1848 [1909], p. 751)... concluded that "hitherto it is questionable if all the 
mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the daya€™ s toil of any human being. They have 
enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased 
number of manufacturers and others to make fortunes."...

Marx and Engels... were not alone in asserting that the standard of living... was quite poor, and 
perhaps declining... during the "hungry a€™40s."... [A]rmy recruits born around 1850 were shorter 
than those born around 1820...

It looks as though Marx and Engels wrote the Manifesto—and made their permanent intellectual 
commitments—in 1848, at the nadir of living standards as far as British Lancashire textile workers 
were considered. Their assertion that wages declined as capitalism progressed looks good up until 
1848 if you take Manchester as your guide. Thereafter it proved wrong. By          1880    manual 
workerswere  earning 40% more thanin     1850.Parliament began to regu
conditions of employment in the 1840s. Parliament began to regulate public health in the 1850s. 
Parliament doubled the urban electorate in 1867, just as volume 1 of Capital was published. 
Parliament gave unions official sanction to bargain collectively in the 1870s.

Marx appears to have responded to this not by rethinking his opposition to markets as social 
allocation mechanisms or by reworking his analyses of the dynamics of economic growth, capital 
accumulation, and the real wage level, but by blaming British workers for not acting according to 
his model in response to predictions by Marx of continued impoverishment and           ever-    
larger business cycles that had not come topass. Boyer quotes Marx writingin1878
about how British workers: "had got to the point when [the British working class] was nothing more 
than the tail of the Great Liberal Party, i.e., of the oppressors, the capitalists." And Boyer 
quotes Engels writing in 1894 of how "one is indeed driven to despair by these English workers... 
bourgeois ideas... viewpoints... narrow-mindedness..."

In the late 1870s—after the failure of the British working class to become more militant, the 
failure of the Paris Commune and the founding of the French Third Republic, and Bismarck's creation 
of a unified Prussified German Empire—Marx and Engels and then their followers started to turn 
their attention toward Russia. That did not end well at all...
Share Brad DeLons's Grasoins Realitv


<httpy/www.bradford-delong.com/understanding-marx.html>


Marx the Economist:
Three Goods:

• Business Cycles’. Marx the economist
was among the very first to recognize
that the fever-fits of financial crisis and
depression that afflict modern market
economies were not a passing phase or
something that could be easily cured,
but   rather a deep disability of the sys­
tem. Marx definitely pointed the spot­
light in the right direction here. Howev­
er,                           I don't think that his theory of busi­
ness cycles and crises holds up...

• The Industrial Revolution as Game
Changer: Marx the economist was
among    the very first to get the industrial
revolution right: to understand what it
meant                           for human possibilities and the
human destiny in a sense that people
like Adam Smith did not—that the in­
dustrial revolution was giving us the
statues of Daedalus, the tripods of Hep­
haestus, looms that weave and lyres that
play by themselves—and thus people
can be lovers of wisdom without being
supported by the labor of a mass of illit­
erate, brutalized, half-starved, and
overworked slaves...

• Economic History: Marx the economist

Understanding
Karl Marx

In the beginning was Karl Marx, with his vi­
sion of how the Industrial Revolution would
transform everything and be followed by a
Great Communist Social Revolution—greater
than the political French Revolution—that
would wash us up on the shores of Utopia...

Marx the Prophet

Large-scale prophecy of a glorious utopian future is bound to be false when applied to
this world. This Marx got too much into the magic mushrooms of Patmos. Marx the
prophet is of interest to cultists, and to historians of cults...

Marv thp Artivict

Marx the Economist:
Three Bads:

• Capital Accumulation and Wages: Marx
believed that capital could never be a
complement to but had to be a substitute
for   labor. Thus technological progress
and capital accumulation that raise aver­
age labor productivity also lower the
working-class wage. Hence the market
system  simply could not deliver a good
or half-good society but only a combina­
tion of obscene luxury and mass pover­
ty. This is an empirical question...

• The Cash Nexus: Marx the economist
did not like the society of the cash
nexus.... Marx mistook the effects of
capitalism for the effects of poverty. The
demand for a world in which people do
things for each other purely out of
beneficence rather than out of interest
and  incentives leads you down a very
dangerous road, for societies that try to
abolish  the cash nexus in favor of pub­
lic-spirited benevolence do not wind up
in    their happy place...

• Income Distribution: Marx believed that
the capitalist market economy was inca­
pable of delivering an acceptable distri­

bution of income for anything but the


got a lot about the economic history of
the development of modern capitalism
in England right—but not everything.
Most important are his observations that
the benefits of industrialization take
generations to kick in, while the costs of
redistributions and power grabs in the
interest                           of market efficiency and the
politically-powerful rising mercantile
classes kick in immediately...

Activism based on three ideas: (1) Ruthless capitalism drops the mass...(2) Capitalists
will never compromise... (3) Large-scale factories the human destiny... All three were
wrong...

Marx the Economist

As a worker-out of theories and an advancer of ongoing discussions, a second-class
Ricardian. As a generator of insights and potential research programs, a first-class in­
novator...

briefest of historical intervals. Marx saw
political democracy as only surviving
for    as long as the rulers could pull the
wool over the workers' eyes, and then
collapsing. I think that Western Europe
over   the past fifty years serves as a sig­
nificant counterexample. It may be diffi­
cult  to maintain a democratic capitalist
market system with an acceptable distri­
bution of income. But incapable is sure­
ly  too strong...

https://www.icloud.com/pages/021rn0Y32sKZuLBX0bdlGcPxAQ 12018-05-10

J. Bradford DeLonq http^ZbradfnrH.dainnn com hrad.delona@amail.com @delonq

651 ^ords 0

Notebook: Discussion of "Communism" and Related Subjects

Cf. also: Communism and Really Existing Socialism: A Reading List for Post-Millennials

Must-Reads:

• John Maynard Keynes (1931): Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren in Essays in Persuasion

• Ursula K. Leguin (1974): The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia

• Francis Spufford (2011): Red Plenty

• Nick Stern et al. (2007): The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review

By Me: J. Bradford DeLong:

(2009): Understanding Karl Marx

(2014): Prolegomenon to a Reading Course on Karl Marx

And:

(1995): Hobsbawm's Age of Extremes

(2003): Let's Get Even More Depressed About Cuba

(2005): Lire le Capital: Mail Call

(2005): Unstructured Procrastination

(2006): Introducing Serious, Permanent Bugs into Your Wetware

(2007): Why Everybody Should Be Short Louis Althusser and His Intellectual Children

(2007): James Scott and Friedrich Hayek

(2007): Keynes, Marx, Trotsky, Yglesias

(2008): Relevance of Marx

(2008): Evaluating Karl Marx as Political Activist

(2008): Good Riddance to Fidel Castro!

(2008): Los Gusanos—the Worms—Infest the Comment Section Tonight...

(2009): Department of "Huh?": In Praise of Neoclassical Economics

(2009): Economic Realities and the Marx Mystique

(2010): James Scott, "Legibility," Flavius Apion, Anoup, the Emperor Justinian, Robin of Locksley, 
Rebecca Daughter of Mordecai, King Richard, and Others...

(2011): What Was Karl Marx's Principal Contribution?

(2011): Washed-Up, Marginal, Authoritarian, and Unappealing Leftist Watch: "Castro Did Lots of Good 
and Humane Things, Despite Being a Dictator; but the Bottom Line Is U.S. Hatred of Castro Had 
Nothing to Do with His Being a Dictator...'

(2011): Marx's Half-Baked Crisis Theory and His Theories of Surplus Value, Chapter 17

(2011): Why, Thank You Mike Begg: Yes, the Argument Back in 2009 That Fiscal Expansion Would Lead 
to Large Rises in Interest Rates and Be Offset by Crowding Out Was Simply Wrong


• (2013): Robert Paul Wolff on Paul Samuelson on Karl Marx: Thursday 
Whiskey-Tango-Foxtrot-Bang-Query-Bang-Query Weblogging

• (2014): Marx and the Mechanical Turk

• (2014): Marx Was Blind to the System's Ingenuity and Ability to Reinvent

• (2015): Hoisted from Other People's Archives from 97 Years Ago: The Already-Written Fidel Castro 
Obituary—(Rosa Luxemburg , "The Russian Revolution" Chapter 6)

• (2016): It's Fidel Castro's 90th Birthday!

• (2016): Which Thinkers Will Define Our Future?

• (2016): Communism and Really Existing Socialism: A Reading List for Post-Millennials

By Others:

The world is divided into those who take Karl Marx's work seriously and those who do not. Those who 
do not take Karl Marx's lifetime work-project seriously are further divided into three groups:

1. Those who ignore Marx completely. Of them there is, of course, nothing to say.

2. Those who use selected snippets from his work as Holy Texts. The late Louis Althusser can serve 
as our example and principal poster child. And I will leave him to Michael Berube and Bill 
Lazonick.

3. Those modern "western Marxists" who find inspiration in the works that Karl Marx wrote 
exclusively before he was thirty. Chris Bertram provides as good an example as any. He recommends 
that people start by discussing the Manifesto', and then go back to the impenetrable and 
jargon-filled Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts, "Theses on Feuerbach", The German Ideology, 
and "On the Jewish Question" written he was 25-28. Maybe read the
Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy, written when he was 30-38, maybe 
not. And add on two paragraphs—ripped from their context—from his written-at-57 "A Critique of the 
Gotha Program*. The "western Marxists" still floating around today have decided that Marx's life 
and work end at 30. It seems to me that that is as damning a judgment of his lifetime project as 
the one made by those who ignore him completely.

Then, on the other hand, there is us. We—people like Joan Robinson, Paul Samuelson, and me—take 
Karl Marx throughout his fife as a mighty and mightily flawed thinker, worth grappling with and 
treating with respect. The Eighteenth Brumaire—and how its analysis of the relation between 
economic classes, economic interests, political fractions, and the coming of the Second Empire 
dictatorship in France over 1848-1852 was wrong? The Grundrisse. The rest
of A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Theories of Surplus Value. Capital, vols. 
I, II, and III:

• Jasper Becker (1997): Hungry Ghosts

• Brad DeLong (2009): Understanding Karl Marx

• Brad DeLong (2014): Prolegomenon to a Reading Course on Karl Marx

• Milovan Djilas (1957): The New Class

• Rene Dumont (1970): Is Cuba Socialist?

• Friedrich Engels (1845): The Condition of the Working Class in England

• Richard J. Evans (2016): [ Reviewing a€~Karl Marxa€™ by Jonathan Sperber][]

• Fred Halliday: What Was Communism? https://www.opendemocracv.net/article/what-was-communism 
2009-10-16

• John Maynard Keynes (1931): Economic Possibilities for Our Grandchildren in [Essays in 
Persuasion][]

•  Leszek Kolakowski: Main Currents of Marxism'. Leszek Kolakowski tells English historian E.P. 
Thompson what he thinks of him... http ://delong .typepad .com/sdi/2006/09/main_currents_o .html 
1974-03-01

• Ursula K. Leguin (1974): The Dispossessed: An Ambiguous Utopia

• Simon Leys (1974): Chinese Shadows

• Charles Maier (1997): Dissolution

• Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels (1848): The Communist Manifesto

• Karl Marx (1849): Wage Labor and Capital

•  Karl Marx (1853): On Say's Law: Theories of Surplus-Value, Chapter 17 
http://delong.typepad.com/sdi/2010/03/karl-marx-on-savs-law-theories-of-surplus-value-chapter-17 
.htmll 863-01-01

• Suresh Naidu (2014): What Marx Really Meant

• George Orwell (1937): The Road to Wigan Pier

•  Joan Robinson: Joan Robinson: Open letter from a Keynesian to a Marxist 
http://delong.tvpepad.com/sdi/2013/07/ioan-robinson-open-letter-from-a-kevnesian-to-a-marxist-tuesda
v-sixtv-vears-ago-on-the-non-internet-weblogging.html 1953-07-30

• Paul Samuelson (1962): Economists and the History of Ideas

• Paul Samuelson: On Paul Samuelson on Karl Marx 
http://delong.tvpepad.com/sdi/2013/10/robert-paul-wolff-on-paul-samuelson-on-karl-marx-thursdav-whis
kev-tango-foxtrot-bang-querv-bang-query-weblogging.html http://www.jstor.org/stable/1823476 
1962-03-01

• Francis Spufford (2011): Red Plenty

• Edmund Wilson To the Finland Station https://db.tt/ZqZJDcBd 1940-06-01

• Wikipedia: Karl Marx http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl _Marx

• Matthew Yglesias: Can Social Democracy Explain Its Own Success? 
http://crookedtimber.org/2006/10/31/can-social-democracy-explain-its-own-success/ 2006-10-31

Plus:

Marx did not divide himself into these three. But we find it useful to do so:

Marx the Economist:

1. Among the very first to get the industrial revolution right and understand what it meant for 
human possibilities and human destiny.

2. Got a lot about the economic history of the development of modern capitalism in England 
right—very much worth grappling with as an economic historian of 1500-1850.

3. Believed, probably wrongly, that a capitaliist market economy with wage labor is an insult to 
humanity, delivered low utility, and was sociologically and psychologically unsustainable.

4. Believed, certainly wrongly that a capitalist market economy with wage labor was incapable of 
delivering an acceptable distribution of income.

5. Among the very first to recognize that the fever-fits of financial crisis and depression that 
afflict modern market economies were not a passing phase but rather a deep and chronic malady of 
the system.

Now we modern neoliberals respond that (5) on the business cycle we have economic policy quinine to 
manage if not banish the disease, (4) Beveridgism or Myrdahlism—social democracy, progressive 
income taxes, a very large and well-established safety net, public education to a high standard, 
channels for upward mobility, and all the panoply of the twentieth-century social-democratic 
mixed-economy democratic state—can keep capitalist prosperity must be


accompanied oy great inequality ana misery, ana (j; a mancet economy can easily oe a gooa tning 
even n a marKet society generally is not, ana mat me torecast oi utopia—mat we jumpea-up monKeys 
wnn Dig Drains win oecome penectiy nappy—Deiongs in me BOOK OI uaniei or oi me Apocalypse, not in 
political economy, wnetner our responses are convincing is tor you to juage.

Marx the Activist:

Marx the political activist had five reasons he thought it necessary and possible to work to 
overthrow the capitalist market economy and socialize the means of production, believing that:

1. Technological progress and capital accumulation that raised average labor productivity also 
lowered the working-class wage.

2. Globalization inherently increased inequality in the world economy's core and hence raised 
pressure for working-class revolution.

3. While previous systems of hierarchy and domination had hypnotize the poor into believing that 
the rich in some sense "deserved" their high seats, capitalism replaced masked exploitation by 
naked exploitation—and without ideological legitimation, unequal class society could not long 
survive.

4. Even though the ruling class could appease the working class by sharing the fruits of economic 
growth, they could not organize themselves to do so. Hence social democracy would inevitably 
collapse before an ideologically-based right-wing assault, income inequality would rise, and the 
system would be overthrown. (The Wall Street Journal editorial page works day and night 365 days a 
year to make this one of Marx's predictions come true. But I
think they will fail.)

5. Factory work would lead people to develop a sense of their common interest and of class 
solidarity, hence they would be able to organize, and revolt, and establish a free and just society 
in a way that they could not back in the old days, when the peasants of this village were 
suspicious of the peasants of the next village. Here I think Marx mistook a passing phase for an 
enduring trend: active working-class consciousness as a primary source of loyalty
and political allegiance was never that strong; nation and ethnos seem to trump class much more 
often than not.

Thus I conclude that while there is a lot in Marx-the-economist worth grappling with and thinking 
about, there is very little in Marx the political activist that is worth paying attention to today.

Marx the Prophet:

Let's listen to a sample:

Great Britain's]... aristocracy wanted to conquer [India], the moneyocracy to plunder it, and the 
millocracy to undersell it.... Now the... millocracy...intend now drawing a net of railroads over 
India... [to] extract... the cotton and other raw materials for their manufactures.... The 
railway-system will therefore become, in India, truly the forerunner of modern industry.  All the 
English bourgeoisie may be forced to do will neither emancipate

nor materially mend the social condition of the mass of the people.... But what they will not fail 
to do is to lay down the material premises to do so].... Has the bourgeoisie ever done more? Has it 
ever effected a progress without dragging individuals and people through blood and dirt, through 
misery and degradation?.... When a great social revolution shall have mastered the results of the 
bourgeois epoch. and subjected them to the

common control of the most advanced peoples, then only will human progress cease to resemble that 
hideous, pagan idol, who would not drink the nectar but from the skulls of the slain...

Were live in this fallen sublunary sphere. In it, the New Jerusalem does not descend from the 
clouds "prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband." In it, a Great Voice does not declare:

I shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor 
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away...

But Marx clearly thought at some level that they would.

He never got to the island of Patmos on which John the Divine lived. But there is a sense that he, 
too, got too much into the magic mushrooms.
Get 50% off for 1 year

Introducing Serious, Permanent Bugs into Your Wetware

Voluntarily introducing serious, permanent bugs into your wetware...

A previous post contained links to how you could temporarily misprogram part of your wetware—your 
visual cortex—for amusement.

Here we find Michael Fitzgerald, a man who has seriously misprogrammed substantial chunks of his 
frontal lobes by reading Karl Marx's Capital— something that, I am becoming convinced, should only 
be done by somebody with immunity to the mental virus—by a trained intellectual or social or 
economic historian, or by a trained neoclassical economist.
Jeff Weintraub quotes Michael Fitzpatrick's favorable review of Francis Wheen's "biography" of Karl 
Marx's Das Kapital:

Jeff Weintraub: Francis Wheen's "Biography" of Marx's Das Kapital: Capital: I first read Capital 
when I was a student in the mid-Seventies. The onset of recession and an upsurge of trade union 
militancy... a wave of interest in Marxism and the Marxist theory of capitalist crisis.... I fell 
in with a small group of people who repudiated... facile arguments and the philistine approach 
towards theory....
[I]nstead of merely spouting Marxist slogans it was necessary to embark on a deeper study of Marx. 
So we read Capital. When I say we read Capital, I mean we read Capital, in a group, out loud, line 
by line, paragraph by paragraph (at least in the early chapters), discussing and arguing over every 
page, through volumes one, two and three, even unto Theories of Surplus Value....

In retrospect, this approach sounds rather like that of students of the Bible, the Talmud or the 
Koran, but this was not a process of rote-learning, rather one of active collective engagement with 
the most important attempt to capture the process of capitalist development in theory. I have never 
read any other book in this way, but, as Wheen observes, Capital is unique....

[R]eading Capital is not easy.... Marx's dialectical method.... Marx does not present a theory of 
capitalist crisis as such... process of reproduction of capitalist society in its totality. Capital 
analyses the dynamics of capitalist production and reveals the limitations of capitalism as a mode 
of production in its incapacity to develop consistently the productive potential of society and 
achieve social progress. Marx's dialectical method aims to
depict in a theoretical form the development of a social system which is simultaneously a process 
of producing the material needs of society and a process for ensuring the profitable expansion of 
value.

Capital begins, famously, with the commodity, "the simplest social form in which the product of 
labour in capitalist society presents itself". Marx explores the twofold character of the 
commodity, as use-value and exchange-value, revealing in an elementary form the contradictory 
character of capitalist production.

This contradictory character... the money form.... The separation of economic processes into two 
phases—production and exchange—implies "the possibility, and no more than the possibility, of 
crises". However, "the conversion of this mere possibility into reality is the result of a long 
series of relations".  The law of value operates in capitalist society as the only possible, albeit 
indirect, mechanism through which social labour can be

distributed. Hence under capitalism... social relations between people appear—and can only 
appear—as relations between things... market relations conceal the operation of the law of value, 
the money form conceals the social character of labour... human beings are dominated by the 
products of their own labour, objects are endowed with supernatural qualities... money acquires 
divine power. this "fetishism of commodities" meant that it

could only be abolished through a fundamental reorganisation of society: "[T]he life process of 
material production does not strip off its mystical veil until it is treated as production by 
freely associated men and is consciously regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan."...

Reading Capital provided an invaluable methodological training as we engaged in the campaigns of 
the late Seventies and the Eighties, seeking to give organisational expression to an 
anti-capitalist outlook. Having gone back to Marx, we were able to move forward to attempt to grasp 
new developments in capitalist society through discovering the mediating links between appearances 
and the inner movement of capital, in the process
developing the basic elements of an anti-capitalist programme...

Where does one begin? Let me make two observations only:

First, I observe that the idea that the best way to understand the political economy of the 1970s 
is through intensive, group, line-by-line study of an unfinished, inconsistent, and ambiguous text 
first drafted in the 1850s by a very smart, sometimes far-sighted, but definitely not divine human 
being—that that idea is already a delusion peculiar to those who were a little too good in school 
in seeking truths from reading books rather than seeking truths from facts.
Second, I observe that Marx's claim that the "twofold character of the commodity, as use-value and 
exchange-value," is a difficulty in need of "exploration" is a claim that can only be made by a 
deranged Hegelian mystic. Consider the following thought experiment:

Suppose that at my left hand I had a fresh-cooked hard-shell lobster and a lobster cracker. The 
lobster cracker would have a lot of use value to me right now: If I didn't have one, then half an 
hour from now my hands would be bleeding and cut—something I would rather avoid. I would be glad 
that I had it. But the lobster cracker would have little exchange-value: nobody nearby would 
exchange for it, would trade for it, anything I would particularly need or want.

Suppose that at my right hand I had a financial portfolio long the shares of residential 
construction companies, and short mortgage-backed securities. At the moment share of residential 
construction companies are low, but mortgage default premia are also low. If the shares of 
residential construction companies are fairly priced, than housing construction and housing prices 
are in free-fall, defaults on mortgages will rise, and the prices on mortgage-backed
securities will fall as well—producing profits on the short position. If mortgage-backed securities 
are fairly priced, then defaults on mortgages will stay low and housing prices and construction 
will stay healthy, in which case shares of residential construction companies are underpriced—and 
there are profits to be expected from the long position. Such a portfolio would have no use-value 
at all. But it could well—if one could get the hedge ratios right—turn out to
have  a mighty exchange value, in the sense that other people would be willing to exchange for it, 
to trade for it, a lot of things I would like to have.

What's the mystery here? What's in need of "exploration"? Things are useful for two reasons (A) 
Because their physical nature is such that you find them directly useful—that's use value, (b) 
Because we live in a society in which other people will trade you things for them, things that you 
can use—that's exchange value. This is not hard to grasp. This is not particularly subtle.

Fitzgerald says that Marx's analysis of use-value and exchange-value "reveal[s] in an elementary 
form the contradictory character of capitalist production" which requires the abolition of private 
property and market exchange in order for the "mystical veil" of market prices to be stripped off 
"the life process of material production" and "production by freely associated men... consciously 
regulated by them in accordance with a settled plan."            In what senseis this
dual role of commodities a "contradiction"? Marx never offered me a coherent answer. And Fitzgerald 
does no better. How would eliminating markets and prices help resolve this "contradiction"? That 
was never explained either

Moreover, in Fitzgerald's phrase "the contradictory character of capitalist production," the 
adjective "capitalist" is incorrect. A moment's look back at history reveals that the distinction 
between use-value and exchange-value is not something invented by or peculiar to the capitalist 
mode of production: it is found in all human societies, no matter how large or small.

The cattle slaughtered and cooked by the thralls of Hrothgar, King of the Geats, have use-value to 
Hrothgar: He and his family can eat (some of) them. The cattle have exchange-value to Hrothgar as 
well: He feeds them to his warriors at their nightly banquets in his great hall of Heorot. In 
exchange for livery and maintenance, the warriors fight Hrothgar's wars. Success in war gains 
Hrothgar more           thralls, morecattle, and a bigger andbetter reputation  as a great
Drighten.

If you try to ground an analysis of capitalism-in-particular on a feature (the distinction between 
objects' direct usefulness and their role in social processes of reciprocity, redistribution, or 
market exchange) that capitalism shares with every other human social system—well, you won't get 
anywhere. And those who read Capital "in a group, out loud, line by line, paragraph by paragraph. 
discussing and arguing over every page, through volumes one, two and three,

even unto Theories of Surplus Value" don't get anywhere at all.

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription


Get a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription

