Subscribe now

Cosma Shalizi: Ernest Gellner, Nations and Nationalism'. a€~This book contains the most convincing 
theory of nationalism Ia€™ ve seen, and has profound implications for anyone concerned with modern 
history, contemporary politics, or the possibilities of multi-culturalism.

Pre-modern socities which possess agriculture and literacy, the inhabitants of what Gellner 
sometimes calls a€oe Agraria,a€D were economically static and internally culturally diverse, at 
least compared to their industrial successors. Cultural differences in fact often went with 
economic specializations, and so served to fix people in their inherited professions. It is
Gellnera€™ s thesis that economic change requires cultural homogeneity, and that the demand for 
cultural homogeneity, and the state apparatus to provide it, is what drives nationalism. The 
argument runs as follows.

Because industrial economies continually make and put into practice technical and organizational 
innovations, they continually change how they employ resources, especially human resources. Their 
occupational structures change significantly in a generation at most, and often more quickly, so no 
one can expect to follow in the family profession. (A hundred years
ago, there were no system administrators, but there were carriage-drivers.) In Agraria, training 
could be left to families or guilds, be largely tacit and physical and tied up with the rituals and 
social context of the trade, and different parts of the same society could be almost unintelligible 
to each other, provided only they could go through the customary haggling or
tithing. None of this will do in an industrial, changing society, in which training must be much 
more explicit, be couched in a far more universal idiom, and emphasize understanding and 
manipulating nearly context-free symbols (even manual work increasingly becomes controlling a 
machine, which must be, as we say, read); it must in short take on the characteristics
formerly associated with the literate High Cultures of Agraria, and moreover this training must be 
received by the entire economically effective population. (A rough definition of an industrial 
society might be: one where you can learn a trade from books, a society of reference manuals.) So 
far, such training, on such a scale, has always needed at least elementary
literacy,  and it hasna€™t been reliably provided by any institutions weaker and smaller than 
states. Moreover, the teachers employed by this system must themselves be trained in the same High 
Culture, and so on, quickly escalating to the point where the culture needs an entire university 
system, at the least, to be self-sustaining. States become the protectors of High
Cultures, of a€ceidiomsa€C; nationalism is the demand that each state succor and contain one and 
only one nation, one idiom.

To be without such an idiom is to be cut off from all prospects of a decent life. To have the wrong 
idiom, that is, a different one than those in charge about you, adds the constant humiliations of 
being a stranger, outcast, isolated, constantly doing a€oethe wrong thinga€D a€” quite possibly 
while knowing that onea€™ s own ways would work at least as well. Thus the
passion behind nationalism derives, not from some atavistic feeling of tribal belonging (supposing 
such a thing to exist at all, outside of the immediate circumstances of mass rallies and the like), 
but from the hope of a tolerable life, or the fear of an intolerable one. Faced with an difference 
between onea€™ s own idiom and that needed for success, people either
acquire the latter, or see that their children do (assimilation); force their own idiom into 
prominence (successful nationalism); or fester. Thus industrialism begets nationalism, and 
nationalism begets nations.

This last point requires more emphasis. Agraria was a mess of partially overlapping ethnic, 
religious, linguistic, political and cultural distinctions. On the issue of language alone, Gellner 
calculates that the Old World contained several thousand dialects, each of which could have been 
the basis of a formalized literary language. (This calculation excludes Papua New
Guinea.) Nations are constructed, in a highly arbitrary way, out of this raw material, often with a 
great deal of false consciousness (e.g., thinking one is reviving peasant culture and folk 
traditions, while actually creating a formalized, school-dependent High Culture) and outright 
fabrication. It is an error to suppose that nations have always existed, or even that modern
nations are very old. (Serbo-Croat, for instance, was created as a literary language in the 19th 
century; in the last decade it has a€oeofficiallya€n become two languages, Serb and Croat, which 
obstinately persist in being mutually intelligible.)

To recap: industrialism demands a homogeneous High Culture; a homogeneous High Culture demands an 
educational system; an educational system demands a state which protects it; and the demand for 
such a state is nationalism. The theory is coherent, simple, widely applicable, convincing, and 
empirically testable (which tests, to all appearances, it passes).

In the sixties, it is said, the Right and the Left in Britain agreed on only one thing: Gellner 
would be up against the wall when the Revolution came. He was quite proud of that, and the same 
spirit comes through abundantly in this book. It is hard to decide whether nationalists or 
anti-nationalists will find Nations and Nationalism more disturbing; rootless cosmopolitan
though I am, it changed my mind on a great many subjects. This is already a rare enough achievement 
for a philosopher or social scientist, let alone someone like Gellner, who was both, since they 
typically change no onea€™ s mind. Even if Gellner was talking utter rubbish, Nations and 
Nationalism would be worth reading simply for his style, a trademark Bertrand-
Russell-meets-Grucho-Marx combination of powerful logic working from very general premises and 
laugh-out-loud (literally) wit. Unfortunately for those of us not enamoured of nationalism, he 
wasna€™ t talking rubbish at all.

LINK: <http://bactra.org/reviews/nations-and-nationalism/>
Share

PLUS:

Cosma Shalizi: Ernest Gellner, 1925a€“1995: a€~On the far side of the ditch from us lies Agraria, a 
realm of a€oeagro-literate politiesa€D subject to a€oethe tyranny of kings or cousins (or both)a€U, 
consisting mostly of highly isolated, custom-bound, illiterate rural producers with magical, 
ritualistic, socially-oriented religions, dominated and exploited by
a€oethe red and the black,a€D expert coercers and literate classes practicing various technically 
ineffective, self-confirming, meaningful or enchanted forms of cognition, which tended more towards 
universalism, rule-boundedness and scripturalism than did the folk-cults.

Those of us on this side of the ditch have a€oeescaped from the idiocy of rural lifea€D (a phrase 
he cheerfully took from Marx) through a lucky accident, a a€cemiraclea€D. Sometime about three or 
four hundred years ago, in an otherwise none-too-promising peninsula of Asia, circumstances 
conspired to bring forth a kind of cognition which was cumulative,
technically effective, and of no value as either a social cement or an emotional comfort a€” 
science, and the epistemologies descended from Descartes (in Gellnera€™ s view, much better as 
charters for science, and prescriptive accounts of how to go about it, than as descriptions of how 
the world works or how messy human beings actually think). This was combined
with classes of people who were more interested in producing wealth than in either theological or 
political disputes, and polities which, in exchange for tax revenue, were willing to let them 
alone. Wealth accumulated, and accumulated faster as technological progress became regular and 
accelerating; production became dominant (an unusual condition; in
Gellnera€™  s view, Marxa€™ s main mistake was to think that production was always dominant, to 
deny the a€oeautonomy of coerciona€D), eventually buying off the population at large (a€oethe 
social bribery funda€d; Gellner probably under-estimated the degree of struggle needed to establish 
a€oethe Danegeld statea€U). Socially, these societies are (at least
relative    to their predecessors) liberal, permissive, rich, powerful, secularized, engaged in 
a€cesingle-strandeda€D activities (e.g., in buying food we worry about taste and cost, not marriage 
alliances or the need not to alienate our grocer lest he not stand with us in the next feud), 
peaceful, atomized, economically unstable and culturally homogenous.

The last two, economic change and cultural homogeneity, are, Gellner claims, connected, and 
together give rise to nationalism: his theory of how this happens is brilliant, innovative and 
convincing, and Ia€™ ve summarized it in my review of Nations and Nationalism, so I shana€™ t 
repeat it here.

Therea€™ s more, of course, though related to this: thoughts on how to get beliefs to spread 
without their passing proper tests of cognitive legitimacy; general considerations on the 
a€oelegitimation of beliefsa€D; the effects of crossing the ditch on the former a€oeartisans of 
cognitiona€D, the humanist intellectuals; how, if at all, liberal, industrial, charter-less
societies can hold together; the a€oeRubber Cagea€D of advanced industrialism, where rationality in 
science and production co-exists with exuberant nonsense in the rest of life; the idea that 
a€oepositivism is right, for Hegelian reasonsa€D; Ibn Khaldun and traditional Islamic society; why 
contemporary Islamic societies are not secularizing; the problems with the
philosophies of Popper, Quine; his inspiration from Hume, Kant, Weber, Durkeheim; the impossibility 
of Cosmic Exile and the necessity of its function.

The two books Ia€™ d recommend starting with (ita€™ s hard to pick between them) are Plough, Sword, 
and Book, and Nations and Nationalism.

LINK: <http://bactra.org/notebooks/gellner.html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

&:

a€~Reductionism, roughly speaking, is the view that everything in this world is really something 
else, and that the something else is always in the end unedifying. So lucidly formulated, one can 
see that this is a luminously true and certain idea. The hope that it could ever bee denied or 
refuted is absurd. One day, the Second Law of Thermodynamics may seem
obsolete; but reductionism will stand for ever. It is important to understand why it is so 
indubitably true. It is rooted a€! not in the nature of things, but in our ideal of explanation. 
Genuine explanation, not the grunts which pass for such in a€oecommon sensea€D, means subsumption 
under a structure or schema made up of neutral, impersonal elements. In this sense,
explanation is always a€cedehumanisinga€D, and inescapably so.a€™ a€”Ernest Gellner, Legitimation 
of Belief

a€~Political control of economic life is not the consummation of world history, the fulfilment of 
destiny, or the imposition of righteousness; it is a painful necessity .a€™ a€”Ernest Gellner, The 
Rest of History

a€~I like to imagine what would have happened had the Arabs won at Poitiers and gone on to conquer 
and Islamise Europe. No doubt we should all be admiring Ibn Webera€™ s The Kharejite Ethic and the 
Spirit of Capitalism which would conclusively demonstrate how the modern rational spirit and its 
expression in business and bureaucratic organisation could only
have arisen in consequence of the sixteenth-century neo-Kharejite puritanism in northern Europe. In 
particular, the work would demonstrate how modern economic and orgisational rationality could never 
have arisen had Europe stayed Christian, given the inveterate proclivity of that faith to a 
baroque, manipulative, patronage-ridden, quasi-animistic and disorderly
vision of the world. A faith so given to seeing the cosmic order as bribable by pious works and 
donations could never have taught its adherents to rely on faith alone and to produce and 
accumulate in an orderly, systematic, and unwavering manner. Would they not always have blown their 
profits in purchasing tickets to eternal bliss, rather than going on to accumulate
more and more?

a€~A Muslim Europe would also have saved Hegel from the need to indulge in most painfully tortuous 
arguments in order to explain how an earlier faith, Christianity, nevertheless is more final and 
absolute than a chronologically later one, namely Islam. (In fact he did it by invoking the fact 
that Europe was only Christianised at the time of Charlemagne, who is at
least suitably posterior to Muhammamed.) Had Islam, the later and by some plausible criteria purer 
faith, prevailed, no such problem would have arisen for a Muslim Hegel. There would have been no 
embarrassing boob in the welthistorischer timetable. Altogether, from the viewpoint of an elegant 
philosophy of history, which sees the story of mankind as a sustained
build-up towards our condition, it would have been far more satisfactory if the Arabs had won. By 
various obvious criteria a€” universalism, scripturalism, spiritual egalitarianism, the extension 
of full participation in the sacred community not to one, or some, but to all, and the rational 
systematisation of social life a€” Islam is, of the three great Western
monotheisms,   the one closest to modernity.a€™ a€”-Ernest Gellner, Muslim Society

a€~If we look back at the logical devices men have employed to provide anchorages for their values, 
we see how very unsatisfactory they are: these seeming anchorages are themselves but floating 
seaweed. The notion of arguing from given desires and satisfactions (as in Utilitarianism), from 
the true nature of man (as in the diverse variants of the Hidden Prince
doctrine, such as Platonism), from a global entelechy, or the notion of harmony, etc., are all 
pretty useless, generally because they assume something to be fixed which is in fact 
manipulablea€!. This point has been obscured in the past by the fact that, though it was true in 
theory, it was not so in practice: human needs, the image of man, etc., were not changing very
rapidly, still less were they under human controla€!a€™ a€”-Ernest Gellner, Thought & Change

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

