CONDITION: Slouching Towards Utopia

The Full Slouching Tweetstorm:


Slouching Tweetstorm:

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...

Share

First: Yes, Hayeka€™s Macro Is Bonkers

I must say that the von Hayekian view here has always struck me as completely bonkers, and I would 
love someone who would elucidate it to me. And I dona€™ t think that the very sharp Nicholas 
Wapshot does a good job here at characterizing it:

Nicholas Wapshot: When Milton Friedman Sided With Keynes Over Hayek on Inflation'. a€~Friedmana€™ s 
belief that the money supply should be controlled by the central bank to keep prices in check put 
him firmly on the Keynesian side of the argument over whether governments should manage       the 
economy. Hayekwould never forgive hima€!
LINK: chttps://promarket.org/2022/01/23/milton-friedman-keynes-haven-inflation-wapshott/>

Friedman thinks that a central bank should use the tools at its disposala€’’discount rates and 
purchases, open-market operations, forward guidance, reserve requirements, other 
safety-and-soundness regulationsa€”to keep the total flow of purchasing power in the economy        
 growing smoothly at a rateconsistent with medium- andlong-term effective price stability. Friedman 
takes this to be accomplished by setting and meeting a target growth rate for M2. But if the
M2 target does not do the job, Friedman thinks the central bank should get the job done, and so 
create a stable environment in which producers and consumers, buyers and sellers, can make their 
plans and decisions and then carry them out.

That, Friedman claims, is a a€ceneutrala€Da€”a pro-free-marketa€’’monetary policy.
Von Hayek saysa€! nothing coherent. For example, in Prices and Production (page 23):

It is perfectly clear that, in order that the supply and demand for real capital should be 
equalised, the banks must not lend more or less than has been deposited with them as savings. And 
this means naturally that they must never change the amount of their circulation. At the same time, 
it is no less clear that, in order that the price level may remain unchanged, the amount of money 
in circulation must change as the volume of production
increases or decreases. The banks could either keep the demand for real capital within the limits 
set by the supply of savings, or keep the price level steady; but they cannot perform both 
functions at oncea€!

I think I understand this. Hayek believes that there is income, which amount people divide between 
their spending on consumption goods and their new deposits in banks; there are bank loans, which 
banks fund out of new deposits plus the bank notes they print (or the balances they credit); and 
then their is spending on capital goods, which is equal to bank loans. If banks thus ever expand 
the a€oeamount of money in circulation^ □ (either by printing up bank
notes or increasing balances they credit) they have created a distortion, fictitious capital, an 
excess demand for new spending on capital goods which does not conform to either the preferences of 
the people in the economy or the productive capacity of the economy.

Then, Hayek goes on, what happens if there is technological progress? The prices of commodities 
should fall. Suppose that the operations of the banking system are such as to keep the price level 
stable. The only way that can happen is for the banks (or a central bank) to print up more bank 
notes or to credit borrowers with amounts in excess of new deposits. That creates an excess of 
demand for new capital goods over desired savingsa€”and that has to cause
trouble in the long run.

Hence the money supply must be constant, deflation must proceed at a rate equal to population plus 
productivity growth, and nominal spending must be unchanged, or there will be big trouble.

This big trouble will be inflation, hubris, which of necessity will be followed by inescapable 
depression, nemesis, which must be accepted and suffered through lest there be even more trouble in 
the future: the market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the market. It does 
not matter, in Hayeka€™ s schema, whether the money creation that powers the inflationary rise in 
nominal spending is impelled by the actions of a central bank, the
enthusiasm of bankers seeking extra profits by credit expansion, or a fortunate gold discovery: all 
are bad, all are dangerous, all are destructive, and all area€”once you have embarked on thema€”the 
source of inevitable and unavoidable future depression.

Now, anybody not a great idiot will notice that this way of thinking was disapprobated, was in fact 
totally demolished, by John Stuart Mill back in 1829. Behind Hayeka€™ s words lie a cash-in-advance 
model with a constant, rigid velocity of money. But we dona€™ t have a pure cash-in-advance 
economy. And we dona€™ t have a constant rigid velocity of money.


<https: //github .com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/2022-02-17-tooze-slides .pdf ,pdf>

One Picture:

Market implied Fed hikes, derived from futures market

Mi imhor nf avnoHad OR hn hikac                          Iho novi AO mnnthc


I 1 VII I I MV I Wl                      VI        UfJ I lirwu V¥VI II IV^ I IVAl I I I I W I I I1 
I sJ

Aug'21            Oct'21            Dec'21           Feb'22
Source: Bloomberg. February 11,2022

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Sohee Kim: Samsung, Hynix & Micron Focus on a€~Protecting ProfitaC™: a€~Memory Chipmakers Dona€™ 
t Want This Boom to End in Another Bust. a€oeProtecting profita€D is the new industry 
mantraa€oeProtecting profita€D is the new industry mantraa€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-02-15/samsung-hynix-and-micron-focus-on-protecting-
profit?cmpid=BBD021522_TECH>

•  Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu: A Third Option in the Inflation Debate'. a€™ Todaya€™ s inflation 
is weird. It is high, which is bad. But it is coming with fast growth, which is good. Weirder 
still, it stems from pandemic disruptions to supply (bad) as well as surprisingly strong demand 
(good). Ita€™ s a mixed baga€! <https://www.ft.com/content/41c62537-04ee-49f6-9e41-8248dc239a79>

•  Lex: Apple: Tim Cook Is Worth Every Penny. a€~The chief executive has steered the company to a 
record market valuation and stable balance sheeta€l 
<https://www.ft.com/content/533deedl-7143-40b2-8854-84al38ele510>

•  Casey Newton: Why You Cana€™ t Rebuild Wikipedia with Crypto'. a€~Q&A with Molly White of Web 3 
Is Going Just Greata€!



Platformer

Why you can't rebuild Wikipedia with crypto

Programming note: Ia€™ m planning to take Wednesday off the newsletter so I can focus on a panel 
Ia€™ m moderating at Pivot Con in Miami. (Ia€™ 11 be interviewing Parler CEO George Farmer and 
GETTR CEO Jason Miller about a€! a lot of things.) Ia€™ 11 be back Thursday a€ I
Read more

a year ago A- 25 likes A- 1 comment A- Casey Newton

• Oliver Willis: Debunking Cana€™ t Defeat Disinformation

Oliver Willis Explains

Debunking Can't Defeat Disinformation

Disinformation kills people. It isna€™ t just an inconvenience or a bother or merely a political 
problem. Intentional lying and the promotion of falsehoods has killed thousands of Americans over 
the past twenty years, ranging from thousands of lives lost to lies about weapons of mass 
destruction to hundreds of thousands of Eves lost to falsehoods about COa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 41 likes A- Oliver Willis

Paragraphs:

Paul Krugman: Trumpa€™ s Big China Flop & Other Failures'. a€~Chad Browna€! a final assessment of 
that deala€!. a€ce China bought none of the additional $200 billion of exports Trumpa€™ s deal had 
promised.a€D So Trump was a chump; the Chinese took him to the cleanersa€!. Trumpa€™ s haplessness 
in dealing with foreign leaders is actually a minor part of the story. Far more important is the 
fact that the shocks wea€™ ve been experiencing since
the pandemic began make the Trumpian view of trade look even more economically foolish than it did 
when he took officea€!

LINK: 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nvtimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit_pk_2022021
5&instance_id=53247&nl=paul-krugman&productCode=PK&regi_id=64675225&segment_id=82806&te=l&uri=nyt%3A
%2F%2Fnewsletter%2Fa954b31c-lb0b-5a20-9c99-65edbf78932b&user_id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

Gillian Tett: In Russia & elsewhere, the Fog of War Has Partially Lifted. But to What End? I 
Financial Times'. a€~Thirty-something years ago, as a rookie reporter in the Soviet Uniona€!. The 
emergence of films such as Putina€™ s Palace also reveals something uplifting about modern 
information flowsa€!. [THEN] everyone, including journalists, lived in a profound information 
foga€!. Today a veritable army of citizen journalists is producing and sharing
texts, pictures and videos from Ukraine and the surrounding regions. Satellites are beaming details 
about troop movements on to websites that ordinary citizens can access. Western governments are 
trying to turbocharge this information flow in a bid to counter Russian misinformation. 
Transparency has become not just the norm but a weapon of war, in a way that was inconceivable 
three decades ago. Yet increased transparency does not always produce the
results that we might like. One consequence of this tsunami of information and misinformation is a 
rise in distrust and cynicisma€!. Yet even if we live in an age marred by misinformation and 
cynicism, it is still better than the information fog that existed three decades agoa€!. Leta€™ s 
also hope that the internet keeps working, even amid cyber hacks. It truly is a modern miraclea€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/46f501db-974f-452f-9254-a91flf83b5a5>

Colin Grabow: 5 Years Later the United States Is Still Paying for Its TPP Blunder. a€~The TPPa€l 
was also an attempt by the United Statesa€’’along with likea€na€<minded alliesa€”to help shape the 
rules governing trade in the As iaa€da€< Pacific region. As Asiaa€™ s center both geographically 
and economically, China is already assured of having a significant say in such matters. The TPP was 
meant to ensure the United States had a prominent seat at the
table when such rules were being hammered outa€’’before it opted to push awaya€!. If the TPP was 
deemed a useful tool in countering Chinaa€™ s influence during the years it was being negotiated, 
it would be even more of an asset now given the bilateral relationships™ s increasingly acrimonious 
natureS!. The United States should return to the TPP/CPTPP. That, however, will require both vision 
and leadership, two commodities that are unfortunately
currently lacking in Washingtona€!

LINK: <https://www.cato.org/blog/5-vears-later-united-states-still-paving-tpp-blunder>

Chad Orzel: Horseshoe Theorem'. a€~the worst Math Education Take of the past weeka€! Quillette, 
which attempted to tap into Super Bowl traffic by running a piece with the title a€oelta€™ s Time 
to Start Treating High School Math Like Football.a€D a€ceLike footballa€D in this case means making 
it entirely optional, because some people just arena€™ t good at matha€!. I hate this so very, very 
much. Ita€™ s really tempting to just say a€oeAll you
assholes deserve each otheraCD and walk away from this, but unfortunately theya€™re doing this 
a€oehorshoe theorya€D thing where both extremes converge on the same terrible solution: less math 
for everyone. Which isna€™ t good for anyonea€!

LINK:


AN △ <*

Counting Atoms

Horseshoe Theorem

On Monday, Inside Higher Ed ran a story about a new report (PDF) calling for less emphasis to be 
given to calculus in college admissions. The rationale for this is, unsurprisingly, social justice: 
rich, white, and Asian students are much more likely to take calculus in high school, while poor, 
Black, and Hispanic students are less likely to even have tha€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 4 comments A- Chad Orzel

Twitter:

John-Baptiste Oduor: a€™ Writers new and seasoned, Ia€™m commissioning articles and book reviews 
for ©Jacobin so dm or email me if you have any ideas you want to work on. Ia€™m particularly 
interested pieces on global politics, political economy, and contemporary film and literaturea€!

Senator Kantian-Leninist: a€™i have 4 articles: - kant was a socialist; - hegel was a socialist; - 
marx was a kantian; - marx was a hegelian. we will write whichever one causes the most outage and 
clicksa€!

Liam Bright: a€oeWhen Aristotle talked about Natural Slaves He Meant White Mena€Da€!

Brad DeLong: a€™ Actually, the womana€“Mnesarete of Thespiaia€“who was the consensus pick for the 
most beautiful woman in Aristotlea€™ s Athens, was nicknamed a€oePhrynea€na€”a€oeToada€na€”because 
of her highly attractive yellowish-brown skin, the color of a toada€™ s. It was much more beautiful 
than the ghastly corpse-like skins of the melanin-deprived Thracian and Gaullish barbarians from 
the north. Needless to say, nineteenth­
century paintings of Mnesarete have beena€! whitewashed. <https://t.co/E901DzOZQR> <

Brad DeLong dY— @ delong

@ lastpositivist @olivertraldi @josh philosophy ...ghastly 
corpse-likeskin^nh^nelaniiwlepnvecrDiraciai^nc^raullisMjarbanan^ron^h^iorth^Jeedles^osay, 
nineteenth-century paintings of Mnesarete have been... whitewashed. 2/END


12:28 AM r™ Feb 15,2022

Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA...

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe


PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Subject: a€oeGreatest of the Noldor, except FA«anor maybe, thougha€! wisera€! and her wisdom 
increased with the long yearsa€!a€D

Galadriel
is tired
of trying

to reason

with yc
Deoole


I accept as a gift that The Wheel of Time did not suck, and expect nothing more.


If their task was not hard enough, they have amped up the difficulty of the dive by making their 
protagonist Gatadriel^’’proud and iron-willed as Satan himself, second-mightiest of the sorcerers 
and sorceresses of the Noldor (for of the Vanyar we know not, and Luthien was half-Maiar), more 
lovely than the dawn itself (for the light of the Two Trees was caught in her hair), able to see to 
the core of the souls of all she gazed upon, yet never judging them save
with understanding and mercya€’’except for her forever-unfriend FA«anor.

We wish Morfydd Clark and the rest of the team luck. They will need it. But I really do not see how 
this is to be accomplisheda€!

Galadriel was the greatest of the Noldor, except FA«anor maybe, though she was wiser than he, and 
her wisdom increased with the long years.... FA«anor beheld the hair of Galadriel with wonder and 
delight. He begged three times for a tress, but Galadriel would not give him even one hair. These 
two kinsfolk, the greatest of the Eldar of Valinor, were unfriends for ever....

She was proud, strong, and self-willeda€!. She had dreams of far lands and dominions that might be 
her own to order as she would without tutelage. Yet deeper still there dwelt in her the noble and 
generous spirit of the Vanyar, and a reverence for the Valar that she could not forget. From her 
earliest years she had a marvellous gift of insight into the minds of others, but judged them with 
mercy and understanding, and she withheld her
goodwill from none save only FA«anor....

She joined the rebellion against the Valara€! and once she had set foot upon that road of exile she 
would not relent, but rejected the last message of the Valar, and came under the Doom of Mandos.... 
Her pride was unwilling to return, a defeated suppliant.  At the end of the Elder Days after the 
final overthrow of Morgoth, she refused the pardon of the Valar for all who had fought against him, 
and remained in Middle-earth. It was not

until two long ages more had passed, when at last all that she had desired in her youth came to her 
hand, the Ring of Power and the dominion of Middle-earth which she had dreamed, that her wisdom was 
full grown and she rejected it, and passing the last test departed from Middle-earth for evera€!.

Or:

Galadriel and her brother Finrod were the children of Finarfina€!. Her mother-name was Nerwen 
(a€oeman-maidena€n), and she grew to be tall beyond the measure even of the women of the Noldor; 
she was strong of body, mind, and will, a match for both the loremasters and the athletes of the 
Eldara€!. Even among the Eldar she was accounted beautiful, and her hair was held a marvel 
unmatcheda€! the light of the Two Treesa€!
snared in her tressesa€!.

The Exiles were allowed to returna€”save for a few chief actors in the rebellion, of whom at the 
time of The Lord of the Rings only Galadriel remained. At the time of her Lament in LA3rien she 
believed this to be perennial, as long as the Earth endured. Hence she concludes her lament with a 
wish or prayer that Frodo may as a special grace be granted a purgatorial (but not penal) sojourn 
in EressA«a, the solitary isle in sight of Aman,
though for her the way is closed. Her prayer was granted a€“ but also her personal ban was lifted, 
in reward for her services against Sauron, and above all for her rejection of the temptation to 
take the Ring when offered to hera€!

[ Celeborn] has dwelt in the West since the days of dawn, and I have dwelt with him years 
uncounted; for ere the fall of Nargothrond or Gondolin I passed over the mountains, and together 
through ages of the world we have fought the long defeat...

Ah! like gold fall the leaves in the wind,
long years numberless as the wings of trees!
The long years have passed like swift draughts
of the sweet mead in lofty halls

beyond the West, beneath the blue vaults of Varda
wherein the stars tremble

in the voice of her song, holy and queenly.
Who now shall refill the cup for me?

For now the Kindler, Varda, the Queen of the stars,
from Mount Everwhite has uplifted her hands like clouds
and all paths are drowned deep in shadow;

and out of a grey country darkness lies
on the foaming waves between us,

and mist covers the jewels of Calacirya for ever.
Now lost, lost to those of the East is Valimar!

Farewell! Maybe thou shalt find Valimar!
Maybe even thou shalt find it! Farewell!

Family tree T



Eldarion

Finwe --------- Miriel           Mahtan

Feanor              Nerdanel

Celebrimbor

Finwe           Indis


Findis         Fingolfin ---------  Anaire             Irime          Finarfin

Fingon          Turgon ----------- Elenwe           Aredhel ----------- Edi               Argon

Idril ------------- Tuor             Maeglin

Earendil       Elwing

Elrond           Elros


Melian


Earendil

Elros               Elrond


Dior                     Nimloth

Elured and Elunn                 Elwing         -- Earendil

Elros               Elrond

