
This morning I find myself much happier than I have been in 4 1/2 years. It is a true the people 
that walked in darkness have seen a great light: they that dwell in the land of the shadow of 
death, upon them hath the light shinedd€\ moment. That is very good.

For this morning I have five things I think you ought to read to orient yourself for a time of 
possibility and, finally, hopefullness. So:

Take a Look at:

Three short thinking pieces on what Biden is doing/should do:

Eric Levitz: BidendC™ s Inaugural Address: a€~Bidena€™ s speech was riddled with contradictions. He 
called for unity (against everything the GOP stands for), and decried extremism (while demanding 
a€oebolda€D action on climate and racial justice). How he resolves these tensions will define his 
presidency <LINK>

Ezra Klein: Joe Biden & Democrats Must Help People Fast'. a€~Among the many tributaries flowing 
into Trumpism, one in particular has gone dangerously overlooked. In their book a€oePresidents, 
Populism and the Crisis of Democracy,a€D the political scientists William Howell and Terry Moe 
write that a€oepopulists dona€™ t just feed on socioeconomic discontent. They feed on ineffective
governmenta€”and their great appeal is that they claim to replace it with a government that is 
effective through their own autocratic powera€Da€! <LINK>

Ed Luce: Joe Biden Embraces His Inner Radical to Confront Winter Of Peril'. a€~Americaa€™ sa€! most 
consequential presidentsa€’’George Washington, Abraham Lincoln and FDRa€”were all leaders of 
moderate temperament. Their skill was to bring others alonga€l. Bidena€l spelt out the waya€l to 
advance his agendaa€!. Civility. At another time, such boilerplate language might prompt
narcolepsya€l. Buta€l Bidena€™ s hand of friendship is also a weapona€l. No significant 
Republican[s]a€l wav[ing] Mr Trump off from the White House or Andrews Air Force Base speaks 
volumesa€l. Biden sketched out the a€oewinter of peril and significant possibilitya€D that is 
facing America. In practice, Mr Bidena€™ s first 100 days could prove to be very interesting 
indeeda€l <LINK>

One thing you should think about studying this spring. Why? Because the subfield of economic 
development has gotten unbalanced, so that these days it tells us a lot about micro-behavioral 
parameters and relatively little about, well, economic development. STEG is trying to offer people 
tools to think about this:

STEG: Key Concepts in Macro Development'. a€~Why? Macro development is a small field. Textbooks are 
unavailable, and while many graduate programs teach some of these concepts in their courses, very 
few have a specific course organised around and dedicated to macro development. This virtual course 
will fill the gap for Ph.D. students or even junior faculty throughout the profession who
are interested in these topics but do not have access otherwise. The virtual classes will be 
interactive, just as virtual graduate lectures in most departments are nowa€l <LINK>

Plus:


We have no idea whether the person writing this was serious. We have little idea how many people 
believe that it is, or might be, true.

ParlertakesB

@parlertakes

ooo

So you'll listen to Biden then?

rThe plan was enacted over the weekend... Only you never saw it

Biden, his cabinet and tons of both Dem and Republican senators
and other official? were arrested. Proof of their vast crimes was


shown. They were court martialed and found guilty.

However, It was decided this was too much for the American people
to accept. Overturning the election and showing the crimes of these
politicians could lead to Civil War.

So an agreement was reached: Biden and other deep state elements
will be allowed to move freely and serve their terms. President
Trump would "concede" and leave office. But this is all for
appearances.

Behind the scenes, Donald J. Trump is still President. This plan,
known as Shadowprez, was seen as a last resort. But it worked.

Anything that happens in the next 4 years is actually President


Anything that happens in the next 4 years is actually President
Trumps doing.                                    6 11:06 AM

