Subscribe now

FIRST: The Discontents with Liberalism: A Check-in:

Another truly excellent podcast from Sean filing: Rethinking the "End of History": Frank Fukuyama 
<https://player.fm/series/vox-conversations/rethinking-the-end-of-history>. They spend almost all 
of their time talking about Francis Fukuyama (2022): Liberalism & Its Discontents (Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux: 0374606714) <https://www.amazon.com/dp/0374606714/>:



READING: Quotes & Such from Frank Fukuyama: "Liberalism & Its Discontents"

Frank Fukuyama & Sean Illing: Podcast Francis: The democratic part of liberal democracy has to do 
with institutions like free and fair multi-party elections to gauge popular will. The liberal part 
really has to do with constraints on the power of the statea€! rule of lawa€! checks and 
balancesa€! a leadera€! legitimated I isn't able to do simply whatevera€! ina€! viola€!
Read more

9 months ago A- Brad DeLong

Let me start with just a few quotes, and a little commentary:

Francis: Out-of-control resentmentsa€! a product of peopled! losing sight of the real stakesd!. 
reasonably well-known conservative intellectual who had gone partly MAG Ad! saidd! doe We're 
livingd! increasingly under a tyranny dD And I saidd! doe What do you see as so tyrannical? Andd! 
he saidd! doeThered™ s a group of nuns that are forced to distribute contraceptives in their medical
practicedidD. Thatd™ s not the worst violation of individual rights that I've encounteredd!

The kicker, of course, is that the doereasonably well-known conservative intellectualdD does not 
know that what HHS asked the Little Sisters of the Poor to do was not distribute contraceptives 
but, rather, that, if the LHotP health insurance plan was not going to cover contraceptives, they 
write HHS a memo to that effect.
That is a very loud thud from the jackboots of totalitarianism indeed!

And it is the ignorance of the RW-KCI about what he was talking about that is painful.

But there is something more painful here: We all know, of coursed’’Little Sisters of the Poor, and 
Reasonably Well-Known Conservative Intellectual as much as any of usa€”that the rhythm method and 
the missionary position produce on the order of four children per couple, given modern standards of 
nutrition and pre-natal care. Thus we all know that the papal prohibition on dceartificialdD means 
of birth control is going to fall. It may
take 500 years, it may take 50. It may take 5 years or 5 months or 5 weeks. Indeed, it may take 5 
days. But no matter when it falls, you must, sub specie A\ternatis, make answer to St. Peter when 
he asks you the question: doe Why were you such a dipshit, making peopled™ s family-planning more 
difficult just for the LULZ?a€D I do wonder what the LSofP and the RW-KCI are planning to say?

Francis: On the left... our institutions need to focus on the rights of individuals rather than 
those of groups. People are never fully defined by their group memberships and continue to exercise 
individual agency. It may be important to understand the ways they have been shaped by their group 
identities, but social respect should take account of the individual choices that they make as 
well. Group recognition threatens
not to remediate but to harden group differences...

The problem here is that Frank is tiptoeing perilously close to doel dond™ t see colordD or a€oel 
dond™ t see genderdD. Well, David Autor and I are both pretty woke as economists go. And yet at our 
CUNY panel with Ann Harrison and Paul Krugman, both of us interrupted Anna€™s opening statement, 
and neither of us interrupted Pauld™ s. (I have been hiding in fear from Ann Harrison since: rather 
hard to do, since she is
now the dean of Berkeleyd™ s business school.) a€ceWokenessa€D primarily involves recognizing how 
ethnic and gender hierarchies are woven into society, and trying to counteract them; secondarily, 
it is recognizing that democracy and discussion work because they pool good ideas, and so there is 
a strong positive benefit from having people with different experiences and thus different 
perspectives in the mix; and only tertiarily is it a
claim that people have different rights and authorities simply by virtue of the color of their 
skin. (And where it does devolve into that, it tends when the rubber hits the road to be things 
like doewhite people really should not say d~nd”d”-d™ dU, or doecross-burners like Charles Murray 
really shouldnd™t be given more forums to spout their prejudices unbacked by good data analysis 
than they already havedD; and I find it very
hard to get worked up at those.) For reading on this, I recommend once again the excellent and wise 
John Scalzi: <https 
://whatever.scalzi.com/2012/05/15/straight-white-male-the-lowest-difficulty-setting-there-is/xhttps 
://whatever.scalzi.com/2022/05/18/straight-white-male-the-lowest-difficulty-setting-ten-years-on/> 
<>.

Francis: Successful liberal societies have their own culture and understanding of the good life, 
even if that vision may be thinner.... Prioritize public-spiritedness, tolerance, open-mindedness, 
and active engagement in public affairs.  They need to prize innovation, entrepreneurship, and 
risk-taking.d! Actual, real existing liberal societies have been built on top of non-liberal 
foundations in which you have nationsd!

culturesd! languaged! shared historyd!. that give your life a certain thicknessd!. That creates a 
tensiond! sometimes those cultural foundations are exclusionaryd!. Enough of a culture that 
peopled! are in a common endeavord!. Butd! thatd! shared core has to be tolerant and accessible...

Now I had always thought we had that in America: That our dominant culture was that we were all 
Pilgrims, or descended from Pilgrimsd”that we were, at our core, a people that had come to this 
land from many different places on a journey in search of opportunity and freedom to make a free, 
prosperous country of ample and open opportunity that would serve the world as a City Upon a Hill. 
Thus we should work diligently, so that, in the
words of my ancestor John Winthrop:

We shall find that the God of Israel is among usd! [and] he shall make us a praise and glory, that 
men shall say of succeeding plantations: doethe Lord make it like that of New EnglanddidD
And we should especially:

follow the Counsel of Micah, doeto do Justly, to love mercy, to walk humbly with our GoddidD

We must be knit together in this work as one man, we must entertain each other in brotherly 
Affection, we must be willing to abridge our selves of our superfluities, for the supply of others 
necessities, we must uphold a familiar Commerce together in all meekness, gentleness, patience and 
liberality, we must delight in eache other, make others Conditions our own, rejoice together, mourn 
together, labour, and suffer
together, always having before our eyes our Commission and Community in the workd!

Thus we are all children of the Pilgrimsd”some by birth, and others by election and adoption. And 
that is (or ought to be) true no matter which particular group of Pilgrims come to this land you 
are referencing at the moment.

Now, today, Fox News and the Republican Party and the algorithms of the clickbait-seeking social 
media companies appear to have convinced a quarter of the population that that is not in fact who 
we are. And we have to get that back. And it will be hard. Let me drop in here an exchange between 
Sean Illing and Frank Fukuyama:

Sean Illing: You writed! liberal societiesd! cannot survive if they are unable to establish a 
hierarchy of factual truthdlcreated by elites of various sorts who act independently of those 
holding political power. The game is over, as far as I can tell, if you're right about thatd!

Francis: Disagree[ments] over policyd! morphed into affective polarizationd!. When did opposition 
to rigorously tested vaccines become such an important issue that it's one of the fundamental 
causes of the political divide in this country?d!. Modern technology hasd! made the debate even 
more opend!. Butd! overwhelm[ing]everyone with more information     thantheyd! could  make sense 
of... information...
of                                                                                                  
                                                                                          poor 
quality, false, or at times deliberately weaponized.... The large internet platforms operate on a 
business model that prioritizes virality and sensationalismd!. People... use their considerable 
cognitive skillsd! in... doemotivated reasoningdD... The deliberative function of freedom of speech 
has been weakened...    by excessivedemands for transparency. [andthe] different kinds of fantasy 
worldsmade

possible by the shift of our social interactions to online communications.d! There are 
well-established techniques for determining factual information, techniques that have been used for 
years in court proceedings, professional journalism, and in the scientific community.  There are 
other necessary norms promoting civility and reasoned discourse that underpin democratic 
deliberation in a liberal societyd!. The

biggest disappointment that I've felt in liberal democracy is thatd! many Americans could vote for 
somebody like Donald Trumpd!. Thatd™ s something that I worry about a lotd!

But we still have three-quarters, of the population to build on.

I did not expect to learn that Fukuyama was, at his core, a late-1970s Jimmy Carter-Hubert Humphrey 
Democrat:

Francis: Youd! need to link liberalism with democracyd! to dod! redistributiond! to mitigated! 
social and economic inequalitiesd!. The most successful liberal societiesd! were the social 
democratic onesd! after World War lid! a real effort to create a welfare stated! to try to be more 
inclusived! sharing the benefits of economic growthd!. We needd! [a] universal healthcare system 
and itd™ sd!
outrageous that we're the onlyd! rich country that doesn't have oned!

Sean Illing: The underlying legal and social structures are not egalitarian. They're not 
meritocratic. And that is part of the reason you felt compelled to write this book.d! And it's one 
of the many reasons people are disenchanted with the system that we have todayd!

hoping to quiet Sean down by pointing out that we are moving, in the long arc of history, toward 
greater social justice (albeit doewith all deliberate speeddn) and that distributing economic 
growth equitably is a powerful and important accomplishment that is within our grasp. The problem, 
of course, is that neoliberalism does not do that. And neoliberalism stubbornly hangs on, in spite 
of Fukuyamad™ s pronouncements that it is in
retreat.

And one more:

Francis: I can imagine a political moment will come when people will take up that challenge and 
then fix the institutions the way they did during the 1930s, after the Great Depression or as a 
direct result of the Great Depressiond!. Buried in liberal theory is a belief in human rationality 
that ultimately people willd! listen to evidenced! deliberate, andd! the resultd! is going to be 
some socially productive
conclusiond!

While Frank was talking to Sean in the metaverse, I was having coffee with a long-time Berkeley 
worthy in meatspace. We reached the opposite conclusion: that the world had been saved from true 
catastrophe only by the skin of our teeth, because Herbert Hoover won the presidency in 1928 and 
hence Franklin Delano Roosevelt succeeded him by winning the election of 1932. And it pretty much 
had to be Roosevelt: elsewhere is the Great
Depression swung politics to the right, either destructively or catastrophically, and the few left 
wing politicians able to take power during the Great Depression were unable to move the needle to 
deal with it (cf.: Leon Blum). doeFixing the institutionsdD looks like a great piece of good 
fortune. And I have not yet noted that the world today would be authoritariand’’fascist or 
really-existing socialistd”if not for the ultima ratio regum, and
that  would not have spoken for the liberal order had not Britaind™ s Labour Party chosen Churchill 
as the head of its wartime national unity government, had not Hitler attacked the Soviet Union 
while still at war with Britain, and had not Hitler declared war on the United States.

As I write in my forthcoming (September 6!) Slouching Towards Utopia <https://bit.lv/3pP3Krk>:

Why did the Great Depression not push the United States to the right, into reaction, or 
proto-fascism, or fascism, as it did in so many other countries, but instead to the left? My guess 
is that it was sheer luckd”Herbert Hoover and the Republicans were in power when the Great 
Depression started, and they were thrown out of office in 1932. That Franklin Roosevelt was 
center-left rather than center-right, that the
length of the Great Depression meant that institutions were shaped by it in a durable sense, and 
that the United States was the worldd™ s rising superpower, and the only major power not crippled 
to some degree by World War IId”all these factors made a huge difference. After World War II, the 
United States had the power and the will to shape the world outside the Iron Curtain. It did so. 
And that meant much of
the world was to be reshaped in a New Deal rather than a reaction- ary or fascist modea€!

Contrary to Fukuyamaa€™ s conclusion, the example of the 1930s makes me much less optimistic about 
prospects for a liberal-democratic future order, not more.

<https ://www.vox .com/vox-conversations-podcastxhttps ://www.amazon .com/dp/0374606714/>
Share

One Video:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Tom Nichols: Mark EsperaC™ s Duty to Speak: a€~Mark Esper Reveals the Full Danger of Trump, 
Finally: He had a duty to speak up before his book deala€! 
<https://newsletters.theatlantic.com/peacefield/627c43280a81280021 a331 
ff/trump-esper-republicans-must-speak-up-democracy-constitution/>

•  Barry Ritholtz: The Rich Are Not Who We Think They Are: a€~MIta€™ s not the small number of 
well-known tech and shopping billionaires but instead more than 140,000 Americans who earn more 
than $1.58 million per yeara€! [an] owner of a a€oeregional business,a€D such as an a€oeauto 
dealera€D or a a€oebeverage distributora€na€! 
<https://ritholtz.com/2022/05/10-tuesday-am-reads-381/>

• Simon Kuper: Democracy Might Be in Crisis. But Autocracy Certainly Is 
<https://www.ft.com/content/9f5227ab-c362-4693-828c-dla7adce0223>

• Wikipedia: Jeffrey P. Weaver <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jeffrey_P._ Weaver>

• Ian King: What Chip Stocks Can Tell Us About the Tech 
₁S,gZZo/jr<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-05-17/what-chip-stocks-can-tell-us-about-
the-tech-selloff?cmpid=BBD051722 TECH>

• Matt Levine: Elon Musk Does Not Care About Spam Bots 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-05-17/elon-musk-does-not-care-about-spam-bots>

• Micah Sifry: Messaging Wona€™ t Save Democrats; Community Might 
<https://micahsifrv.medium.com/messaging-wont-save-democrats-community-might-7d802154b433>

• Jeet Heer: Farewell to Midge Decter 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/culture/midge-decter-obituary-bigotry/>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Paul Krugman: a€~Weprobably have underlying inflation of 3.5a€“4 percenta€!

Paul Krugman @paulkrugman

So have near-term wage expectations, an indicator of underlying inflation running about a point 
below recent wage hikes 4/

Median expected earnings growth

OVERVIEW DEMOGRAPHICS


Q Main O 1 -year detail

Percent
6

5

4

3

1

0

2014 2015      2016      2017      2018      2019      2020      2021      2022

Source: New York Fed Survey of Consumer Expectations

1:53 PM r™ May 15,2022

3 89Likes41 Retweets

•  Matt Yglesias: Solving Problems by Letting People Do Things'. a€~The Ukrainian rule that 
requires surrogates to already be parents seems to me to have benefitsa€!. As a nice bonus, of 
course, youa€™ d be helping more families have kidsa€!


Slow Boring

Solving problems by letting people do things

A long time ago, I got a request to do a post about whether we should allow payments to kidney 
donors in order to increase the supply. My initial reaction was that I didna€™ t have much to say 
about this; it just seemed like the kind of obviously good idea that people are nevertheless 
suspicious of because of a superstitious aversion to certain kinds of transactions. But ita€™ s 
been on my mind as Ia€™ ve done some reading about related
questions, and while I wouldna€™ t say Ia€™ ve dramatically changed my opinion, I do think I have a 
more nuanced understanding of the issue in the form of two somewhat distinct viewsa€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 123 likes A- 149 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions
Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

I share Paul's absolute bewilderment and complete him comprehension of why people say that this is 
like the late 1970s. It could become like the late 1970sa€”if we had more big supply shocks, and if 
people lost confidence in the federal reserves willingness to act. But we are still far, far away 
from that point:

Paul Krugman:    probably have underlying inflation of 3.5a€“4 percent, with a higher headline rate 
reflecting probably temporary factors like supply chain disruptions and Ukraine fallout. Thata€™ s 
too high, but we dona€™ t have spiraling inflation due to unanchored expectations. Consumer surveys 
suggest medium-term inflation expectations have remained fairly stable. So have near-term wage
expectations, an indicator of underlying inflation running about a point below recent wage hikes. 
And the bond market seems to expect elevated inflation for the next year or so but more or less 
normal inflation after that. What story makes sense here? Ia€™ d say that we have a moderately 
overheated economy that the Fed should be and already is acting to cool off: interest rates 
relevant to real spending are way up.
Plus   stuff that is, yes, transitorya€!

LINK:

Paul Krugman @paulkrugman

So have near-term wage expectations, an indicator of underlying inflation running about a point 
below recent wage hikes 4/

Median expected earnings growth

OVERVIEW DEMOGRAPHICS

® Main Q 1 -year detail

Percent
6


5

4

3

1

0

2014 2015      2016      2017      2018      2019      2020      2021      2022

Source: New York Fed Survey of Consunw Expectations

1:53 PM r™ May 15,2022

391Likes41Retweets

My view is that the Wall Street bears do not understand how much the COVID plague has done to boost 
not just short- but long-term demand for semiconductor products:

Ian King: What Chip Stocks Can Tell Us About the Tech Selloff: a€~Chip companies can offer a kind 
of microcosm for Wall Streeta€™ s feelingsa€!. This year, Nvidia Corp, is down 41%. Advanced Micro 
Devices Inc. has dropped 35%. And the Philadelphia Stock Exchange Semiconductor Index is down more 
than 25%a€!. Meanwhile, chipmakers still cana€™ t keep up with demand. GlobalFoundries Inc. said
ita€™ s sold out for this year and 2023. That means that even though ita€™ s expanding production, 
GlobalFoundriesa€™ customers have already ordered as much as it can manufacture for the next 18 
months. Of course, therea€™ s a bear case tooa€!. Just look at Chinaa€! where first-quarter handset 
shipments fell 29% last quarter from the same period a year earliera€!. Nvidia[a€™ s]a€! stock has 
been savaged so
far this year, but ita€™ s also telling that this quarter analysts are mainly worried about one 
thing: If Nvidia will be able to get enough supply from its subcontractors to keep up with 
demanda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-05-17/what-chip-stocks-can-tell-us-about-the-tech-s
elloff?cmpid=BBD051722 TECH>

Matt Levine is the must-read for what is going on in finance and industry. The must-read. I think 
he is correct about Twitter's optimal strategy in dealing with Elon Musk: move ahead as if the deal 
is going to close on schedule, and if it does not drop musk from Twitter and sue him for specific 
performance, with the amount to be extracted in settlement depending on how the case goes and how 
rich Musk turns out to be. Negotation with a
chaos monkey seems to me to be a foola€™ s game:

Matt Levine: Elon Musk Does Not Care About Spam Bots: a€~a€oelf our Twitter bid succeeds,a€D he 
tweeted, a€oewe will defeat the spam bots or die trying !a€D His Twitter bid succeededa€!. 
Yesterday he announced that he does not want to buy Twitter because of the spam botsa€!. I think it 
is important to be clear here that Musk is lying. The spam bots are not why he is backing away from 
the deala€!. What has
happened?a€! Tesla Inc. stocka€! is down almost 30%a€!. So he is angling to reprice the deal for 
straightforward market reasons. But that is very clearly not allowed by the merger agreement that 
he signed: Public-company merger agreements allocate broad market risk to the buyer, and he cana€™ 
t get out just because stocks went downa€!. What does Twitter get from signing a new merger 
agreement with him at,
say, $42 per share? He has not lived up to any of his agreements with Twittera€”the standstill, the 
non-disparagement clause of the merger agreement, apparently a nondisclosure agreement, the merger 
agreement itselfa€”and hea€™ s not going to live up to a repriced merger agreement unless he feels 
like it. An agreement with Elon Musk is worthlessa€!. Twitter can try to hold him to the terms of 
his current deal, but
that is also riskya€!. Twitter has no good options. The market thinks that the most likely outcome 
is that the deal gets done at a lower price, rewarding Musk for his bad faitha€!. Twittera€™ s best 
option is to do nothing: Let Musk tweet, ignore him, and continue acting as though everything is 
normal and the deal is going to closea€!. In that vein, this morning Twitter calmly filed the 
preliminary proxy statement for
its deal with Muska€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-05-17/elon-musk-does-not-care-about-spam-bots>

Why is there no democratic party infrastructure? Why is there only a network of semi-grifter 
consultants sending me panicked fundraising emails of which they get an excessive cut?

Micah Sifry: Messaging Wona€™ t Save Democrats; Community Might: a€~Lux and his colleagues founda€! 
populist economics: tax the rich, hammer corporations for price gouging and profiteering, bring 
jobs home, help small businesses against corporate monopolies are all themes that resonate and also 
offer an answer to voter concerns about rising inflationa€!. These voters are sick of a€oepartisan 
bickeringa€n
and not receptive to political messages from either parta€!. This rings true to me. Politics as it 
is practiced today, in the form of messaging wars on television and online, is just too far from 
most peoplea€™ s livesa€!. a€oeCandidates and party committees should be spending time doing things 
like sponsoring community events like [Ohio Senator] Sherrod Browna€™ s a€~movie nights,a€™ which 
he does in the old
movie theaters of Ohioa€™ s mid-sized towns, where the theme is to build community spirit and 
togetherness. Or they could set up events that were community health clinics where people come in 
and get health care assistance that they couldna€™t otherwise afford. Or Chautauqua style events, 
where musicians, community theater performers, poets, and community organizations spend a day in a 
community.a€D
Even better, Ia€™ d add, instead of opening campaign offices for a few weeks, stocking them with 
fresh-faced volunteers from out of town, and then closing as soon as the election is over, 
Democrats could invest in year-round community centers like the union halls of old, where people 
gathered to socialize, have a beer and talk politics. Unfortunately, Lux is a rarity among his 
colleagues. I dona€™t think Democrats
are likely to shift the tens of millions of dollars they now have slotted for expensive ad 
campaigns this fall into community fairs or mutual aid programs. Theya€™re going to keep doing what 
theya€™ ve always done and pray for a different resulta€!

LINK: <https://micahsifrv.medium.com/messaging-wont-save-democrats-community-might-7d802154b433>

Men as creatures of extremely fragile egos loaded with neuroses who needed to be guided and 
steereda€”and feminism as destroying womena€™ s ability to learn how to do that successfully. That 
was, I thought, the key to Midge Dectera€™ s thought. Mena€™ s business was to bring home the bacon 
so women could live their lives, focusing on what was important. And all men wanted in return for 
transferring massive amounts of resources
was sex and affection. Hence meet-hubby-at-the-door-wearing-saran-wrap as the alternative to 
feminism, which Decter always saw as a hairy-legged bra-burning movement aimed at the pointless and 
stupid task of scoring ego points against men:

Jeet Heer: Farewell to Midge Decter: a€~Decter wasa€! cruciala€! marrieda€! secular social 
conservatism (rooted ina€! revisionist Freudianism)a€! witha€! militarism and big business 
capitalisma€!. Decter was an odd person to be a voice of right-wing traditional family values, 
since she was a very successful career woman, and easy-going about sexual morality in her private 
lifea€!. Treated as, in her words,
a€oea kind of honorary sona€D by her family because she was always ambitious and not willing to 
conform to the expectations of being an obedient daughter and wifea€! she never felt the need for 
feminism. Indeed, feminism became the main target of her major books The Liberated Woman and Other 
Americans (1970), The New Chasity and Other Arguments Against Womena€™ s Liberation (1972), and 
Liberal
Parents, Radical Children (1975)a€!. Her ridiculous book Rumsfeld: A Personal Portrait (2003). In 
that book, she celebrates the a€oemanlinessa€D of Donald Rumsfeld, at one point swooning, a€oeHe 
works standing up at a tall writing table, as if energy, or perhaps determination, might begin to 
leak away from too much sitting downa€Da€!

LINK: <https://www.thenation.com/article/culture/midge-decter-obituarv-bigotry/>

How do you guard peoplea€™ s interests properly with respect to the most emotion-laden and 
self-changing activities a woman can engage in? Matt Yglesias points to Ukraine as a good example:

Matt Yglesias: Solving Problems by Letting People Do Things: a€~The Ukrainian rule that requires 
surrogates to already be parents seems to me to have benefits. The women portrayed in Dominusa€™ s 
article are out of school, they have families and jobs, and they have relatively mature and 
plausible ideas about what they want to do with their money. So Ukraine strikes me as a positive 
example of legalizing
international surrogacy but with some amount of restrictiveness. Other ideas countries might want 
to consider are a minimum age rule, a low cap on the number of times a person is allowed to serve 
as a surrogate, and/or a requirement to hit some educational attainment threshold a€”the idea in 
all these cases being that you could capture some of the economic benefits of allowing paid 
surrogacy without turning it into
a   career in a way that would derail larger development goals. As a nice bonus, of course, youa€™ 
d be helping more families have kidsa€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

Solving problems by letting people do things

A long time ago, I got a request to do a post about whether we should allow payments to kidney 
donors in order to increase the supply. My initial reaction was that I didna€™ t have much to say 
about this; it just seemed like the kind of obviously good idea that people are nevertheless 
suspicious of because of a superstitious aversion to certain kinds of transactions. But ita€™ s 
been on my mind as Ia€™ ve done some reading about related
questions, and while I wouldna€™ t say Ia€™ ve dramatically changed my opinion, I do think I have a 
more nuanced understanding of the issue in the form of two somewhat distinct viewsa€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 124 likes A- 150 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Subscribe now


Slow Boring

Solving problems by letting people do things

A long time ago, I got a request to do a post about whether we should allow payments to kidney 
donors in order to increase the supply. My initial reaction was that I didna€™ t have much to say 
about this; it just seemed like the kind of obviously good idea that people are nevertheless 
suspicious of because of a superstitious aversion to certain kinds of transactions. But ita€™ s 
been on my mind as Ia€™ ve done some reading about related
questions, and while I wouldna€™ t say Ia€™ ve dramatically changed my opinion, I do think I have a 
more nuanced understanding of the issue in the form of two somewhat distinct viewsa€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 124 likes A- 150 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Subscribe now

