Subscribe now

FIRST: Cory Doctorow Explains the Cognition-of-Fiction to Us

Is it not monstrous that this player here.
But in a fiction, in a dream of passion,
Could force his soul so to his own conceit
That from her working all his visage wanned,
Tears in his eyes, distraction in his aspect,

A broken voice, and his whole function suiting
With forms to his conceita€"and all for nothing!
For Hecuba!

Whata€™s Hecuba to him, or he to aY“Hecuba,aY©
That he should weep for her?...

From Hexapodia XIII (May 4,2021):



PODCAST: Hexapodia XIII: "Mandated Interoperability": We Can't Make It Work, or Can We?
Listen now (52 min) I a€!

Read more

2 years ago A- 3 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong
Noah: a€oeHexapodiaa€D is the key insight! Six feet!
Brad: And what is that supposed to mean?

Noah: That there is some nugget of fact that, if you grasp it correctly and place it in the proper 
context, will transform your view of the situation and allow you to grok it completely.

Brad: And in the context of Vernor Vingea€™ s amazing and mind-Bending science-fiction space-opera 
novel A Fire Upon the De epl

Noah: The importance of a€oehexapodiaa€D is that those sapient bushesa€!

Brad: a€ [riding around on six-wheeled scooters have been geneticallya€!

Noah: a€ [programmed to be a fifth column of spies and agents for the Great Evil.

Brad: However, here we seek different key insights than a€cehexapodiaa€D. Today we seek them from 
the genius science-fiction author and social commentator Cory Doctorow. I think of him asa€”it was 
Patrick Nielsen Hayden, I think, who said around 2004: that he felt like he was living in the 
future of Scottish science fiction author, Ken MacLeod. And he wished Ken would just stop. At times 
I feel that way about Cory. But we are very happy to have him
here. His latest book is How to Destroy Surveillance Capitalism. IIRC, his latest fiction is Attack 
Surface. My favorite two books of his are Walkaway anda€”I think it was your firsta€”Dow« & Out in 
the Magic Kingdom.

Cory: Thata€™ s right. Yes. Thank you. Thank you for that very effusive introduction. I decry all 
claims of genius, though.

Brad: Well, we know this is a problem. When one is dealing with an author whose work one has read a 
lot ofa€”by reading your books, by now, Ia€™ ve spent forty hours of my life looking at squiggles 
on a page or on a screen and, through a complicated mental process of gymnastics, downloaded to my 
wetware and then run on it a program that is my image of a sub-Turing instantiation of your mind, 
who has then told me many very entertaining and excellent
stories. So I feel like I know you very wella€!

Cory: Therea€™ s this infamous and very funny old auto-reply that Neal Stephenson used to send to 
people who emailed him. It basically went: a€oeAh, I get it. You feel like you were next to me when 
we were with Hero Protagonist in Alaska fighting off the right-wing militias. But while you were 
there with me, I wasna€™ t there with you. And so I understand why you want to, like, sit around 
and talk about our old military campaigns. But I wasna€™ t on
that campaign with you.a€D

Brad: Yes. It was only my own imago, my created sub-Turing instantiation of your mind that was 
therea€!

Cory: Indeed. We are getting off of interoperability, which is what I think wea€™ re mostly going 
to talk about. But this is my cog-psy theory of why fiction works, and where the fanfic dispute 
comes from:

Writers have this very precious thing they say. It is: a€oela€™m writing and Ia€™m writing and all 
of a sudden the characters start telling me what they want to do.a€D

I think that what they actually mean by that is that: We all have this completely automatic process 
by which we try and create models of the people we encounter. Sometimes we never encounter those 
people, but just encounter second-hand evidence of them. Sometimes those people dona€™t live at 
all. Think about the people who feel great empathy for imaginary people that cruel catfishers have 
invented on the internet to document their imaginary battles with
cancer. They then feel deeply hurt and betrayed and confused, when this person theya€™ ve come to 
empathize with turns out to be a figment of someone elsea€™ s imagination.

I think what happens when you write is that you generate this optical link between two parts of 
your brain that dona€™ t normally talk to each other. There are these words that you are explicitly 
thinking up that show up on your screen. And then those words are being processed by your eyeballs 
and being turned into fodder for a model in this very naA“ve way. And then the model gets enough 
flesh on the bonesa€”so it starts telling you what it wants to do. At
this point, you are basically breathing your own exhaust fumes here. But it really does take what 
is at first a somewhat embarrassing process of putting on a puppet show for yourself: a€oeLike, 
everybody, leta€™ s go on a quest!a€D a€oeThat sounds great!a€D a€oeHere we go!a€D It just becomes 
something where you dona€™t feel like youa€™re explicitly telling yourself a story.

Now the corollary of this is that it sort of explains the mystery of why we like stories, right? 
Why we have these completely involuntary, emotional responses to the imaginary experiences of 
people who never lived and died and have no consequence. The most tragic death in literature of 
Romeo and Juliet is as nothing next to the death of the yogurt I digested with breakfast this 
morning, because that yogurt was alive and now ita€™ s dead and Romeo and Juliet
never lived, never died, nothing that happened to them happened. Yet you hear about the Romeo and 
Julieta€!

Noah: a€ [except that a human reads about Romeo and Juliet and caresa€[

Cory: That is where it matters, yes indeed. But the mechanism by which we care is our build this 
model which is then subjected to the authora€™ s torments, and then we feel empathy for the model. 
What that means is that the readers, when theya€™re done, if the book hit its aesthetic marks, if 
it did the thing that literature does to make it aesthetically pleasinga€”then the reader still has 
a persistent model in the same way that if your granny dies, you still have
a model of your granny, right? You are still there.

That is why fanfic exists. The characters continue to have imagined lives. If the characters dona€™ 
t go on having imagined lives, then the book never landed for you.
And thata€™ s why authors get so pissy about fanfic.

They too have this model that they didna€™ t set out to explicitly create, but ita€™ s there. And 
ita€™ s important to their writing process. And if someone is putting data in about that modeled 
person that is not consistent with the authora€™ s own perception of them, that creates enormous 
dissonance. I think that if we understood this, we would stop arguing about fanfic.

Noah: We argue about fanfic?

Brad: Oh yes, there are people who do. I remembera€”in some sense, the most precious thing I ever 
read was Jo Walton saying that she believed that Ursula K. LeGuin did not understand her own 
dragons at alla€[

Noah: a€[Yep, correcta€[

Cory: Poppy Brighta€”back when Poppy Bright was using that name and had that gender identitya€’’was 
kicked out of a fan group for Poppy Bright fans on LiveJournal for not understanding Poppy 
Brighta€™ s literature. I think thata€™ s completely true. Ray Bradbury to his dying day insisted 
that Fahrenheit 451 had nothing to do with censorship but was about the dangers of televisiona€!

Brad: Fanfic is an old and wonderful tradition. It goes back to Virgil, right? What is the Aeneid 
but Iliad fanfic?

Cory: And what is Genesis but Babylonian fanfic? It goes a lot further back than thata€[

Brad: Today, however, we are here to talk not about humans as narrative-loving animals, not about 
the sheer weirdness of all the things that we run on our wetware, but about a€oemandated 
interoperabilitya€d, and similar thingsa€[

References:

Cory Doctorow: How to Destroy Surveillance Capitalism <https://www.google.com/books/edition/How to 
Destroy Surveillance_Capitalism/W20NzgEACAAJ>

Cnrv Dnrfnrnw Attack Surface          crnncrlf* r.nm/hnnks/pditinn/Attar.k Snrfarp/rFfFOw A AOR A


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

The recent era of globalisation is unprecedented and has not


reversed

Very Briefly Noted:

• Plutarch: Life of Lycurgus of Sparta <https://www.google .com/books/edition/Greek 
Lives/TCFL16fJDI8C>

• Scott Lemieux: a€ceCancel Cultured€d& Patriarchal Entitlement

<https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2022/06/cancel-culture-and-patriarchal-entitlement>

• Chris Dixon: Why Web3 Matters <https://future.com/why-web3 -matters/>

• Dan Hon: The Ones Who Advocated for a Casus Belli Intervention in Ornelas, & Nineteen More 
<https://medium.eom/@hondanhon/the-oneswho-advocated-for-a-casus-belli-intervention-in-omelas-and-tw
enty-more-9650c3146ea7>

•  Robert Farley: Oral History of the Blogosphere, Episode 5: Brad DeLong: a€~ After a hiatus of a 
few months we are returning to our Oral History of the Blogosphere series. On the latest episode 
Dan and I interview Brad DeLong, who has been around the blogosphere since before the blogosphere 
was born and after the blogosphere dieda€! 
<https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2022/06/oral-historv-of-the-blogosphere-episode-5-brad-delong>


•  Daisy Yuhas: Why Social Media Makes People Unhappya€”& Simple Ways to Fix It: a€~Platform 
designs make us lose track of time spent on them and can heighten conflicts, and then we feel upset 
with ourselvesa€! 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/why-social-media-makes-people-unhappy-and-simple-ways-to
-fix-it/>


Twitter & a€~Stack

Damon Linker: The Rightd€™ s Road to Nowhere on Climate'. a€~Our plans and projects are going to be 
disrupted more and more often by weather-related disasters. Will Republicans even attempt a 
response ?a€!

yes on the Right

The Right's Road to Nowhere on Climate

When we planned an ambitious family vacation out west nearly a year agoa€”our first since before 
the start of the COVID-19 pandemica€”it seemed like we were being smart. The summer of 2021 ina€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 9 likes A- 3 comments A- Damon Linker

Chris Blattman: a€™ Economics has a hidden curriculum&€\

Chris Blattman @cblatts

Like an rofession, economics has a hidden curriculuma€”for how to succeed (plus how to help others 
succeed). @marcfbellemare's new book pulls back the curtain. A thread on some of my favorite advice 
and insights from the book. mitpress.mit.edu/books/doing-eca€!


What You Should Have Learned

in Grad School—But Didn’t


.  J,unTA2A’2—02'3-

529Likes 116Retweets

• Matt Yglesias: Wea€™re

.  Wrong Q^estl°
Asking the

• n About Ai Senti^e


Slow Boring

We're asking the wrong question about AI sentience

a€oeThe real question,a€D B.F. Skinner once wrote, a€oeis not whether machines think but whether 
men do. The mystery which surrounds a thinking machine already surrounds a thinking man.a€D That 
line has been reverberating in my head ever since the sort of wacky story of Google engineera€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 116 likes A- 155 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription


Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

