Subscribe now

FIRST: A Positive Narrative for a Global Future:

From my Ezra Klein Show taping:

Ezra Klein: We talked earlier about the info-biotech possibilities. You talked about domination and 
communication. What do you think the moral, economic narrative is that would work in this era? What 
do you think, when people begin trying to tell a story, they need to be paying attention to, 
recognizing that ita€™ s more than an economic policy?

Rrarl ITAT .nnw* Paul ^AahrirThta^TM hnnl" Thu Cnmn/inv nf Rtrnn oorc Vnn drnn qnv finp nF nc in 
thA wildArnAcc and WA diAa^! WA a^! hovA tn hA nart nF a cnniAtv with a cnnhictinatAd divicinn nF 
lahnra^! WA havAa^! aa^ ! nrnnAncitv tn An era a A in criFt-AYnhancrA rAlatinnchinca^! Vnn dnna£™ f 
xx/ant tn RA a mnnnhAr hut vnn alcn dnna£™ f xiznnt tn dwave hA th A nArcnn dnincr th A wnrVa^! 
Thic nnmnlinatAd danrA nF Favnrc and nhlicratinnc in whinh idAallv


everyone feels obligateda€! even though everyone is getting enormous amounts from the relationship. 
And we invent coins. And, all of a sudden, you can have this gift-exchange relationship not just 
with your neighbors, your friends, and your kin, buta€! with everyone everywherea€!.
[We need] to realize how very lucky we are and how we all are cousins and how we all are involved 
in this reciprocal exchange of favors for each othera€!. [We need] to take that very seriously.

Adam Smith, in The Wealth of Nations, has a passage where hea€™ s arguing against mercantilists who 
say a low-wage economy is going to be a strong economy becausea€! your golda€! [buys] lots of work 
on a€! and project[s lots of] military powera€!. He says: wait a minute. The society is made up of 
people. If most of the people are starving, is that a good society? And then he does this 
gift-exchange, intellectual judo move, saying: a€oeit is but equity,
besides, that those who feed, clothe, and care for the rest of society should themselves, be well 
fed, well clothed, and well cared for.a€da€l

To take seriously that the market economy is a gift-exchange networka€! [among] cousinsa€!. We have 
enormous amounts in common [with] and we owe [many] things to people far away. There are people in 
Pakistan who wove the carpets that are on the floor of my living rooma€!. Every time I walk on 
them, I should think:a€! a€oel have this wonderful carpeta€!. And when the dog barfs on it we go to 
considerable effort to clean it off because it is a thing of
beautya€!. Ia€! have an obligation toa€!the guy in Pakistana€! who tied these knots.a€Ua€! Whatever 
I should do, I should take care that he is somewhere close to the front of my mind.


Ezra Klein Show Highlights
Ezra Klein Show Pagea€l
Read more

3 months ago A- 7 likes A- 3 comments A- Brad DeLong
Share

CONDITION: Is This the Effect of the Ezra Klein Show?

A nice day-of-release-of-the-podcast bump in the Amazon sales ranking:

Historical Sales Rank

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century

Formats and editions

Hardcover, September 5, 2022


M ECONOMIC BiSTCRY
m TWENTIETH CEMIW

This format is currently ranked #3,725.


DDinrnon nri nun           A _ _

     A I        _ I I B ■             A. ft—  I     A A    11    I \ Z           I \ Z         

All A      • I — I- I -


Asorroaay: z vveeKS i rvionin o ivionins i rear z rears । HII nvanauie

Sales Rank

1500

3000

4500

6000

7500

10/07/2022     10/10/2022     10/13/2022     10/16/2022     10/19/2022     10/22/2022     
10/25/2022     10/28/2022     10/31/2022      11/04/2022

Very hard to tella€!

My guess from a number of sources and comparisons is that the book is closing in on 20,000 
worldwide all-formats copies sold now, but there are annoying lags and gaps in reporting.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Audio: DeLong on Stephanomics:

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-10-27/podcast-biden-s-pro-labor-presidencv-isn-t-good-
enough-for-unions#xi4y7vzkg>

Then Stephanie speaks to University of California, Berkeley economist Bradford DeLong about his new 
book, Slouching Towards Utopia. DeLong argues that the 20th century essentially started in 1870, a 
technological turning point after which production was rapid enough that (at least theoretically) 
we could bake a large enough economic pie to provide for all. The fact that, in the real world, 
everyone doesn't have enough is a symptom of our failure to
distribute goods and services equitably, DeLong observes. Getting in the way of that goal as well 
are human foibles including a desire to distribute wealth to their children and a related disdain 
for inheritance taxes, as well as abhorrence of people who appear to be getting a free ride, he 
saysa€!

<https: //overcast ,fm/+x7 cvIR2_M>
Leave a comment

One Image: This Yeara€™s Stone Lecture:


rhe Annual Stone Lecture Presents W

JLOUCHING

"TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. Bradford De Long

Bechtel Sibley Auditorium, UC Berkeley

Tuesday, November 29,5:10 - 6:30 pm

Let me jump the announcement and say that I am going to be giving the Stone Lecture this year.
Get 50% off a group subscription


Must-Read: Song Dynasty China:

Doug Jones: A Cycle of Cathay: a€~a€oeThe innovations which make their appearance in East Asia 
round about the year 1000 a€! form such a coherent and extensive whole that we have to yield to the 
evidence: at this period, the Chinese world experienced a real transformation. a€! The analogies 
[with the European Renaissance] are numerous a€“ the return to the classical tradition, the 
diffusion of knowledge, the upsurge of science and technology (printing,
explosives, advance in seafaring techniques, the clock with escapement a€l), a new philosophy, and 
a new view of the world. a€! There is not a single sector of political, social or economic life in 
the eleventh to thirteenth centuries which does not show evidence of radical changes in comparison 
with earlier ages. It is not simply a matter of a change of scale (increase in population, general 
expansion of production, development of internal and external trade) but
of    a change of character. Political habits, society, the relations between town and country, and 
economic patterns are quite different from what they had been. a€! A new world had been 
borna€!a€Da€”Jacques Gernet. A History of Chinese Civilization, pp. 298-300d€\.

The changes are dramatic. Population roughly doubles, from about 50 million to about 100 
milliona€!. The division of labor advancesa€! a€oegoods such as rice, wheat, lighting oil, candles, 
dyes, oranges, litchi nuts, vegetables, sugar and sugarcane, lumber, cattle, fish, sheep, paper, 
lacquer, textiles and iron.a€D In a number of fields of technology a€“ iron production, 
shipbuilding a€“ China reaches heights which the West will not attain for many
centuriesa€!. Taxes come to be mostly collected in casha€!. Eventually revenues from taxes on 
commerce, including excise taxes and state monopolies, will greatly exceed those from land tax. A 
Council of State will put constitutional checks on the power of the emperor. Yeta€!. The nomad 
brake^\. Rice economics^}. Rice psychology^}. The history of the Song period poses in particularly 
clear form the a€oeNeedham puzzlea€D of why the Industrial
Revolution did not originate in China. The answer, it seems, is complicated, combining (at least) 
political and social responses to external threat, the nature of agricultural economies, and more 
intangible (but still measurable) differences in cognitive stylea€!

Give a gift subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Django Wexler: a€~10/10 macroeconomic hubris simulator, would recommend: So my Victoria 3 
playthrough has taken an interesting turn J'm playing as Chile, and basically just trying to 
industrialize rather than take over the world. So I've got my three little states and I'm 
contenta€!

•  Louis Ashworth: Support group for confused BoE watchers: a€~Taking the journey towards 
understanding, together: Yesterdaya€™ s Bank of England day started with a historic rate hike, and 
ended with Governor Andrew Bailey confirming he would never try to overthrow a Prime Minister. If 
it all seemed like a bit too much, worry not: economics professionals are also very confuseda€!

•  Abdul El-Sayed: Obamaa€™ s Attack Works Because He Hits Republicans Where They Think Theya€™re 
Strong: a€~Not,„ the halting professorial cadence that came to characterize the Obama we knew as 
president. It was more a€oetruth from the pulpita€D than a€oetalking points from the lectern.a€Da€! 
He demonstrated how Democrats can send a withering message about the economy without apologya€!

• Maria Farrell: Twitter consequences; not just for little people: a€~There are now tens of 
thousands of journalists, policymakers, academics and various other thought-leader types who 
viscerally get what it is to be trapped inside a monopolistic tech platform, and for it to be 
costly and painful to leave...
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Conrad Swanson: Colorado River conditions are worsening quicker than expected. Feds prepare to step 
in: a€~Without enough snow this winter, the water level at Lake Powell a€” the countrya€™ s 
second-largest reservoir a€” will drop below a critical level by next November, according to a new 
report from the U.S. Bureauof Reclamation. Below that point, the Glen Canyon Dam will no  longer be 
able to generate electricity and expertsworry whether
conditions will worsen to the point that the structure will no longer be able to send water 
downstream at all. Drought, overconsumption, and climate change, are main factors dissipating the 
amount of Colorado River water that will reach the Sea of Cortez on its journey through the 
Colorado River Deltaa€!

Josh Marshall: a€~Let's say a few words about "brand safetya€D. Musk and top Republican leaders are 
now complaining that the problem is "woke" activists breaking Twitter and pushing it toward 
financial collapse. Nope. That's not it. Not remotelya€!. Advertisers want you to see their ads in 
a good moment, in a comfortable setting. Here's an examplea€!. Even in his heyday Drudge never had 
better than low rent, crap adsa€!. Even though it was a hugely
hugely popular site premium advertisers just don't want to be near something so hot and 
contentious. Half the people are hate reading anyway. There's always a big inverse premium for uck 
and discomfort and controversya€!. The exceptions are venues that have something that can't be 
matcheda€!. Musk basically bought Twitter on a lark. He was riding so high he thought he could 
basically buy Twitter with Fa€”- Ya€” money. Since then he's been operating on
the premise that he could both be Mr Free Speech (tm) memelord and make Twitter operate at a 
profit. It's one or the other. No advertiser wants to be near this drama or controversy let alone 
the next N-word explosion...

John Ganz: The Last Days of Twitter: I have to admit I was maybe a little bit wrong about Elon 
Muska€™ s Twitter takeover. I was under the impression that he had essentially adopted the 
reactionary tech ideology of his old business partner Peter Thiel and venture capitalist David 
Sacks, who is apparently part of his a€oewar rooma€D at Twitter. Ithought hewouldessentially use 
the platform to wage a class war against unionizing workers and the
a€ceWokea€D middle-strata of the professional-managerial class. Now I just think he really has no 
idea what hea€™ s doing at alla€!

Dave Karpf: Elon's Twitter-Tilt: a€~It seems to me that, when Musk made that offer, his plan was 
pretty straightforward. Twitter was widely regarded as a poorly-managed company. It was far more 
influential than profitable. Musk figured he could buy the company outright, spend a year or two 
adding new monetization features and fixing the most glaring inefficiencies, then take it public 
again and turn a nice profit. Hea€™ d be declared a heroa€! adding
another layer to the legend of Elon Muska€!. I doubted at the time that it would actually work. But 
ita€™ s a plausible storya€l. But then the tech crash happeneda€!. Instead of buying a company 
worth $40-45 billion for $44 billion and then trying to flip it, Elon found himself buying a 
company worth $15-20 billion for $44 billion. So he tried to scrap the deal. But it turns out he 
cana€™ t bully the Delaware Chancery Court the way hea€™ s used to bullying
the SEC. The deal went through. Elon massively overpaida€!. The best-case scenario for an Elon-run 
Twitter would be one where he realized that his only hope for turning a profit lies in waiting out 
the tech crash. That requires patience and deliberate behavior. What wea€™ ve seen in his first 
week is a gambler obsessed with his losses, taking wild swings trying to earn his money back. Ita€™ 
s an approach that is going to cost him. And it might take down
Twitter before an approximate replacement has emergeda€!


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

