Subscribe now

Approximately 1/5 of low wage jobs in Germany would not be viable if workers understood how good 
their outside options truly were. That is the conclusion of my colleague here
at Berkeley Benjamin Schoefer, along with his coauthors Simon JA^ger, Christopher Roth, and Nina 
Roussille

<https://eml.berkeley.edu/~schoefer/schoefer_files/JRRS Beliefs Rents Outside 
Options_July2021.pdf>. If something were to shake up low-wage workersa€™ false beliefs
about how poor their outside options were, things would change. I guess that things are the same, 
but only more so, here in the United States where our minimum wage is far lower
relative to average productivity than in Germany.

Perhaps here in the United States the COVID-19 plague has been that shake-up, has been that wake-up 
call. The rate at which U.S. workers are quitting their jobs is now a
remarkably high 3%/month. This is unheard of, especially given that the employment-to-population 
ratio is still only 58.8%, 2%-points below full employment, back at its level of
2014 <https ://fred .stlouisfed .org/series/EMRATIO>. So what is going on in the U.S. labor 
marketa€”what we would see in normal times as a great shortage of jobs, but coupled
with a greatly outsized willingness of workers, especially low-wage workers, to quit and look for 
something better for themselves?

There is a standard list of explanations: fear of the COVID plaguea€’’especially among those who 
live with elderly or immunocompromised relativesa€’’disrupted childcare and
other arrangements; households flush with cash from the plague-relief programs; a decision to smell 
the roses rather than work too hard at an unpleasant and badly paying job. But
the problem with that, as Paul Krugman observes, is that western Europe is not seeing this 
a€oeGreat Resignationa€D and depression in the share of adults who are employed

<https ://www.ny times .com/2021/11/29/opinion/united-states-europe- jobs .html>.

Step back. One effect of the COVID plague has been to lead to a transformation of work and the 
workplace that would have taken decades in the plaguea€™ s absence, or that
might have never come to pass at all. The shift to remote white-collar work. The replacement of 
substantial components of service work by technology. The transformation of
retaila€”many more delivery drivers, many fewer in-store sales workersa€”in a way that seems to 
many consumers to add convenience as online tools finally get good enough that
one    can feel one need not shop in person to get a sense of quality. And one can always return 
it, if it turns out to not be what was expected.

Unless workers are explicitly on temporary layoff, reknitting the division of labor to restore 
employment is always a long and painful process. In the 2010s it seemed to be bound by
a speed limit of 1%-point per year. Admittedly, that was because demand remained relatively slack 
as fiscal and monetary policy fought not the last war but the several-wars-ago
phantom dragons of debt and inflation. But I really do not think it would be good policy for the 
U.S. to be bound by this speed limit of recovery now. Rapid recovery requires that
American provide low-wage workers with the better bargains in the workplace that the high quit rate 
says that they are demanding. Rapid recovery requires that the supply-side
blockages  to labor participation^’’the CO VID plague, and childcarea€”be rapidly removed. And 
rapid recovery requires a high-pressure economy to make it obvious to workers
reentering where the good opporunities are.

The Biden administration^’’and the Democratic congressional majoritya€’’needs to recognize that 
both workers and entrepreneurs need a great deal more support right now than
Americaa€™ s business-as-usual can provide. Western Europe points the way. Copy what it does.

627 words
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


