Subscribe now

CONDITION: Waiting for TapBotsa€™s Mastodon Client, Ivory:

Tweetbot Maker Tapbots Working on 'Ivory' Mastodon App

Tuesday November 29, 2022 5:08 pm PST by Juli Clover

Tapbots, the company behind the popular Tweetbot app designed for Twitter, is working on
developing a new app called Ivory that integrates with the Mastodon social network.

7:55

Timeline

MacRumors.com ©macfumors

Judge Approves Apple's Plan to Pay $50
Million to Settle Butterfly Keyboard Lawsuit

Following


Judge Approves Apple's Plan to Pay $50
Million to Settle Butterfly Keyboard Lawsuit

macrumors com

MacRumors.com @macrumors

MacRumors.com
@macrumors

Apple, iPhone, iPad, and Mac rumors, news, tips and
videos. Tap Follow!

FOLLOWS YOU

COMMON FOLLOWERS

0x4**


Kuo: iPhone 14 Pro Sales Are in Big Trouble

Due to Foxconn Factory Protests

1,872


Q) Posts

Posts       Posts & Replies       Reposts

"Tapbots"

q

a


Kuo: iPhone 14 Pro Sales Are in Big Trouble
Due to Foxconn Factory Protests

macrum

MacRumors.com @macnjmors
Apple CEO Tim Cook Meeting With

Republican Lawmakers in Washington
macrumors.com/2022/11/29/tim-c...

40rr

123

k                                                                                                   
                       fl

Share

FOCUS: Industrial Strategy for a Rich, Leading-Edge, Economy:



Give a gift subscription

ONE IMAGE: I Appreciate Ian Morrisa€™s Trying to Do Azis, Buta€l:

Isna€™t a€oeenergy capturea€D after the year -2000 largely wheat vs. rice? And what is this 
a€oewestern corea€D that travels so far across the ages, while the a€oeeastern corea€D remains two 
neighboring river valleys? In what sense is it the a€cecorea€D of a a€oecivilizational 
traditiona€D? That Victorian Englishmen thought they wanted to be and claimed they were the sole 
legitimate heirs of Cicero and Demosthenes is interesting, but does not make it
so:

East vs West Over the Ages

Composite Social Development Index by Ian Morris

Index components =
energy capture,

war making capacity,

organisation,
information technology


Roman unification of
Mediterranean Sea into
single political framework

Rise of first states

Collapse of Old Kingdom
Egypt and Akkadian Empire
in Western core -2200 BC

Western core begins in Hilly
Flanks with first settlements
of >1 k residents, later
shifting geographically to
Mesopotamia then Egypt

-10000          -5000

Region

East
West

China amazes
Marco Polo

Bureaucratisation & prof
essionalisation of states

Fall of Western Zhou
Destruction of Taosi in
Eastern core -2000 BC

Xipo grows to >1k residents

--- 1--------------

0


year

Data: 'The Measure of Civilization' by Ian Morris. Chart: realchinacharts.com

Social Development Index for East vs. West by Ian Morris. Chart and annotations by
realchinacharts.com

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA%er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Economist: These are The Economista€™ s best books of 2022: a€~Slouching Towards Utopia. By J. 
Bradford DeLonga€!. Written with wit, style and a formidable command of detail, this book places 
the successes and disasters of the 20th century in their economic context. In doing so, it provides 
insights into how things have gone wrong in more recent yearsa€”and what must go right if 
catastrophe is to be avoided in the current centurya€l

• Wikipedia: Aneutronic fusiona€!

•  Noah Smith: The dream of bringing back Bell Labs: a€~Was America's most famous corporate lab a 
product of its time, or something that can be reproduced?a€l

•  Nate Cohn: Turnout by Republicans Was Great. Ita€™ s Just That Many of Them Didna€™ t Vote for 
Republicans: a€~No, the main G.O.P. problem wasna€™t prioritizing Election Day voting over early 
votinga€!

•  Yuan Yang: We need an honest east-west discussion about industrial policy: a€~Europe and the US 
are breaking a taboo that east Asia was never afraid ofa€l

• Sam Feldman: Brave vs. Chrome: Which Browser is Better?a€l

•  Zvi Mowshowitz: Sadly, FTX: a€~I have seen claims [Alameda] actually lost all the money that was 
made on the Japan trade through bad trades and recklessness, and that Sam was taking insane risks 
all over the place, including a likely disregard for legal risks and structures. He was definitely 
posting Twitter threads justifying exceeding the Kelly criteriona€l

• Alexandra Scaggs: Labor markets look good. US manufacturing does nota€l

•  J.M. Berger: My heart is human, my blood is boiling, my brain I.B.M: a€~As long as A.I. is 
created first for verisimilitude, wea€™re going to have this problem, an arms race to see who can 
develop the most convincing generative liar. WHAT COULD POSSIBLY GO WRONG? To its credit, ChatGPT 
will tell you the truth about itself when asked. Unfortunately, too many people are willing to rush 
right past its statement of identitya€l

•  John Halpin: More Emotions, Fewer Statistics: a€~Politicians are unable to connect with most 
Americans because they dona€™t experience economic anxiety on a regular basis...

• Meghan MacPherson: Trump's call to suspend Constitution not a 2024 deal-breaker, leading House 
Republican says: a€~Republican Ohio Rep. Dave Joyce said Sunday that... Trump's comment should be 
taken "in context" but that it wouldn't prevent him from supporting Trump if he ends up winning the 
nomination...
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Diane Coyle: The Double Transformation: a€~The worlda€™ s advanced economies are in the midst of 
dual structural transformations^I digitalizationa€l [and] the shift to a carbon-neutral economya€l. 
For four decades, the prevailing view among economists has been thata€l the statea€l sets the legal 
framework, builds infrastructure, and funds basic research, while the private sector innovates and 
creates wealtha€l. xisting antitrust-enforcement frameworks
are ill-equipped to address the challenges posed by winner-takes-all digital marketsa€l. The 
net-zero transitiona€l. Competition policy typically opposes companies sharing information with 
each othera€l. [But] sharing data among firms is essential to reducing waste, increasing energy 
efficiency across supply chains, enabling autonomous-vehicle adoption and efficient transport 
management, and reducing entry barriers in digital marketsa€l. Policymakers must
be careful when weighing the strategic benefits of technocratic competition and industrial 
policiesa€l

Andrew Marvell: An Horatian Ode upon Cromwella€™ s Return from Ireland: a€~Though justice against 
fate complain/And plead the ancient rights in vain;/But those do hold or break/As men are strong or 
weak./Nature that hateth emptiness/Allows of penetration less/And therefore must make room/Where 
greater spirits comea€l

Chance: When the 'Chute Fails: a€~Elon Musk and Donald Trumpa€l have in commona€l a willingness to 
flout rulesa€l. In many circumstances throughout history, businesses and individuals chose to do 
what they had contracted to do, not because there was no feasible way out of the deal, but because 
it made sense to just be a person of integrity. The rules that might be voted a€oeMost Likely to be 
Flouteda€D in high school superlative terms are generally
those enforced by societal, reputational, and policy pressures a€” not by strong, bright-line 
consequences or rigid and swift application of the legal systema€l. Although ita€™ s not news that 
Musk fired Parag Agrawal, Vijaya Gadde, and Ned Segal a€oefor causea€D on October 26th, just as he 
was closing the merger, it does seem that it should be newsworthy to note that two months later, 
Musk appears to have taken the further step of withholding their
contractually-owed golden parachute paymentsa€l. In Form 4 filings made with the SEC on Friday, 
December 2nd, Agrawal, Gadde, and Segal went on record with the amounts they believe are owed to 
them under the terms of their severance agreementsa€I.It appears that the unvested portions (both 
in Issuer RSUs and Issuer PSUs) have not been paid outa€l

Greg Olear: The Founding-Fatherization of Adam Smith (with Glory M. Liu): How did an eccentric 
Scottish philosopher become an icon of American free market capitalism?'. a€~As Liu recounts in her 
book, Adam Smitha€™ s hallowed name has been invoked in recent years by Barack Obama, on the left, 
and on the right, Arthur Brooks of the American Enterprise Institute. The fact that this long-dead 
Scottish moral philosopher can be credibly used in such a
way reveals a€oehow we have come to depend on Smith for ways to think our way out of our current 
predicaments,a€U she writes. a€oeWe have become so confined by our hope that capitalism must 
survive, that we have to a€~get it right,a€™ that, rather than seeking out its alternatives, we 
insist that its lifelines lay in the body of work that Adam Smith created more than two and a half 
centuries agoa€Da€l



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

