Grok this first. It is important to recognize that this is part of America todaya€”and not an 
unimportant part:

A not atypical post on Parler:

Lwatts: Parler Free Speech Social Network <https://parler.com/search?hashtag=trump>: a€~Everyone 
needs to understand my President: Plays 3 layer chess! What did Trump do?????a€! He said walk down 
1600 he didn't know the ANITIFA HIRED BY PENCE WAS THERE, HE NEW THE SUPPORTERS were fine!!!! It 
was the left that jumped first!!!!! Yall killed a VET,,, A HERO" HOW DARE YOU ALL. Yeah if I fa€”- 
up
this bad I would be on every TV channel trying to lie your asses off... #millionmagamarch 
#supremecourt #voterfraud #MEME #PARLER #PARLERUSA #USA #QANON #MAGA #trump2020 #trump #patriots 
#StopTheSteal #tuckercarlson #tucker #sidneypowell #kag #2020elect

On to the main course:

Bites:

Karl Marx: Theories of Surplus-Value, Chapter 17 <https ://www.marxists 
.org/archive/marx/works/1863/theories-surplus-value/ch 17 .htm>: The childish babble of a Saya€!

Wikipedia: Quarrel of the Ancients & the Moderns <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quarrel_of_the 
Ancients and the Moderns>...

Karl Marx (1867): Capital: Primitive Accumulation <https://www.marxists 
.org/archive/marx/works/1867-cl/ch31 .htm>a€!

Paragraphs:

More historical evidence on the benefits of immigration. People willing to move are people you want 
on your side, working with you:

Erik Hornung: Immigration and the Diffusion of Technology: The Huguenot Diaspora in Prussia <https: 
//funginstitute .berkelev.edu/wp-content/uploads/2014/02/HornungDiaspora20141 ,pdf>: a€~In 1685, 
religiously persecuted French Huguenots settled in Brandenburg-Prussia and compensated for 
population losses due to plagues during the Thirty Yearsa€™ War. We combine Huguenot immigration 
lists from 1700 with Prussian
firm-level data on the value of inputs and outputs in 1802 in a unique database to analyze the 
effects of skilled immigration to places with underused economic potential. Exploiting this 
settlement pattern in an instrumental-variable approach, we find substantial long-term effects of 
Huguenot settlement on the productivity of textile manufactories^!

The bureaucratic deglobalization blowback from Brexit has begun, making a poorer, weaker, littler 
England:

Dutch Bike Bits: Shipping: Brexit <https://www.dutchbikebits.com/shipping>: a€~Unfortunately, we 
will not be able to send parcels to the UK from mid December 2020 onward. Quite apart from 
uncertainty surrounding the shipping cost, taxation etc. after that time, there is also a problem 
caused by the British government deciding to impose a unique taxation regime which will require 
every company in the world in every country in
the world outside the UK which exports to the UK to apply and collect British taxes on behalf of 
the British government. For providing this service they intend to charge a fee to every company in 
the world in every country in the world which exports to the UK. Clearly this is ludicrous for one 
country, but imagine if every country in the world had the same idea. If every country decided to 
behave in the same way then we would have to
pay 195 fees every year, keep up with the changes in taxation law for 195 different countries, keep 
accounts on behalf of 195 different countries and submit payments to 195 tax offices in 195 
different countries, and jump through whatever hoops were required to prove that we were doing all 
of this honestly and without any error. Therefore from mid December 2020 onward we ship to every 
country in the world... except the UKa€!

Trump. But not smart. Can this really be the bottom line on Brazila€™ s Bolsonaro?:

Gideon Rachman: Jair Bolsonaroa€™s Populism Is Leading Brazil to Disaster 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c39fadfe-9e60-llea-b65d-489c67b0d85d>: 'I had a chat with a prominent 
financier about the parallels between Donald Trump and Jair Bolsonaro. a€oeThey are very 
similar,a€D she said, before adding: a€oeBut Bolsonaro is much stupider.a€D This answer took me 
aback since the US president is not generally regarded as a
towering intellect. But my banker friend was insistent. a€ceLook,a€D she said. a€oeTrump has run a 
major business. Bolsonaro never made it above captain in the army.a€D... The coronavirus pandemic 
has reminded me of that observation national unity will not emerge while Mr Bolsonaro is president. 
In classic populist fashion he thrives on the politics of division. Brazil is already a deeply 
polarised country, where conspiracy theories
are  rife. The deaths and unemployment caused by Covid-19 are exacerbated by Mr Bolsonaroa€™ s 
leadership. But, perversely, a health and economic disaster could create an even more hospitable 
environment for the politics of fear and unreasona€!

John McLaren & Su Wang: Effects of Reduced Workplace Presence on COVID-19 Deaths: An 
Instrumental-Variables Approach <https://www.nber.org/papers/w28275>: a€~Numerous government 
policies have attempted to keep workers out of the workplace, on the assumption that this will 
lower transmission of COVID-19. We test that assumption, measuring the effect of aggregate 
workplace absence on US COVID deaths at the
county level through August. Instrumenting with an index of how many local workers pre-pandemic can 
work from home, based on differences in county occupational mix, we find no effect of workplace 
absence until mid-May, then a sharply rising effect. By August, moving 10 percent of a county's 
workers from the workplace would lower deaths there by three quarters one month latera€!

Wikipedia: Axial Age <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Axial Age>: a€~Axial Age... is a term coined by 
German philosopher Karl Jaspers in the sense of a "pivotal age", characterizing the period of 
ancient history from about the 8th to the 3rd century BCE. During this period, according to 
Jaspers' concept, new ways of thinking appeared in Persia, India, China and the Greco-Roman world 
in religion and philosophy, in a striking parallel
development, without any obvious direct cultural contact between all of the participating Eurasian 
cultures. Jaspers identified key thinkers from this age who had a profound influence on future 
philosophies and religions, and identified characteristics common to each area from which those 
thinkers emergeda€!

Substack Blog: Substack Welcomes The Dispatch, a New Type of Media Company 
<https://blog.substack.eom/p/substack-welcomes-the-dispatch-a>: a€~Wea€™ ve long believed that 
people dona€™ t really subscribe to a€cecontenta€Da€”they subscribe to voices they trust. This 
collaboration represents what that a€oesubscribe to a persona€D model might look like when pushed a 
step further, and it gives us an opportunity to further
explore how groups of writers can work together on Substack. Wea€™re also pleased to support The 
Dispatcha€™ s mission of trying to create a space for discourse that doesna€™t have to play by the 
rules of the attention economy. In their mission statement, Hayes and Goldberg write: "We think the 
clickbait model is an anathema to serious discourse. We also believe it is a blight to the eye and 
a disturbance of the mental peace. So
we  are rejecting the advertising that makes clickbait seem so necessary. It might seem oxymoronic 
in the current climate, but we want as many readers as possible, but we do not care a whit about 
traffic." We believe this reader-first approach to publishing is a smart one for the news industry, 
and we hope others will see it as a model to followa€!

Plus two longer chunks:

Martin Wolf: The Fading Light of Liberal Democracy 
https://www.ft.com/content/47144c85-519a-4e25-9035-c5f8977cf6fd: a€~The election of Joe Biden as US 
president is a relief. But this story is not yet over...

a€!Branko Milanovic.  Capitalist economies go with two distinct political systems in leading 
economies: the a€celiberala€D model of the US and its allies, which is the concern of Messrs Garton 
Ash and Diamond, and Chinaa€™ s a€cepoliticala€D model. Mr Milanovic argues correctly that liberal 
democracy is a good in itself and also allows peaceful self-correction. People do desire freedom 
and US voters have disposed of Donald

Trump. The Chinese cannot do the same with Premier Xi Jinping....

A third political version of capitalism exists: demagogic authoritarian capitalism.  The ruler is 
above the law and democratically unaccountablea€’’elections are a sham. But power is personal, not 
institutionalised. This is corrupt gangster politics. It rests on the personal loyalty of 
sycophants and cronies. Often the core consists of the family members, viewed as most trustworthy 
of all. This is the political system Mr Trump wished to

install in the US. Such rulers are like wasp larvae that eat the spider from within. They manage to 
win an election and then erode the institutional and political bulwarks against indefinite personal 
rule....

Events in the US have shown two crucial things. First, core American institutions including the 
courts have resisted.  Second, a huge proportion of the Republican party has abetted his lie that 
the election was rigged. This has underlined another reality of the past four years: the Republican 
leadership showed absolute obedience to their leader, almost to the last gasp. This is no accident. 
It is the logical outcome of the political and

economic strategy of the a€oepluto-populista€D. Mr Trump is a natural outcome of the strategic goal 
of the donor classa€”tax cuts and deregulation. To achieve this end, they have to convince a large 
proportion of the population to vote against its economic interests by focusing on culture and 
identity. This strategy has worked and will continue to work: Mr Trump may have gone; Trumpism has 
not. Not entirely dissimilar patterns can
be seen in Brexit Britain....

None of todaya€™ s dominant systems is working well. Capitalism is innovative, but creates huge 
social, political and environmental challenges. Liberal democracy is corroded, even at its core. 
But the authoritarian politics that challenge it are vastly worse. Unaccountable rule by gangsters 
or brutal bureaucrats is deeply depressing, even if the latter are much less incompetent. Those of 
us who continue to believe in freedom and
democracy hope Mr Trump was the warning we all needed. But I doubt it. There is none so blind as 
rich egotists who will not seea€!

David French: Debunking the Frivolous & Dangerous Last-Gasp Effort to Overturn the Election 
https://frenchpress.thedispatch.eom/p/debunking-the-frivolous-and-dangerous-8a0: a€~One of the most 
dispiriting aspects of a dispiriting year has been watching the supremely cynical post-election 
contest by conservative lawyers and conservative politicians who know exactly what theya€™re 
doinga€!

a€!Intimidated by Trump and desperate for the approval of Trumpa€™ s base, they have lent their own 
gravitas to utterly frivolous arguments, used their platforms to falsely whip up public concerns 
about election integrity, and then used the concerns they helped create as the justification for 
continuing a fruitless fight. I could point to any number of public figures, but leta€™ s focus for 
a moment on twoa€”Sen. Josh Hawley and talk
radio host Mark Levin....

"Issues of mere administration of a general election do not mean there has not been a 'general 
ballot' at a 'general election.' Plaintiffa€™ s conflation of these potential nonconformities with 
Constitutional violations is contrary to the plain meaning of the Electors Clause. If plaintiffa€™ 
s reading of 'Manner' was correct, any disappointed loser in a Presidential election, able to hire 
a team of clever lawyers, could flag claimed deviations
from the election rules and cast doubt on the election results. This would risk turning every 
Presidential election into a federal court lawsuit over the Electors Clause.")...

The time to challenge election procedures is well before the election, not after. In fact, this is 
a matter of basic election precedent. a€oeBefore a court can contemplate entering a judgment that 
would void election results,a€D Judge Scudder wrote, a€oeit a€~must consider whether the plaintiffs 
filed a timely pre-election request for relief.a€D... The 7th Circuit Court of Appeals isna€™t the 
ultimate authority on Wisconsin law. neither is

the junior senator from Missouri. But he knows this. So does Mark Levin. It must be emphasized that 
both of these men are smart, capable lawyers. And while they may be drinking so much of their own 
Kool-Aid that theya€™re now believing their own nonsense, I doubt it. And if they do believe their 
own nonsense, their lapse in judgment is inexcusable....

Ben Sasse.... When we talk in private, I havena€™ t heard a single Congressional Republican allege 
that the election results were fraudulentaC not one. Instead, I hear them talk about their worries 
about how they will look to President Trumpa€™ s most ardent supporters.  We have a bunch of 
ambitious politicians who think therea€™ s a quick way to tap into the presidenta€™ s populist base 
without doing any real, long-term

damage. But theya€™ re wronga€“and this issue is bigger than anyonea€™ s personal ambitions. Adults 
dona€™ t point a loaded gun at the heart of legitimate self-governmenta€!


The   VICE   PRESIDENT.   Hearing

none,  this  certificate  from  Alaska,  the
Parliamentarian has advised me, is the

The   VICE   PRESIDENT.   Are   there
any  objections  to  counting  the  certifi­
cate  of  vote  of  the  State  of  Arizona


only  certificate  of  vote  from  that  State
that  purports  to  be  a  return  from  the
State  and  that  has  annexed  to  it  a  cer­
tificate  from  an  authority  of  the  State
purporting   to   appoint   and   ascertain
electors.

Ms.  LOFGREN.  Mr.  President,  the

certificate  of  the  electoral  vote  of  the
State  of  Alaska  seems  to  be  regular  in
form   and   authentic,   and   it   appears
therefrom  that  Donald  J.  Trump  of  the
State    of  Florida  received  3  votes  for
President  and  MICHAEL  R.  PENCE  of  the
State   of  Indiana  received  3  votes  for
Vice President.

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Are  there

any  objections  to  counting  the  certifi­
cate  of  vote  of  the  State  of  Alaska  that
the  teller  has  verified  appears  to  be
regular in form and authentic?

There was no objection.

The   VICE   PRESIDENT.   Hearing
none,  this  certificate  from  Arizona,  the

Pa.rlinmpnt.firiari has a.dvispH mp is fhp

that  the  teller  has  verified  appears  to

be regular in form and authentic?

Mr.  GOSAR.  Mr.  Vice  President,  I,
PAUL  GOSAR  from  Arizona,  rise  for  my­
self  and  60  of  my  colleagues  to  object
to  the  counting  of  the  electoral  ballots
from Arizona.

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  Is  the  objec­
tion  in  writing  and  signed  by  a  Sen­
ator?

Mr. GOSAR. Yes, it is.
Senator CRUZ. It is.

The  VICE  PRESIDENT.  An  objection

presented  in  writing  and  signed  by  both
a  Representative  and  a  Senator  com­
plies  with  the  law,  chapter  1  of  title  3,
United States Code.

The Clerk will report the objection.

The   Clerk   read   the   objection   as
follows:

OBJECTION TO COUNTING THE ELECTORAL
VOTES OF THE STATE OF ARIZONA

We,  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Representa-

and   a   TTrnf.prl   St.nf.pR   Rpnnf.nr   nhipnt   f.n


cate oi vote oi tne ouate oi AiasKa inau

the  teller  has  verified  appears  to  be
regular in form and authentic?

There was no objection.

The   VICE   PRESIDENT.   Hearing
none,  this  certificate  from  Arizona,  the
Parliamentarian  has  advised  me,  is  the
only   certificate  of  vote  that  the  State
purports  to  be  a  return  from  the  State

and  that  has  annexed  to  it  a  certificate

iiie Pieris. win report tne uujeutioii.

The   Clerk   read   the   objection   as
follows:

OBJECTION TO COUNTING THE ELECTORAL
VOTES OF THE STATE OF ARIZONA

We,  a  Member  of  the  House  of  Representa­
tives  and  a  United  States  Senator,  object  to
the  counting  of  the  electoral  votes  of  the
State  of  Arizona  on  the  ground  that  they
were   not,   under   all   of   the   known   cir­


from  an  authority  of  that  State  pur­
porting  to  appoint  or  ascertain  elec­

cumstances, regularly given.

PAUL GOSAR,


tors.

Senator   KLOBUCHAR.   Mr.   Presi­
dent,   the   certificate   of   the   electoral
vote  of  the  State  of  Arizona  seems  to
be  regular  in  form  and  authentic,  and
it   appears   therefrom   that   Joseph   R.
Biden,  Jr.,  of  the  State  of  Delaware  re­
ceived   11   votes   for   President   and
KAMALA  D. HARRIS  of the State of Cali­
fornia  received  11  votes  for  Vice  Presi­
dent.

Representative, State of Arizona.

TED CRUZ,

Senator, State of Texas.


V                                                                        W^W W^. V

it   appears   therefrom   that   Joseph   R.
Biden,  Jr.,  of  the  State  of  Delaware  re­
ceived   11   votes   for   President   and
KAMALA  D. HARRIS  of the State of Cali­
fornia  received  11  votes  for  Vice  Presi­
dent.

