Subscribe now

FOCUS: Components of A%e Grand Narrative of A%e 21st Century: Global Warming, & China Stands Up:

I made a decision fairly early in writing Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> that there were 
two important processesa€’’global warming, and the rise of China to whatever
its ultimate position in the world will turn out to bea€”were parts of the story of the 21st 
century, and did not belong in my grand narrative of a long 20th century that began in
1870. Jeremy Wallace seems to me to have by far the most intelligent disagreement with that 
decision of mine:

Jeremy Wallace: Slouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (of Neoliberalism): a€~Ia€! have a hard time reading 
a history of the long twentieth century while
ensconced in my position well into a 21st century where it seems increasingly clear that climate 
and China are central if not the main charactersa€!. Taking
China more seriously as not just a major player in the world going forward but as a causal force in 
the global turn towards neoliberalism as well as its
current demise (?) is a missed opportunitya€!.

The a€oeThirty Glorious Years of Social Democracya€Da€l phrasing is very common and, in some ways, 
not wronga€!. This was a period of vast
improvement, relatively well-distributed. On the other hand, different perspectives (*cough* China 
*cough*) might view this time period as less congenial.
One  could argue that the famine of Chinaa€™ s Great Leap Forward is, next to World War II itself, 
the second greatest devastation humanity has suffered
since the Black Death. Forty million Chinese are killeda€!.

Great forces of economics and politics reshap[ed] the worlda€! pushing forward neoliberalism from 
the social democracy that came before ita€L More
could be done to acknowledge China as an agent in that story with particularly underexamined 
powera€!. Early shifts away from Maoist planning helped to
cement hegemonic beliefs in markets in the field of economics. The (Chinese) left wasna€™ t just 
devoid of ideas, it was actively switching sidesa€!. That
rapid development in China was seen by modernization theorists and Western politicians as likely to 
produce shifts in Chinese political dynamics towards
greater freedoms helped provide cover for investments that could have been more tarred as disloyal 
to the home country. The idea that these investments
might have positive political externalities smoothed thema€!.

Delong argues against a simple a€oeChina shocka€D understanding of this dynamic where China stole 
American jobs leading to backlash:
a€oeHyperglobalizationa€™ s principal effect was to cause not a decline in blue-collar jobs but a 
roll of the wheel from one type of blue-collar job to
anothera€”from assembly-line production to truck-driving and pallet-moving distribution, plus, for 
a while, construction.a€Da€l I concur, trade with
China generated broad but diffuse benefits, principally through cheaper goods to consumers across a 
range of products, while the costs of the trade
remained relatively narrow but deepa€!.

Chinaa€™ s undercutting of neoliberalism also comes from its presentation of an alternative system 
of political economy with substantially more state
involvementa€! Keynesian stimulusa€! industrial policy for favored firms and sectorsa€!. Ia€™ m not 
suggesting that a world shifting away from
neoliberalism  will be moving more quickly to utopiaa€!. As likely as nota€! wea€™ll fall deeper 
into morasses of identity-based violence, isolationism,
beggar  thy neighbor policies, and wara€!

The China Lab newsletter

Slouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (of Neoliberalism)

Brad Delong writes a lot, he writes well, and he writes on the internet. And so offering a snippet 
review of one slice of his magnum opus Slouching Towards Utopia, an undoubtedly
impressive and absolutely engaging piece of scholarship of the long 20th century, feels a bit like 
picking a fight with a person who buys (interneta€!

Read more

3 months ago A- Jeremy Wallace
Share

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


