Subscribe now

The inadequate response to the Great Recession reflects policymakersa€™ acceptance of Milton 
Friedmana€™ s analysis of the Great Depression. And yet the dominance of Friedmand€™ s monetarism 
has less to do with the evidence supporting it than with the fact that economics is all too often 
tainted by
politics:

FRED — Velocity of Money Stock for United States

5.0


FRED 2^ — Velocity of

M2 Money

FRED^

11

10

9

8

7

M1 Money
Stock

AA


1.0

1975            2000

Share

BERKELEYa€ ’’Ideas matter. That is the lesson of Hall of Mirrors, the American economist Barry 
Eichengreena€™ s chronicle of the two biggest economic crises of the past 100 years: the twentieth 
centurya€™ s Great Depression and the ongoing Great Recession, from which we are still struggling
ineffectually to recover.

Eichengreen is my friend, teacher, and patron, and his book is to my mind the best explanation to 
date of why policymakers in Europe and the United States have reacted to the most dramatic economic 
collapse in almost four generations with half-hearted measures and half-finished interventions.
According to Eichengreen, the Great Depression and the Great Recession are related. The inadequate 
response to our current troubles can be traced to the triumph of the monetarist disciples of Milton 
Friedman over their Keynesian and Minskyite peers in describing the history of the Great 
Depression. In A

Monetary History of the United States, published in 1963, Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz 
famously argued that the Great Depression was due solely and completely to the failure of the US 
Federal Reserve to expand the countrya€™ s monetary base and thereby keep the economy on a path of 
stable
growth. Had there been no decline in the money stock, their argument goes, there would have been no 
Great Depression.

This interpretation makes a certain kind of sense, but it relies on a critical assumption. Friedman 
and Schwartza€™ s prescription would have worked only if interest rates and what economists call 
the a€oevelocity of money a€Da€’’the rate at which money changes handsa€”were largely independent 
of one
another. What is more likely, however, is that the drop in interest rates resulting from the 
interventions needed to expand the countrya€™ s supply of money would have put a brake on the 
velocity of money, undermining the proposed cure. In that case, ending the Great Depression would 
have also required the
fiscal expansion called for by John Maynard Keynes and the supportive credit-market policies 
prescribed by Hyman Minsky.

The debate over which interventions would be needed to put a halt to something like the Great 
Depression should have been a simple matter of analyzing the evidence. In economic hard times, did 
interest rates have little impact on the velocity of money, as Friedman suggested? Was Keynes 
correct when he
described the concept of a liquidity trap, a situation in which easing monetary policy further 
proves ineffective? Is the stock of money in an economy an adequate predictor of total spending, as 
Friedman claimed, or is the smooth functioning of credit channels a more important factor, as 
Minsky argued?

These questions can be debated. But it is fairly clear that even in the 1970s there was not enough 
empirical evidence in support of Friedmana€™ s ideas to justify their growing dominance. And, 
indeed, there can be no denying the fact that Friedmana€™ s cure proved to be an inadequate 
response to the Great
Recessiona€’’strongly suggesting that it would have fallen similarly short had it been tried during 
the Great Depression.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

The dominance of Friedmana€™ s ideas at the beginning of the Great Recession has less to do with 
the evidence supporting them than with the fact that the science of economics is all too often 
tainted by politics. In this case, the contamination was so bad that policymakers were unwilling to 
go beyond
Friedman and apply Keynesian and Minskyite policies on a large enough scale to address the problems 
that the Great Recession presented.

Admitting that the monetarist cure was inadequate would have required mainstream economists to swim 
against the neoliberal currents of our age. It would have required acknowledging that the causes of 
the Great Depression ran much deeper than a technocratic failure to manage the money supply 
properly.
And doing that would have been tantamount to admitting the merits of social democracy and 
recognizing that the failure of markets can sometimes be a greater danger than the inefficiency of 
governments. 2 The result was a host of policies based not on evidence, but on inadequately 
examined ideas. And we
are still paying the price for that intellectual failure today.

LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/friedman-ideas-great-recession-by-j—bradford-delong-20
15-Q3>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

