
Arnold Schwarzenegger: Governor Schwarzeneggera€™ s Message Following This Weeka€™s Attack on the 
Capitol

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Joshua Gans: B.l.1.7: a€~B.1.1.7 has an advantagea€! when the mitigation strategies are in 
placea€! [in] getting around them.  The fight against B.l.1.7 requires the places that have been 
the most vigilant need

more action. It is hard to know what that isa€! LINK: <https://ioshuagans.substack.com/p/b 117>

•  Nora Caplan-Bricker: An Overlooked Novel from 1935 by the Godmother of Feminist Detective 
Fiction'. a€~A new group biography establishes Dorothy L. Sayersa€™ s a€oeGaudy Nighta€D as a 
forerunner of
works by Gillian Flynn and Tana Frencha€! LINK: chttps ://www.ne 
wyorker.com/books/under-review/an-overlooked-novel-from-1935-bv-the-godmother-of-feminist-detective-
fiction>

• Annalee Newitz: What Ancient Roman Hospitality Workers Can Teach Us About This Moment in History 
<https://thehvpothesis.substack.com/p/what-ancient-roman-hospitalitv-workersa€!

• Ben Sasse: a€~Many party leaders and consultants thought they could preach the Constitution while 
winking at QAnon. They cana€™ t. The GOP must reject conspiracy theories or be consumed by them. 
Now is
the time to decide what this party is abouta€! LINK: 
<https://uphill.thedispatch,com/p/biden-cabinet-inauguration-gop-future>

• Acropolis Museum: Digital Museum: a€~The Acropolis Museum enters dynamically into the world of 
digital technology and opens new channels of communication with the publica€! LINK:
chttps: //w ww.theacropolismuseum .gr/en/digital-museum>

Seven Paragraphs-Plus for Dinnertime:

Anna Akhmatova: From a€~Requiema€™ : a€~During the years of the Yezhovschina, I spent seventeen 
months standing outside the prison in Leningrad, waiting for news. One day someone recognized me. 
Then a woman
with lips blue from the cold, who was standing behind me, and of course had never heard of my name, 
came out of the numbness which affected us all. She whispered in my ear (for we all spoke in 
whispers there): a€oeCan
you describe this?a€D I said, a€oel can.a€D Then something resembling a smile slipped over what had 
once been her facea€! LINK

Ken Untener: Prophets of a Future Not Our Own : a€~It helps, now and then, to step back and take a 
long view. The kingdom is not only beyond our efforts, it is even beyond our vision. We accomplish 
in our lifetime only a
tiny fraction of the magnificent enterprise that is Goda€™ s work. Nothing we do is complete, which 
is a way of saying that the Kingdom always lies beyond us. No statement says all that could be 
said. No prayer fully
expresses our faith. No confession brings perfection. No pastoral visit brings wholeness. No 
program accomplishes the Churcha€™ s mission. No set of goals and objectives includes everything. 
This is what we are about.

We plant the seeds that one day will grow. We water seeds already planted, knowing that they hold 
future promise. We lay foundations that will need further development. We provide yeast that 
produces far beyond our
capabilities. We cannot do everything, and there is a sense of liberation in realizing that. This 
enables us to do something, and to do it very well. It may be incomplete, but it is a beginning, a 
step along the way, an opportunity
for   the Lorda€™ s grace to enter and do the rest.

We may never see the end results, but that is the difference between the master builder and the 
worker. We are workers, not master builders; ministers, not messiahs.
We are prophets of a future not our own. LINK

Rosa Luxemburg: The Russian Revolution: a€~The socialist system of society should only be, and can 
only be, an historical product, born out of the school of its own experiences, born in the course 
of its realization, as a
result of the developments of living historya€!. Socialism by its very nature cannot be decreed or 
introduced by ukasea€!. The negative, the tearing down, can be decreed; the building up, the 
positive, cannot. New Territory.
A thousand problems. Only experience is capable of correcting and opening new ways. Only 
unobstructed, effervescing life falls into a thousand new forms and improvisations, brings to light 
creative new force, itself corrects
all mistaken attempts.

The public life of countries with limited freedom is so poverty-stricken, so miserable, so rigid, 
so unfruitful, precisely because, through the exclusion of democracy, it cuts off the living 
sources of all spiritual riches and
progressa€!. Otherwise, socialism will be decreed from behind a few official desks by a dozen 
intellectualsa€!. Life dies out in every public institution, becomes a mere semblance of life, in 
which only the bureaucracy
remains     as the active element. Public life gradually falls asleep, a few dozen party leaders of 
inexhaustible energy and boundless experience direct and rule. Among them, in reality only a dozen 
outstanding heads do the
leading  and an elite of the working class is invited from time to time to meetings where they are 
to applaud the speeches of the leaders, and to approve proposed resolutions unanimouslya€“at 
bottom, then, a clique affaira€“a
dictatorship, to be sure, not the dictatorship of the proletariat but only the dictatorship of a 
handful of politicians, that is a dictatorship in the bourgeois sense, in the sense of the rule of 
the Jacobins (the postponement of the
Soviet Congress from three-month periods to six-month periods!)

Yes, we can go even further: such conditions must inevitably cause a brutalization of public life: 
attempted assassinations, shooting of hostages, etca€! LINK: 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1918/russian-
revolution/ch06 .htm>

Noah Smith: Short Thoughts on the Insurrection: a€~I think Republicans who still support the 
insurrectionistsa€”or who are still on the fencea€”are motivated not by hate but by fear. To 
understand the mind of American
conservatives, you have to understand the constant diet of fear that they consume every day. For 
decades, right-wing talk shows and Fox News have understood that they could get conservatives to 
tune in by constantly
pumping                                                                                             
      up the feara€”fear of a War on Christmas, fear of gay culture, fear of terrorism, fear of 
Black crime, fear fear fear. During the Trump Era, the chief bugaboos have been A) wokeness, B) 
immigration, and C) antifa.
To be a conservative in America is to exist in a constant state of having people trying to scare 
you.

Now, in the era of Trumpist insurrection, the chief threat that the fearmongers are hawking is that 
Republicans and conservatives will become a persecuted class in Americaa€!.. Some Republicans will 
see this threatening
warning and think a€oeEhh, thata€™ s hysteria; leta€™ s focus on the real threat of insurrection 
and then things will be back to normal.a€D But some will think a€oeOMG ita€™ s truea€!. Ia€™m going 
to be hunted and
persecuted in my own country just because Ia€™ m a conservative^!. Who can protect me from this 
terror?a€D And for many, the only possible answer to the question of a€oeWho can protect me from 
this terror?a€D will
be a€oeTrump, and the people who stormed the Capitola€D. Having been told that the institutions of 
America are an existential threat to them, they will cling to the only force they feel might be 
capable of protecting
thema€!.

All the insurrectionists have to do to retain Republican support is to keep pumping up the threat, 
and keep presenting themselves as the only port in the storm. And some Republicans, tragically, 
will cling ever tighter to the
very monster that is at their throatsa€! LINK 
<https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/insurrection-thoughts-113>


Noah Smith: Short Thoughts on the Insurrection'. a€~I think Republicans who still support the 
insurrectionistsa€”or who are still on the fencea€”are motivated not by hate but by fear. To 
understand the mind of American
conservatives, you have to understand the constant diet of fear that they consume every day. For 
decades, right-wing talk shows and Fox News have understood that they could get conservatives to 
tune in by constantly
pumping                                                                                             
      up the feara€”fear of a War on Christmas, fear of gay culture, fear of terrorism, fear of 
Black crime, fear fear fear. During the Trump Era, the chief bugaboos have been A) wokeness, B) 
immigration, and C) antifa.
To be a conservative in America is to exist in a constant state of having people trying to scare 
you.

Now, in the era of Trumpist insurrection, the chief threat that the fearmongers are hawking is that 
Republicans and conservatives will become a persecuted class in Americaa€!.. Some Republicans will 
see this threatening
warning and think a€oeEhh, thata€™ s hysteria; leta€™ s focus on the real threat of insurrection 
and then things will be back to normal.a€D But some will think a€oeOMG ita€™ s truea€!. Ia€™m going 
to be hunted and
persecuted in my own country just because Ia€™ m a conservative^!. Who can protect me from this 
terror?a€C And for many, the only possible answer to the question of a€oeWho can protect me from 
this terror?a€D will
be a€oeTrump, and the people who stormed the Capitola€D. Having been told that the institutions of 
America are an existential threat to them, they will cling to the only force they feel might be 
capable of protecting
thema€!.

All the insurrectionists have to do to retain Republican support is to keep pumping up the threat, 
and keep presenting themselves as the only port in the storm. And some Republicans, tragically, 
will cling ever tighter to the
very monster that is at their throatsa€! LINK 
<https://noahpinion.substack.com/p/insurrection-thoughts-113>

Tom Snyder: The American Abyss: a€~When we give up on truth, we concede power to those with the 
wealth and charisma to create spectacle in its place. Without agreement about some basic facts, 
citizens cannot form the
civil society that would allow them to defend themselves. If we lose the institutions that produce 
facts that are pertinent to us, then we tend to wallow in attractive abstractions and fictions. 
Truth defends itself particularly
poorly when there is not very much of it around.... Social media... supercharges the mental habits 
by which we seek emotional stimulation and comfort, which means losing the distinction between what 
feels true and what
actually is truea€! LINK: chttps://www.nytimes .com/2021/01/09/magazine/trump-coup.html>

Haley Bird Wilt: The Consequences of Lying to People: a€~Republican lawmakers misled millions of 
people into believing the results of a legitimate election could be overturned. Many of them viewed 
contesting the
outcome as a relatively easy way to gain political currency among Trump supporters, knowing all the 
while that their efforts would have no real impact on who will be sworn into office in two weeks. 
The deceptiona€”
primarily led by Trump, yet enabled by members of Congressa€”set the stage for the violence that 
unfolded at the Capitol Wednesday. Four people died....

The normally dry procedural affair of counting of the Electoral College votes was viewed by 
everyday Republicans and zealots alike as the place to make a final stand to overturn the 
electiona€”even though elected
Republicans knew the outcome would ultimately remain unchanged. As my colleague Jonah writes this 
morning, a€oeConvincing people they need to prevent a coup when no such coup exists is a recipe for 
violence,a€D
This  was the energy that fueled the horde on Wednesdaya€! LINK: 
<https://uphill.thedispatch.eom/p/the-consequences-of-lying-to-people>

Scott Alexander: Still Alive: a€~513,000 people read my blog post complaining about the New York 
Timesa€™ attempt to dox me (for comparisona€!. So many people cancelled their subscription that the 
Timesa€™
exasperated customer service agents started pre-empting callers with a€oels this about that blog 
thing?a€Da€! I got emails from no fewer than four New York Times journalists expressing sympathy 
and offering to explain
their papera€™ s standards in case that helped my cause. All four of them gave totally different 
explanations, disagreeing about whether the reporter I dealt with was just following the rules, was 
flagrantly violating the rules,
was unaffected by any rules, or what. Seems like a fun place to work. I was nevertheless humbled by 
their supporta€!.

Someone who knows New York Times reporters says the guy on my case was their non-hit-piece guy; 
they have a different reporter for hatchet jobs. After I torched the blog in protest, they seem to 
have briefly flirted with
turning it into a hit piece, and the following week they switched to interviewing everyone who 
hated me and asking a lot of leading questions about potentially bad things I dida€!.

I think the New York Times wanted to write a fairly boring article about me, but some guideline 
said they had to reveal subjectsa€™ real identities, if they knew them, unless the subject was in 
one of a few predefined
sympathetic categories (eg sex workers). I did get to talk to a few sympathetic people from the 
Times, who were pretty confused about whether such a guideline existed, and certainly ita€™ s 
honored more in the breach than
in   the observance (eg Virgil Texas)a€!.

I had a phobia of being doxxed. But psychotherapy classes also teach you to not to let past traumas 
control your life even after theya€™ ve stopped being relevant. Was I getting too worked up over an 
issue that no longer
mattered? The New York Times thought so. Some people kept me abreast of their private discussions 
(in Soviet America, newspapera€™ s discussions get leaked to you!) and their reporters had spirited 
internal debates about
whether                                                                                             
       I really needed anonymity. Sure, Ia€™ d gotten some death threats, but everyone gets death 
threatsa€!. Sure, I might get SWATted, but realistically thata€™ s a really scary fifteen seconds 
before the cops apologize
and go away. Sure, my job was at risk, but I was a well-off person and could probably get 
anothera€!.

In the New York Timesa€™ worldview, they start with the right to dox me, and I had to earn the 
right to remain anonymous by proving Ia€™ m the perfect sympathetic victim who satisfies all their 
criteria of victimhooda€!. I
dona€™ t think anyone at the Times bore me ill will, at least not originally. But somehow that just 
made it even more infuriatinga€!

Leave a comment
Share

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

