Subscribe now

Editors' Picks: Best History

Find your next favorite read through the Amazon Editors' top book picks.

RAZOR
03

1HE UZIS FORIHESS PRISDR

ALAN C7 MACK          BEN MACINTYRE

fir Fill MU IISIIILLIIC 1H1I1 IF

iMirm mewu in HI nr HI UI IHHII


American Demon: Eliot
Ness and the Hunt for

Daniel Stashower

Kindle Edition

$ 1 4" $20.99

* * * * ☆ (58)

Razor 03: A Night
Stalker's Wars

Alan C. Mack

Hardcover

$2267 $34.95

* * * * * (2)

Prisoners of the Castle:
An Epic Story of Survival

Ben Macintyre

Kindle Edition

5" $28.99

* * * * if (63)

Slouching Towards
Utopia: An Economic

Bradford DeLong

Kindle Edition

$1 9" $35.00

* * * * ☆ (39)

A Man of Iron: The
Turbulent Life and

Troy Senik

Kindle Edition

$16"

* * * * * (7)

FIRST: Amazon Editora€™s Pick: Best History:

<https://www.amazon.com/gp/browse.html7rw useCurrentProtocol=l&node=l72767960 ll&ref =amb 
link_oitSVy9qS5SJ5N!KElWmyg_6>

<bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

And the Adam Tooze Review in the a€ceFinancial Timesa€D:

This is a wonderful treat for me, and a great pleasure to see:

Adam Tooze: Fueling Americaa€™ s Global Dream: a€~This duality of production and destruction gives 
the 20th century a claim to be the most radical ina€! history of our speciesa€!. Grand 
narrative.a€!Hobsbawma€! organised his accounta€! the rise and fall of the Soviet projecta€!. 
Milanovica€! globalisation, deglobalisation and reglobalisationa€!. DeLonga€™ s version of the 20th 
century is more parochiala€! centred on the
political battles that raged around the growth regime of modern American capitalism and continue to 
shape policy debate in governments and central banks today. This is, you might say, the in-house, 
post-Clintonian history of the 20th centurya€!.


The first British-centred industrial revolutiona€! by modern standards it proceeded at a snaila€™ s 
pace. The American-led growth phasea€! was differenta€!. The laboratory, the corporation and 
globalisation. Migration enabled tens of millions to raise their standard of living. Global 
investment put them to work. From the laboratory poured forth the magic of modern technologya€!. 
The ensemble acquired such momentum that it
promised to give history a deterministic logic dominated bya€! economic development [that] would 
realise utopia in the sense of freedom from want. Buta€! the liberal development engine was 
fragilea€!. On the question of whethera€! [WWI] was itself the result of combined and uneven 
economic development, or nationalist passion and happenstance, DeLong prevaricates...

Oooh! This is going to be fun! I can see I am going to have a lot to say!
At this point, I would like to stop and make two points:

1/ a€ceParochiala€D. Yes and no. Yes, in that Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> is a 
history written by someone who when younger thought he was engaged in restoring and perfecting 
American social democracy a€’’reviving the New Deal Ordera€”under cover of Left-Neoliberal sheepa€™ 
s clothing, and is still trying to figure out what went wrong. No, to the extent that you believe 
with Leon Trotskya€™ s that in the 20th century America was
a€oethe furnace where the future was being forge da€D. Since I do agree with Lev Davodovich from 
Yanovka here, I assert that my parochial perspective is in fact the general and universal one.

2/ a€oe[WWI]a€! result[ing from]a€! combined and uneven economic development, or nationalist 
passion and happenstancea€!a€D PORQUE NO LOS DOS?


•  a€oeHappenstancea€D in the sense of traditional A©lites fearing that they were on the downside 
of Schumpeterian creative-destruction, and desperate to demonstrate that they still had (or perhaps 
find a new) social role by leading a Short Victorious War.

•  a€oeNationalist passiona€D in that, as Ernest Gellner stressed most stridently, nationalism was 
the preeminent popular response to Schumpeterian creative-destruction: Find yourself in a world in 
which a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the marketa€D is the 
Gospel and property rights are the only rights that mattera€”the only source of social power? Then 
ethno-nationalist mobilization against the rootless-
cosmpolite princes of the market seems the best road to vindicating your Polanyian rights to 
Zaw<Za€”the community and built environment you deservea€”^nancea€’’stability of the money flows 
that support your occupation and, indeed, your community, industry, and livelihoods’’and labors 
’’vindicate your right to the income and status and respected social role that you deserve (and 
also vindicate your right to keep the others from gaining more
income and status and respect than they deserve).

•  Thus a€oenationalist passiona€D is the response to a€ recombined and uneven developments□a€”to 
the technology-driven Schumpeterian creative-destruction that doubles the potential wealth of 
humanity every generation, but at the cost of grinding sectors, industries, livelihoods, 
occupations, and communities into dust.

•  And do not forget Social Darwinism: if you are to justify market-produced individual inequality 
as harsh for the individual but progressive for the race, it is only a very small step from 
applauding market struggle and the flourishing of the ScefittestSD to applauding military struggle.

And as for John Maynard Keynesa€™ s beliefa€”wisha€”hopea€”that wiser technocrats before WWI could 
have prevented and wiser technocrats after WWI could have stabilized pseudo-classical 
semi-liberalism and kept humanity on a largely peaceful road to El Dorado? He did claim that the 
ruling point-of-view was a belief that the progressive

state of affairs [was]a€! normal, certain and permanenta€’’except in the direction of further 
improvement[, with] any deviation from ita€! aberrant, scandalous and avoidable. The projects and 
politics of militarism and imperialism, of racial and cultural rivalries, of monopolies, 
restrictions and exclusion, which were to play the serpent to this paradise, were little more than 
the amusements of his daily newspapera€!

Had I actually written this book during the 1994-2000 years when I thought that someone should 
write it, I should have agreed with Keynes that the problem of rewriting the econo-social 
relations-of-production software running on top of the massively transformed technology-driven 
forces-of-production hardware in such a way as to avoid catastrophe should have been possible. And 
I might have been triumphalist that we had finally gotten it right in a 1990s
Frank Fukuyama vein.

But not anymore. Not now.
Share

Must-Reads:


A Comment on Kevin Druma€™ s a€oeTechnical Prefacea€D.                                              
                                                                                              iBrad 
DeLong's Grasping Reality

JJllillLyi2L!£^inJ)nimjiereJiyu)refaceJoJiisj^viewj)fjnyJlouchingJI(^^


Read more

5 months ago A- Brad DeLong
And:

Dambisa Moyo: Why US Inflation Is Headed Down: a€~Supply-chain disruptionsa€! Chinaa€™ sa€! 
zero-COVIDa€! the Russia-Ukraine wara€! largely fall outside of what the Fed can control. The US 
economy, however, is uniquely positioned to overcome this particular species of inflation, owing to 
its relative energy and food independence, abundance of immigrant labor, strong production 
capacity, and access to the capital needed
to maintain and increase domestic manufacturing^!. There are already signs that US inflation might 
be coolinga€!. Core inflationa€! fell to 5.9% in July from a high of 6.5% in March, before rising 
again in Augusta€!. That said, we cannot expect inflation to return to the Feda€™ s target of 2% 
anytime soon. But we can expect inflation to stabilized!. It is hard to find another economy that 
can match what the US offers: ample natural
resources, effective governance, a history of immigration, and a global reserve currency. That is 
an ideal inflation-busting toolbox. By comparison, most other countries are far more dependent on 
the global economy. In today a€™ s world, that leaves them more exposeda€!

This seems to me to make sense. But it may well be that Vladimir Putin has changed the situation, 
so that not even a clever navigator can find a path between the Scylla of depression and secular 
stagnation, and the Charybdis of unmanaged and persistent inflation.
Share Brad DeLong1 s Grasping Reality

Other Things I Note:

•  SubStack HQ: Announcing the all-new Substack Reader for web: a€~Read all your Substack 
subscriptionsa€”and morea€”in a clean, simple, and fast web reader. Everything stays in-sync with 
your Substack app for iOS. Want to add a publication from outside Substack? No problema€”just 
select a€ceAdd RSS feeda€D from the left sidebara€!

• Jeremy Reimer: A history of ARM, part 1: Building the first chip

•  Samuel Hammond: Nonprofits are under-theorized: a€~Te devolution of US politics into a jungle of 
waring activists, each claiming to be building the one true a€oemovement,a€n is a reflection of 
that same low church Protestant ethic. Ita€™ s enough to make me miss those old Anglican ladies and 
their triangular sandwichesa€!

• Matt Stoller: Congress to Vote on New Antitrust Laws This Week

• Nicole Chung: Do Authors Need an Online Platform?

•  Noah Smith: Why the UK is having an economic crisis: a€~Fortunately, the UK doesna€™ t have the 
other two things that make many emerging markets vulnerable to a currency crash: pegged exchange 
rates and foreign-currency debt...

•  Matt Yglesias: Beating climate change absolutely requires new technology: a€~When California 
votes to keep Diablo Canyon opena€! that does absolutely nothing to slow renewable buildout. And 
the idea that investments in hypothetical carbon capture technologies are preventing the deployment 
of already existing decarbonization technologies in the present day is just wronga€!

• Claudia Sahm: a€~The Fed has a choice: Core PCE in prior three months averaged 4.2% at an annual 
rate, about 2 percentage points above target, inflation has been high for a year and a half and 
expectations are anchored, pushing us into a global recession and social unrest is not worth it. 
ita€™ s not necessarya€!
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

