Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: California Peak Omicron

New confirmed cases of Covid-19 in New York, California, Florida and Michigan

Seven-day rolling average of new cases (per 100k)

California

Florida
Michigan

New York

2020                                                                                           2022

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from the Johns Hopkins CSSE.

Data updated January 21 2022 6.26pm GMT. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading
Share


First: 70,000 Years of Human Economic Growth, Briefly

Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

Technological
Ideas-Stock
Growth        Rate h

Technological
Ideas Stock

Level H (1870 = 1)

Average Annual Total Human Total Real
Real Income per Population L World Income

Capita y       (millions)     Y (billions)


-48000

-8000

-6000

-3000

-1000

800

1500

1770

1870

2010

2100

0.0011 %

0.011 %

0.013%

0.030%

0.061 %

0.022%

0.052%

0.149%

0.442%

2.125%

2.000%

0.0256

0.040

0.051

0.074

0.14

0.25

0.30

0.43

0.64

19.6

118.4

$1,200

$1,200

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

[

$900

$1,100

$1,300

$10,526

$58,518

2.5

15

50

170

240

500

750 I

1300

7600

9000

$1.20

$3.0

$14

$45

$153

$216

$450

$825

$1,690

$80,000

$526,665

70,000 years ago, back in the Early Paleolithic Age, there were perhaps 100,000 of wsa€”100,000 
East African plains apes who looked like us, moved like us, acted like us, talked like us, and from 
whom the overwhelming proportion of all of our heredity is derived. Yes, we have small admixtures 
(5%?) from other groups and subspecies and maybe even species, but overwhelmingly we are those
proto-hundred-thousand's children. Each of them who has living descendants today has a placea€”has 
an astronomical number of placesa€”on each of our <http://ancestry.com> family trees. (No, I do not 
believe that the Khoisan are in any sense a€oea separate creationa€U, diverging from those who 
became the rest of us 200,000 years agoa€”lots of back-and-forth gene flow over those

200,000 years.)

Back then we were culture-biology co-evolved herd animals. We gathered, we hunted (some), we 
protected ourselves, we made stone and wood tools, we understood our environment, we manipulated 
our environment, we communicated with each other, we cooperated and we fought, we talked, and we 
did the things that humans.

Flash-forward 20,000 years to 50,000 years ago, on the eve or possibly in the middle of our final 
radiation-migration out of the Horn of Africa and to the rest of Africa, and also across the Red 
Sea to the wider world. There were then, perhaps, one million of us. We had been very successful in 
amplifying our numbers, almost surely by crowding our near-cousins out of our common ecological


Our standard of living back then? If we had to slot it into emerging-markets standards of living in 
the world today, we might call it 3.50 dollars a day. Poverty, but not quite what the United 
Nations calls extreme poverty: natural resources were not scarce, our knowledge of our east African 
environment was profound, and we probably had to spend a little more than one-third of our waking 
hours
collecting 2000 calories plus essential nutrients each day, plus enough shelter and fire and 
clothing that we were not unduly wet or cold. We were buff: life was strenuous. But we were 
short-lived: a life expectancy at birth of perhaps 25-30, for hauling around a family in our 
then-semi-nomadic lifestyle was dangerous: life was strenuous. And we were in rough ecological 
balance. The level of our
technology? Normalized to our benchmark H(1870) = 1.0, that guessed standard of living and that 
guess at our then-numbers computes a level H(-48000) = 0.0256 back 50,000 years ago,

Flash-forward another 40,000 years, to 10,000 years ago, on the very eve of the invention/discovery 
of agriculture and of animal domestication. Things were much the same, save that there were then 
not one million of us in East Africa but rather perhaps two-and-a-half million of us, well, pretty 
much everywhere. Our living standards were much the same as they had been. We had better tools,
but they were of stone and wood, plus fur and fiber, and not yet metal: it was still the Mesolithic 
Age. Our knowledge of our environments”or rather environmentsa€”was more profound, and so was our 
power to manipulate them. But in each environment we lived in we found ourselves in rough 
ecological balance. As of 8000 BC the index H of human technological capabilities stands at

= 0.04.

Over the Paleolithic Era of stone and the Mesolithic Era of stone plus some pottery and textiles 
from 70 to 10 thousand years ago, the rate at which the stock of useful ideas about technology and 
organization was growing was 0.001% per yeara€”and, with standards of living stagnant at an average 
of $3.5 dollars a day or so, the rate of growth of human populations was twice that: 0.002% per
year, or 0.05% per generation: a typical generation would see, an average, 2000 people turn into 
2001. What if growth over the generations had been much faster? Then, given thea€”very slow, 0.001% 
per yeara€”rate of growth in useful ideas H, the population finds itself without sufficient 
resources to sustain itself and drops. What if growth over the generations had been much slower? The
population would find itself better-nourished, with children's immune systems less compromised and 
women ovulating more regularly, and population growth would have accelerated. Malthusian 
equilibrium thus kept population growing along with useful ideas, and the rate of growth of useful 
ideas was very slow.

Then, at the end of the gatherer-hunter age, comes the upward leap (or was it an upward leap) of 
the neolithica€”new stonea€’’revolution. The proportional rate of growth of ideas jumped up, 
massively, eleven-fold to 0.011% per year, during the -8000 to -6000 Neolithic Revolution: herding 
and agriculture were really good ideas. 2000 years after -8000 we are (poor) agriculturalists and
(unsophisticated) herders of barely domesticated animals, with a human population of perhaps 7 
million, but a lower living standard of perhaps 2.50 dollars a day, with an index d\_LS>(-6000) = 
0.051.

Why a near-tripling of population in 2000 years or so? Because living was easier when you were 
sedentary or semi-sedentary: you no longer had to carry babies substantial distances, and you could 
accumulate more useful stuff than you could personally carry. Plus even early agriculture and 
herding were very productive relative to what had come before. Since life was easier, more babies
survived to grow up and themselves reproduce.

Why a fall in the standard of living? Because population grew until humanity was once again in 
ecological balance, with population expanded to the environment's carrying capacity given 
technology and organization. But what keeps population from growing further? The fact that life has 
become harder again. But it became harder in a different way: agriculturalists are 
shortera€’’figure about
three inches, 7.5 centimetersa€’’malnourished, prone to endemic diseases, and vulnerable to plagues 
relative to gatherer-hunters. Biologically, it would seem much better to be a typical person in the 
gatherer-hunter than in the post-Neolithic Revolution agrarian age: your life expectancy is no 
less, your daily life presents you with more interesting and less boring cognitive problems, and 
you are
much more buff and swole.

Jared Diamond believesa€”or at least provokesa€”that the invention of agriculture was, as the title 
says, a bad mistaker: humans would be better-off had we remained gatherer-hunters.

Technological progressa€”the discovery, invention, development, deployment, and diffusion of useful 
and valuable ideas about how to manipulate nature and organize humansa€ ’’continued at 0.013% per 
year from -6000 to -3000, the end of the Stone and the start of the Literacy and Bronze Age .In the 
Bronze and then the Iron Age agriculture, craftwork, organization, literacy, and more advance
civilization: from -3000 to -1000, and then from -1000 BC to the year 1, we see H rise at first 
0.03% per year, and then 0.061% per year, with a year-1 human population of 170 million. St least 
half of that year-1 population was collected in three great empiresa€’’Roman, Parthian, and 
Hana€’’enforcing imperial peace, and together spanning Eurasia from what is now Vladivostok to 
Cadiz and
from  Hainan to Scotland.

Then comes further development of agriculture, craftwork, organization, literacy, civilization: by 
year 1 the index dl 1 h( 1) = 0.25, but our standard of living was not significantly higher, for 
there were now 170 million of us on the globe.

This is still a Malthusian Equilibrium', vast improvements in technological and organizational 
capabilities, from 0.4 to 0.43; but all of that improvement going to support a 70-fold increase in 
human population; and with only 1/70 the potential natural resources at their disposal, the typical 
peasant or craftsman in 1500 was able to use that technology to eek out roughly the same standard 
of living
as their predecessors 7.5 millennia before.

Now be careful: there is definitely a spurious precision here.

Even if we could gain universal assent as to technological capability in, say, ceramics and each of 
the other aspects of human productivity and creativity, squashing multi-dimensional objects down 
into a single one-dimensional index simply cannot be done. All we can say is that if there were an 
economy simple enough for such an index to be accurate, and if its levels of productivity
corresponded to those we assign to the real history, then its index of human technological and 
organizational capabilities would be our H.

Nevertheless, I find such a framework very useful as a metaphor in organizing my thoughts. The 
numbers assigned to H do carry meaning. Look at pottery in -8000, in year 1, and in 1500:

Technology in Ceramics, -8000 to 1500: Jomon,
Roman, Ming

John Maynard Keynes, however, would reject that the difference can be measured as quantitative. He 
said that the idea of doing so is a mistake: that any such quantitative measurement:

is a proposition of a similar character to the statement that Queen Victoria was a better queen but 
not a happier woman than Queen Elizabeth a€” a proposition not without meaning and not without 
interest, but unsuitable as material for the differential calculus. Our precision will be a mock 
precision if we try to use such partly vague and non-quantitative concepts as the
basis of a quantitative analysisa€!

Mock or not, I find such quantitative estimates useful for organizing my thinking. Queen Victoria 
does not appear to have been a much better queen than Queen Elizabeth. But, from all historical 
accounts, Gloriana appears to have been perhaps four times as happy a woman as the Widow of 
Windsor.

Then from la€”or, rather, from 165 or soa€”to 800 it looks like we get a definite downshift: the 
Late-Antiquity Pause. We do not get a further acceleration to more than 0.06%/year of technology 
growth. We get a fall to a rate of 0.2%/year, a slower rate of technology growth than humanity had 
seen since before the start of the Bronze Age. Something goes wrong. There is the crisis of the
Antonine Dynasty in the Roman Empire at one end, the collapse of the Han Empire at the other end, 
shortly followed by the collapse of the Parthian Empire and the Indo-Greek kingdoms under pressure 
a Sassanians, Kushans, Hephthalites, and others.

Instead of the near-tripling from the year 1 to the year 800 in population that the Axial Age of 
-1000 to 1 would have led us to expect, human population in 800 is less than 40% above population 
in the year 1. Ideas growtha€”and population growtha€”slowed drastically. From 1 to 1500, each 
person on the globe contributed only 1/6 as much to ideas growth. And it was still the case that


essentially all improvements in technology flowed through to increasing population, with 
essentially none flowing through to higher labor efficiency, productivity, and living standards tor 
the typical human.

The Late-Antiauitv Pause

Imperial Decline & Dark
Age

• Late Agrarian:

1-1500:

h=0.036%/year, g=0, n=0.072%/year

• Axial Agrarian:

-1000 to 1:

h=0.061%/year, g=0, n=0.122%/year

•  Why no further post-Axial growth
acceleration?

•  Why the late-antiquity pause—and
Dark Age?

The sources of the Late-Antiquity are a substantial mystery, surrounded by speculation, but with 
little in the way of solid knowledge.

But things then recover, somewhat: 800 to 1500 see technology growth recover to 0.05%/year. So 
progress in technological advance does, however, continue. By the year 1500 we have dl I b(1500) = 
0.43. But we also have 500 million humans, compared to the 170 million of year 1 or the 7 million 
of year -6000. Typical standards of living in 1500? They still seem much the same: still 2.5
dollars a day.

Thereafter come the really big changes. Thereafter comes the breakout:

• a growth rate of useful ideas of 0.15% per year during the 1500-1770 Imperial-Commercial 
Revolution Age.

• a growth rate of useful ideas of 0.44% per year during the 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution Age.

•  a growth rate of useful ideas of 2.06% per year during the post-1870 Modern Economic Growth Era.

•  a population explosion, and then a slowdown toward zero population growth as prosperity brings 
female education, female education brings greater female autonomy, and literate women with rights 
to own property find that there are other ways to gain and maintain social power than to try as 
hard as possible to become the mother of many sons and daughters.

In the speedup from 1500 to 1770 to 1870a€”over, first, the Imperial-Commercial Revolution and, 
second, the Industrial Revolution erasa€”our quantitative index H grows from 0.43 to 0.64 to 1.0. 
And this time there was some increase in typical standards of living: figure a world in 1870 with 
$3.50 a day per person, albeit much more unevenly distributed. But, still, the overwhelming bulk of
improvements in human technology and organization went to supporting a larger population: the 500 
million of 1500 had grown to 1.3 billion by 1870, as better living standards lowered death rates 
worldwide.

After 1870 came the explosion: from 1870 to 2010, in our era of Modern Economic Growth, our H has 
risen from 1.0 to 21.5. Our population has risen from 1.3 to 7.6 billion. And our resources from 
$3.5 to $32 a day: tenfold and more above what it was back in the Agrarian Age. If we have nota€”as 
we have nota€”used our remarkable technological power and wealth relative to all previous
human societies to build a utopia, that is on us.


One Picture: Overt Acts to Overthrow the Government of the United States by Fraud & Force


Donald J. Trump 0

@realDonaldTrump

If Vice President @Mike_Pence comes through for us,
we will win the Presidency. Many States want to
decertify the mistake they made in certifying

incorrect & even fraudulent numbers in a process
NOT approved by their State Legislatures (which it
must be). Mike can send it back!

©  This claim about election fraud is disputed

6:00 AM • Jan 6, 2021                                (

Donald J. Trumps

@realDonaldTrump

States want to correct their votes, which they now
know were based on irregularities and fraud, plus
corrupt process never received legislative approval.
All Mike Pence has to do is send them back to the
States, AND WE WIN. Do it Mike, this is a time for
extreme courage!

©  This claim about election fraud is disputed

1:17 PM • Jan 6, 2021


Q 269.3K Q 142.IK people are Tweeting about this                       (9 213.5K Q 85.8K people are 
Tweeting about this


Donald J. Trump O

@realDonaldTrump

The States want to redo their votes. They found out
they voted on a FRAUD. Legislatures never approved.
Let them do it. BE STRONG!

© This claim about election fraud is disputed

2:15 PM • Jan 6, 2021

© 218.3K Q 82.8K people are Tweeting about this

Donald J. Trump0

@realDonaldTrump

Mike Pence didn't have the courage to do what should
have been done to protect our Country and our
Constitution, giving States a chance to certify a
corrected      set of facts, not the fraudulent or

inaccurate ones which they were asked to previously
certify. USA demands the truth!

® This claim about election fraud is disputed

7:24 PM - Jan 6, 2021

Q 194.6K Q 146.5K people are Tweeting about this

Treason consists of adhering to the enemies of the United States. We have many more than two 
witnesses to these tweets. The only question is that, when one has made oneself the chief enemy of 
the United States, are onea€™ s actions and conspiracies than a€ceadheringa€D to onesself?

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Economist: Economists Are Revising Their Views on Robots & Jobs'. a€~There is little evidence of 
a pandemic-induced surge in automation^I 
<https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2022/01/22/economists-are-revising-their-views-on-r
obots-and-jobs>

• Eric Loomis: Meat Loaf Joins the Great Van/Clapton Horse Paste Heaven in the Sky 
<https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2022/01/meat-loaf-ioins-the-great-van-clapton-horse-paste-heav
en-in-the-skv>

•  David French: Caring About Genocide in China Isna€™ t a a€ "Luxury Beliefa€™: a€~Especially for 
a billionaire who is able to do more than mosta€l 
<https://newsletters.theatlantic.com/the-third-rail/61eaf2506c90860Q204c50e5/caring-about-genocide-i
n-china-isnt-a-luxurv-belief/>

•  Jonathan Elliot: The Debates in the Several State Conventions on the Adoption of the Federal 
Constitution as Recommended by the General Convention at Philadelphia in 1787: Virginia 
<https://archive .org/details/debatesinseveral03elli/mode/2up>

•  Josh Bivens: U.S. Workers Have Already Been Disempowered in the Name of Fighting Inflation'. a€™ 
Policymakers should not make it even worse by raising interest rates too aggressivelya€! 
<https://www.epi.org/blog/u-s-workers-have-alreadv-been-disempowered-in-the-name-of-fighting-inflati
on-policvmakers-should-not-make-it-even-worse-bv-raising-interest-rates-too-
aggressively/>

• James Fallows: Breaking the News

Breaking the News

Dispatches from a veteran reporter
By James Fallows

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

• Brad DeLong: American Nationalisms & A3Ae American Revolution



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

American Nationalisms & AMe American Revolution

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”I really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhilea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 comments A- Brad DeLong

• Brad DeLong: HOISTED FROM 2018: Why Trumpists & Ex-Trumpists Should Just Sit Down & Shut Up


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

HOISTED FROM 2018: Why Trumpists & Ex-Trumpists Should Just Sit Down & Shut Up

<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2018/12/clinton-administration-vis-trump-administration.html>Become
 a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsleta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- 1 comment A- Brad DeLong


Paragraphs:

Gita Gopinath: d€~Afew thoughts/charts on the different inflation outcomes in the US and Euro Area. 
[1] US core inflation much higher than in France, Spain & Italy, but not that much higher than in 
Germany (especially in changes). One-off factors like the reversal in VAT playing a role in 
Germany. [2] The higher US inflation has gone along with a faster recovery in the US, and especially
strong private sector demand in the US. [3] And useful to keep in mind that the euro area entered 
the pandemic with lower core inflationary pressures (consistent with ECB policy rate below the Fed 
policy rate in 2019) and lower inflation expectations than the US. [4] The higher core inflation in 
the US is driven by much higher goods price inflation in the US, and to a lesser extent by higher
services inflation relative to the euro area. (A demand shock a€~typicallya€™ would show up the 
other way but there is nothing typical about this period) [5] One factor driving this (in addition 
to others, including strong demand for cars in the US) is the steep increase in price of 
a€~distribution servicesa€™ which accounts for a sizeable chunk of retail prices of traded goodsa€!

LINK:

Gita Gopinath @GitaGopinath

[2] The higher US inflation has gone along with a faster recovery in the US, and especially strong 
private sector demand in the US.


Core inflation has been supported by a
stronger recovery in the US than in the
euro area...

Gross domestic product

(percent change, 2019Q4=100)

2015 2016 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

...while the US recovery in private
domestic demand has been
particularly strong

Private final domestic demand

(percent change. 2019Q4- 100)

—United States Germany

^France       ^Itaty

-30 L

201S 2016 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021

Sources:   Analybs and HX- staff cafaJabons.

1:22 AM r™ Jan 20,2022

46Likes8Retweets

Matt Yglesias: Housing Policy Lessons from the Microchip Shortage: a€~Scarcity is a terrible 
wealth-building strategya€!. One way of looking at the current car situation is that Americaa€™ s 
car owners have seen the value of our assets rise enormously. My familya€™ s 2014 Prius is kind of 
beat up, but it works fine. And these days we could resell it for a lot more money than we could 
have
in the pasta€”so wea€™re rich. And this is actually a pretty typical American situation. Car prices 
are a reasonably large component of the Consumer Price Index because cars are so expensive. But in 
the typical year, only a relatively small minority of Americans buy a car. So for most of us, the 
car inflation of 2021 has not actually reduced our spending power. Instead, the asset value of the
cars we own has risena€”wea€™ ve become wealthier. And indeed my household with two adults, one 
child, and one car has fewer cars per capita than the typical American household. So lots of people 
have seen soaring car wealth. Yay? I think we all have the (correct) intuition that this is a dumb 
way to look at ita€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

Housing policy lessons from the microchip shortage

American automakers sold approximately 14.9 million cars in 2021, a 2.5% uptick from the 
pandemic-disrupted year of 2020 but still below the pre-pandemic rate of 16 million per year. The 
reason for the curtailed sales is not a lack of customer demand, but thea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 155 likes A- 242 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

Isaiah Berlin (1990): Joseph de Maistre & the Origins of Fascism: a€~This isa€! a genuine 
convictiona€! that men can only be saved by being hemmed in by the terror of authoritya€!. Their 
appointed masters must do the duty laid upon them by their maker (who has made nature a 
hierarchical order) by the ruthless imposition of the rulesa€”not sparing themselvesa€”and equally 
ruthless
extermination of the enemy. And who is the enemy? All those who throw dust in the eyes of the 
people or seek to subvert the appointed order. Maistre calls them a€oela secte.a€D They are the 
disturbers and subverters. To the Protestants and Jansenists he now adds deists and atheists, 
Freemasons and scientists, democrats, Jacobins, liberals, utilitarians, anticlericals, 
egalitarians, perfectibilians,
materialists, idealists, lawyers, journalists, secular reformers, and intellectuals of every breed; 
all those who appeal to abstract principles, who put faith in individual reason or the individual 
conscience; believers in individual liberty or the rational organization of society, reformers and 
revolutionaries: these are the enemy of the settled order and must be rooted out at all costs. This 
is a€oela
secte,a€D   and it never sleeps, it is forever boring from within. This is a catalog of which we 
have since heard a good deal. It assembles for the first time, and with precision, the list of the 
enemies of the great counterrevolutionary movement that culminated in fascisma€!

LINK: <https://www.nvbooks.com/articles/199Q/Q9/27/ioseph-de-maistre-and-the-origins-of-fascism/>

Tipping Point Quick Hits: a€~Israel prepares for Iran, NASA considers alien contact, and a Temple 
dye is restoreda€!. The incoming commander of the Israel Air Force (IAF) told The Jerusalem Post 
that Israel was prepareda€’’right nowa€”to strike Irana€™ s nuclear program. Major-General Tomer 
Bar will officially take command of the IAF in Aprila€!. When asked if he thinks Israel can
successfully destroy Irana€™ s nuclear facilities, Bar stressed that a€oethere is no way that we 
will operate there, one thousand kilometers from here, and I will return home without being able to 
say a€~I completed the mission.a€™ a€D Ita€™ s noteworthy that Israela€™ s military leaders are now 
referring to the potential of a strike at any moment, and assuming that it will happen soon. I have
written before, of course, that a preemptive strike from Israel could be the match that sparks the 
Gog-Magog War. Interestingly, Bar seems to indicate that he understands hitting Iran wona€™t be the 
end of a solitary nation-to-nation conflict, but the beginning of a broader one involving multiple 
groupsa€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

Housing policy lessons from the microchip shortage

American automakers sold approximately 14.9 million cars in 2021, a 2.5% uptick from the 
pandemic-disrupted year of 2020 but still below the pre-pandemic rate of 16 million per year. The 
reason for the curtailed sales is not a lack of customer demand, but thea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 155 likes A- 242 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

Isaiah Berlin (1990): Joseph de Maistre & the Origins of Fascism: a€~This isa€! a genuine 
convictiona€! that men can only be saved by being hemmed in by the terror of authoritya€!. Their 
appointed masters must do the duty laid upon them by their maker (who has made nature a 
hierarchical order) by the ruthless imposition of the rulesa€”not sparing themselvesa€”and equally 
ruthless
extermination of the enemy. And who is the enemy? All those who throw dust in the eyes of the 
people or seek to subvert the appointed order. Maistre calls them a€oela secte.a€D They are the 
disturbers and subverters. To the Protestants and Jansenists he now adds deists and atheists, 
Freemasons and scientists, democrats, Jacobins, liberals, utilitarians, anticlericals, 
egalitarians, perfectibilians,
materialists, idealists, lawyers, journalists, secular reformers, and intellectuals of every breed; 
all those who appeal to abstract principles, who put faith in individual reason or the individual 
conscience; believers in individual liberty or the rational organization of society, reformers and 
revolutionaries: these are the enemy of the settled order and must be rooted out at all costs. This 
is a€oela
secte,a€D   and it never sleeps, it is forever boring from within. This is a catalog of which we 
have since heard a good deal. It assembles for the first time, and with precision, the list of the 
enemies of the great counterrevolutionary movement that culminated in fascisma€!

LINK: <https://www.nvbooks.com/articles/1990/09/27/ioseph-de-maistre-and-the-origins-of-fascism/>

Tipping Point Quick Hits: a€~Israel prepares for Iran, NASA considers alien contact, and a Temple 
dye is restoreda€!. The incoming commander of the Israel Air Force (IAF) told The Jerusalem Post 
that Israel was prepareda€’’right nowa€”to strike Irana€™ s nuclear program. Major-General Tomer 
Bar will officially take command of the IAF in Aprila€!. When asked if he thinks Israel can
successfully destroy Irana€™ s nuclear facilities, Bar stressed that a€oethere is no way that we 
will operate there, one thousand kilometers from here, and I will return home without being able to 
say a€~I completed the mission.a€™ a€D Ita€™ s noteworthy that Israela€™ s military leaders are now 
referring to the potential of a strike at any moment, and assuming that it will happen soon. I have
written before, of course, that a preemptive strike from Israel could be the match that sparks the 
Gog-Magog War. Interestingly, Bar seems to indicate that he understands hitting Iran wona€™t be the 
end of a solitary nation-to-nation conflict, but the beginning of a broader one involving multiple 
groupsa€!

LINK:

Tipping Point Prophecy Update

Tipping Point Quick Hits (1.13.22)

Israel Air Force Commander Prepared for Iran Strike In an interview published in late December, the 
incoming commander of the Israel Air Force (IAF) told The Jerusalem Post that Israel was 
prepareda€’’right nowa€”to strike Irana€™ s nuclear program. Major-General Tomer Bar will 
officially take command of the IAF in Aprila€!

Read more

a year ago A- 227 likes A- 72 comments

Duncan Black: Florida Man: a€~This is the world gun nuts want. Sowing, reaping. tl;dr: guy hits 
Prius with his BMW, Prius driver gets mad, guy who hit the Prius pulls gun and shoots at Prius, 
Prius driver puts one in his melon. Guy is former chief of state of Republican state senator, and 
had previously been arrested in a road rage incident at the exact same intersection. Bonus is his 
wife
claiming he had been assassinated. <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/01/florida-man.html>

Tristan Wood: John Kuczwanski Killed in Tallahassee Road Rage Incident: a€~John Kuczwanski, the 
Legislative Affairs Director for the State Board of Administration^!. Sources familiar with details 
of the investigation told Florida Politics that Kuczwanski caused the auto accident that began the 
chain of events, and that he began the shootout that led to his own deatha€!. Dennis MacKee,
speaking on behalf of the State Board of Administration, said he could not confirm that Kuczwanski 
was the person killed in the road rage incident, but confirmed that he died Thursday, according to 
the Tallahassee Democrat. a€oeHe was a quiet fellow,a€D MacKee said. a€oeEverything in his world 
was about his familya€Da€! LINK: <https://floridapolitics.com/archives/485132-john-
kuczwanski-killed-in-road-rage-incident/>

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription


Duncan Black: Florida Man’. a€~This is the world gun nuts want. Sowing, reaping. tl;dr: guy hits 
Prius with his BMW, Prius driver gets mad, guy who hit the Prius pulls gun and shoots at Prius, 
Prius driver puts one in his melon. Guy is former chief of state of Republican state senator, and 
had previously been arrested in a road rage incident at the exact same intersection. Bonus is his 
wife
claiming he had been assassinated, <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/01/florida-man.html>

Tristan Wood: John Kuczwanski Killed in Tallahassee Road Rage Incident’. a€~John Kuczwanski, the 
Legislative Affairs Director for the State Board of Administration^L Sources familiar with details 
of the investigation told Florida Politics that Kuczwanski caused the auto accident that began the 
chain of events, and that he began the shootout that led to his own deatha€!. Dennis MacKee,
speaking on behalf of the State Board of Administration, said he could not confirm that Kuczwanski 
was the person killed in the road rage incident, but confirmed that he died Thursday, according to 
the Tallahassee Democrat. a€oeHe was a quiet fellow,a€D MacKee said. a€oeEverything in his world 
was about his familya€Da€! LINK: <https://floridapolitics.com/archives/485132-john-
kuczwanski-killed-in-road-rage-incident/>

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

