Subscribe now

First of All:

I have been trying to think about the editorial policy of Hamish MacKenzie and company a€’’what 
kind of writers they think they ought to try to bring to the SubStack platform. So I am making the 
circuit of SubStack Pro. Today's stop is Freddie deBoer:

My knee-jerk reaction is: WHOA!! This goes totally off the rails, starting with "apparently so is 
something called Rebecca Baird-Rembaa€!"

If Freddie deBoer wanted to make me 100% certain that SBR is right when she saysa€”of FdBa€”a€oeL. 
was like... 'do we need this in the world again?a€™ a€D, he would have to call her a inhuman 
a€oeita€D. And that is what he went and did.
No: we do not need this in the world again. It has long been a grave and pointed insult in English 
to call a man a woman, or to call a woman a prostitute. Calling a woman an inhuman thing does not 
seem to be an improvement.

Hamish, Chris: Is this your more thoughtful platform in action?

After that the spiral downward continues.

I wonder. I think: FdB wants me to read him, to listen to him, to understand him and consider his 
arguments. And yet here he is, giving me an overwhelming desire to simply get up and quietly sidle 
away to where the conversation and more information-rich and lessa€! simply unbalanced:

Freddie deBoer: There You Go Again: a€~Shea€™ s in the club, so ita€™ s OK. Shea€™ s in the digital 
media kaffee klatsch. (Apparently so is something called Rebecca Baird-Remba; I dona€™ t know, I 
dona€™ t read Commercial Observer.) Shea€™ s done the necessary ingratiatinga€! liked the shitty 
joke tweetsa€! pretended to carea€! gritted her teeth and congratulated writers she really, really 
didna€™ t like about their new
jobs. She has completed the rituals, the sorority rusha€! awarded a rung on the ladder. Thata€™ s 
why shea€™ s allowed to do it, and Ia€™ m nota€!.

These peoplea€! their endlessly workshopped dry one-linersa€! depressed and anxiousa€! cries for 
help of desperate people, trapped in a dying industry, making pennies to grind out something called 
content while 70 year olds in the same business write 5000 words a year and watch their pensions 
grow. They think that theya€™ re participating in the traditions of Joan Didion and Ellie Bly but 
the work they produce are listicles about
Tik Tok and thinkpieces about Rick & Morty.a€! They mock Silicon Valley while quietly knowing that 
they are utterly in its thrall, that any shithead VC baron could come along at any moment, decide 
to throw a switch, and obliterate them and their publication.  They look at publications like the 
New Yorker as the cathedrals they aspire to work for, not seeming to realize that the beauty of 
being a cathedral is you get to treat even your

big name employees like shit. They want some security but they wona€™t take that job offer from 
their uncle because theya€™re sure, somehow, that theya€™re better than hima€!

LINK: <https://freddiedeboer.substack.eom/p/freddie-nitro-edition-there-you-go>

My considered reaction: This is someone who should not tweet. This is someone who should not blog. 
This is someone who very much needs an editora€”and a good editor who cares for him, and will 
calmly, patiently explain to him just how his current presentation-of-self shtick is alienating his 
potential core audience, and leading them all to think a€oeis there any reason we need this?a€D
I think it was cruel for SubStack to have given him the keysa€”the social power and resources, via 
SubStack Proa€”to do this full time without giving him an editor who cares.

Hamish, Chris, & company: What do you think you are doing here?

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Janelle Shane: Being Vaccinated Does Not Mean Ita€™ s Okay to Ask Gpta€ “3 to Participate in 
Meme Formats About Pandemics That Didna€™ t Exist When Its Internet Training Data Cut Off in Oct 
2019: a€~Being vaccinated does NOT mean you can travel through time and multiple realities. 
Fortunately youa€™ re still the same good-hearted grade schooler you were before you walked out of 
that basement with two items in your hand. One
was the ability to restore the Dragon Balls, and the other was the recipe for the worlda€™ s best 
green bean casserolea€! <https://ianellecshane.substack.eom/p/being-vaccinated-does-not>

• Wikipedia: Catalan Atlas <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catalan Atlas>

•  A previous example of journalists finding a writer and letting him set himself on fire for the 
LULZ, and the clicks: The New York Times in 2017 hires Michael Kinsley to say nice things about 
Donald Trump. No link: this kind of behavior should not be rewarded: Michael Kinsley: We Asked 
People to Say Something Nice About Trump. Herea€™ s What We Heard

•  A very nice and well-written take on Bidena€™ s corporate tax proposals: Richard Murphy: 
BidendC™ s Tax Plan Is About Tackling the Class Warfare of the Us 
EZfrg<https://www.taxresearch.org.uk/Blog/2021/04/08/bidens-tax-plan-is-about-tackling-the-class-war
fare-of-the-us-elite/>

• I do not think IP suspensions area€”necessarilya€”in order, but certainly we should produce now 
and sort out the finances later: the market was made for man, not man for the market: Caleb Watney: 
How the US Can Solve the Global Vaccine Shortfall: a€~We need to rapidly expand vaccine 
manufacturing around the worlda€”are IP suspensions the best way to do it?a€! 
<https://www.agglomerations.tech/how-the-us-can-solve-the-global-vaccine-
shortfall/>

•  Speaking of people who I never thought would become big BitCoin bulls!: Noah Smith: Bitcoin Is 
Upending the World of the Rich: a€~What the Bitcoiners have done is to create not just a new 
technology or a new asset, but a new asset class. Ita€™ s difficult to describe just how valuable 
it is to have an asset class§€. \ 
<https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/bitcoin-is-upending-the-world-of>

•  Smart economists, including me, opine: Neil Irwin: How 10 Economists Think About the Economy 
Potentially Overheating: a€~ow 10 Prominent Economists Think About Overheating Some notable 
participants in the debate over the Biden stimulus tell us, in their words, what a too-hot economy 
would look likea€! <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/03/24/upshot/economy-inflation.html>

Paragraphs:

1) Deliciously written and wonderful to read:

Matt Ridley: The Unexpected History & Miraculous Success of Vaccines: a€~The general idea behind 
vaccination was brought to the attention of the western worlda€!. His name was Onesimus and he 
lived in Boston, as the property of Cotton Mather, a well-known puritan preacher. Her name was Lady 
Mary Wortley-Montagu, the literary wife of the British ambassador to Constantinople^!. Onesimus 
seems to have told Mather that
back in West Africa people were in the habit of deliberately infecting children with a drop of 
a€oejuice of smallpoxa€D from a survivor, thus making them immunea€!. Six years latera€!. Mather 
wrote to 14 doctors begging them to try inoculation. Thirteen ignored him but one, Zabdiel 
Boylston, did nota€!. At almost the same time in Britain, a brave woman pioneer, Lady Mary Wortley 
Montagu, was introducing variolation to London
society, having learnt of the practice while in Constantinople as the wife of the ambassador. She 
too was the subject of fierce denunciation^!

LINK: 
<https://www.warpnews.org/health-tech/matt-ridlev-the-unexpected-historv-and-miraculous-success-of-v
accines/>

2) Very pleased to see this, because it is what I was thinking. The fact that Tankersley thinks the 
same gives me much more confidence in my take:

Jim Tankersley: With Warning to Democrats, Manchin Points the Way for Bidena€™ s Agenda: a€~The 
West Virginia Democrata€™ s latest plea for bipartisanship suggested that, to win over a critical 
swing vote in his own party, President Biden will first have to reach out to Republicansa€!. The 
chances that such a compromise will materialize are slima€!. Manchina€™ s calls for bipartisanship 
were less an insurmountable obstacle
for Democrats than a road map for Mr. Bidena€! reaching out to Republicans to explore possible 
areas of compromise while laying the groundwork to steer around them if no such deal 
materializesa€!. Bidena€! aim[s] at increasing the pressure on Republicans to compromised’’and, if 
they will not, giving Mr. Manchin and other moderate Democrats whose backing Mr. Biden needs the 
political cover to accept an all-Democratic
plana€!. [Biden] urged Republicans to a€oelisten to your constituents,a€D arguing that voters 
across America back infrastructure spending on the scale Mr. Biden envisionsa€!. Smaller pieces 
that could attract 10 or more Republican votes each, starting with a bill focused on supply chains 
and competition with Chinaa€!. Postponing Mr. Bidena€™ s proposed tax increases on corporationsa€! 
if doing so would get Republicans on board
with  a spending billa€!. Manchina€! has blared his message: First, try bipartisanship. a€oeSenate 
Democrats must avoid the temptation to abandon our Republican colleagues on important national 
issues,a€D Mr. Manchin wrote in the Washington Post op-ed on Thursday. a€oeRepublicans, however, 
have a responsibility to stop saying no, and participate in finding real compromisea€na€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/08/business/biden-manchin-infrastructure.html>

3) The only reporters who should speak at White House press briefings should be local reporters not 
in Washington, D.C. who have substantive policy-related questions. Just saying:

Anne Laurie: Media Mudlarks Open Thread: Wea€™re Dying Over Here, Dude!: a€~From the a€~Short 
Attention Spana€™ file, by an experienced Washington Post reporter: Dana Houle: a€ceNope. This is 
not intentional parody. Paul Farhi: a€DWhere are the leaks? The Trump White House provided 
reporters with a gusher. Under Biden, the pipeline has dried upa€!. Juicy details about the 
presidents™ s behind-the-scenes conduct
and decision-making? No one seems able to dig up anything interesting. Early forecasts of major 
policy proposals on the horizon, a.k.a. the grand tradition of the Washington trial balloon? A 
story wea€™re not getting to read these days. Insider accounts of West Wing rivalries, analyses of 
who wields influence with the president, detailed lists of Oval Office visitors? No such thing 
anymorea€!.a€™a€D

A whole two and a half months, and yet no drama! Truly, TFGa€™ s Oval Office occupany spoiled our 
Very Serious Media, possibly irreversibly. They loved those four years of a non-stop peep show, 
where every news cycle was a new a€~reality showa€™ episode. What are they supposed to do now, find 
their own stories?a€!
LINK: <https://www.balloon-juice 
.com/2021/04/06/media-mudlarks-open-thread-were-dying-over-here-dude/>

4) They think their job is to suck up to their insider sources, their advertisers, and their 
bosses, Duncan:

Duncan Black: What Is Your Job: a€~Journalists spend years knowingly conveying a false impression 
of whata€™ s going on and then get really fa€”ing excited when someone like Boehner pens a tell 
all. And, ok, they have their weird little conventions about a€oeoff the recorda€D and 
a€cebackgrounda€D so they cana€™ t always share the specifics of what they know, but the top 
political people get on teevee all the time and do
a€oeANALYSISa€n and it is here that they basically just lie. The fiction they present to the 
country is one theya€™ ve all agreed on. And now theya€™re all on twitter basically saying a€oelol 
Boeher, we all knew that at the time.a€D Oh, cool. Thanks for all that, you aa€“holesa€!

LINK: <https://www.eschatonblog .com/2021/04/what-is-your-job .html>

5) As John Oakes pointed out five years ago, many historians of capitalism confuse the true fact 
that slavery and capitalism were intertwined and mutually supporting at the market level with the 
false claim that slavery and capitalism were allied:


John Oakes (2016): Capitalism and Slavery & the Civil Ware'. a€~at some point, the [historians of 
capitalism] area€! going to have to do a better job of accounting for the Civil War, ideally in a 
way that brings the debate over slavery and capitalism into closer alignment with the debate over 
slavery and the sectional crisisa€!. As the North grew strongeraCI northern politiciansa€! 
advocate[d] federal policies designed to bring about the
a€oeultimate extinctiona€D of southern slaverya€! the overthrow of a powerful slaveholding class 
and the destruction of the largest, wealthiest slave system in the world. Antislavery politicians 
could safely do this because their own economy was not threatened by the destruction of slavery. 
Northerners wanted cotton, buta€! grown by free laborersa€!.

The slaveholders could not respond in kind. Proslavery politicians may have convinced themselves 
that grass would grow on the streets of New York and Philadelphia if the North dared make war on 
King Cotton, but the North had no intention of making war on cotton. It made war on slaverya€!. For 
all the proslavery bluster, the Old South never produced a popular movement calling for the 
abolition of free labor. Here and there
eccentric intellectuals predicted the imminent demise of a€cefree society ,a€D but not even the 
most bellicosea€! advocateda€! the a€oeultimate extinctiona€D of capitalism. They couldna€™ta€!. 
Southern leaders struggled to insulate slavery from the revolutionary threat of capitalisma€!. The 
slaveholders grew ever more belligerent in their increasingly extreme demands for federal 
protection of slaverya€! because they really did face
an existential threat to their way of life .a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/international-labor-and-working-class-history/article/capit
alism-and-slavery-and-the-civil-war/453A47DC79CFCE4FF69198C0712CFA63>

6) Was Kankan Musa the richest man before 1800? Possibly when valued in gold, certainly not when 
valued in salt. On Medieval and Early Modern Timbuktu:

Lorraine Boissoneault: The Golden Age of Timbuktu'. a€~On the southern edge of the Saharaa€! north 
of thea€! NigeraCI beige towers and dusty roads appearing] out of the sanda€!. From a seasonal camp 
for storing salt and other goods to a major center for caravan[s]a€! golda€! for salt from mines to 
the easta€! By the early 1300s, Timbuktu belonged to the Empire of Mali and was truly 
prosperinga€!. Europe was awash in rumors of Timbuktua€™ s
seemingly endless wealth and resources. Ita€™ s said that, in 1324, Malia€™ s sultan, Mansa Moussa, 
made a pilgrimage to Mecca with 60,000 slaves and servants and so much gold that, during his visit 
to Cairo, the price of the precious metal dropped precipitouslya€!. Ibn Battuta visited the famed 
city 30 years later, and his descriptions of the bustling metropolis stoked thea€! imagination^!. 
Europeans struggled with a minor ice age and the bubonic
plaguea€! [and] dreamt of streets lined with gold in Timbuktua€! [an] African El Dorado, hidden 
somewhere south of the Sahara.


It wasna€™ t until the late 15th century, however, that Timbuktu experienced its a€oeGolden Age.a€D 
But it was books, not gold bars, that brought Timbuktu its prosperity. Hundreds of scholars studied 
at the nearly 200 maktabs (Quranic schools). These scholars worked as scribes, thus increasing the 
number of manuscripts in the city. (You can browse through digital versions of some of the 
manuscripts here.) Visiting strangers were treated like royalty in hopes
that theya€™ d share their knowledge and books with Timbuktua€™ s scholars. As California State 
Universitya€™ s Brent Singleton, wrote: a€oethe acquisition of books is mentioned more often than 
any other display of wealth, including the building and refurbishment of mosquesa€D in texts from 
the era. Timbuktu was one of the worlda€™ s great centers of learning. Never had African Muslims 
seen a better time to be a scholar (or a librarian)a€!

LINK: <https ://daily.i stor.org/golden-age-timbuktu/>

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


It wasna€™ t until the late 15th century, however, that Timbuktu experienced its a€oeGolden Age.a€D 
But it was books, not gold bars, that brought Timbuktu its prosperity. Hundreds of scholars studied 
at the nearly 200 maktabs (Quranic schools). These scholars worked as scribes, thus increasing the 
number of manuscripts in the city. (You can browse through digital versions of some of the 
manuscripts here.) Visiting strangers were treated like royalty in hopes
that theya€™ d share their knowledge and books with Timbuktua€™ s scholars. As California State 
Universitya€™ s Brent Singleton, wrote: a€oethe acquisition of books is mentioned more often than 
any other display of wealth, including the building and refurbishment of mosquesa€D in texts from 
the era. Timbuktu was one of the worlda€™ s great centers of learning. Never had African Muslims 
seen a better time to be a scholar (or a librarian)a€!

LINK: chttps://daily.istor.org/golden-age-timbuktu/>

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

