Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)As I wrote, burning rubber and leaving skidmarks as you rejoin traffic at speed is not the same 
thing as boiling over and melting your enginea€”as my sister did one memorable
day to her Saab on the BQE. My view is that we should not worry about an inflationary spiral from 
a€ceoverheatinga€D until we have made back the 9%-points by which the price
level today has undershot expectations of where prices today would be back at the start of the 
Great Recession:

Equitable Growth: Overheating Is Not a Concern: a€™ Plans for further public investments should be 
judged primarily on the merits of those
investments. Arguments that the U.S. economy will overheat ignore the need for additional 
investments in the economy and rely on the possibility of future
policy errors to argue against needed investments todaya€!. The Congressional Budget Officea€™ s 
estimates of potential GDP are highly influential, but
critics argue, with substantial justification, that CBO analysts have been unduly pessimistic about 
the capacity of the economy in recent years, and thus
overstate the risk of overheatinga€!. The U.S. economy has 10 million fewer jobs today than it 
likely would absent the coronavirus pandemic and resulting
recession. This is why now is not the time for concern about overheatinga€!. Wendy Edelberg and 
Louise Sheiner of The Brookings Institution estimate
that legislation of approximately the scale of the American Rescue Plan would restore actual GDP to 
potential GDP after the third quarter of 2021, cause
GDP to exceed potential GDP temporarily by a modest 1 percent in the fourth quarter of 2021, and 
then allow GDP to roughly match its potential path in
the middle of 2022a€L Concerns about an overheated economy typically focus on a set of potential 
consequences that could arise if it remains overheated
for a long time. If an economy remains overheated for many years, then that could lead to higher 
inflation. If the Federal Reserve, in response to that
inflation, pushes the U.S. economy into recession by pushing up interest rates, then that could 
cause widespread harma€!. This concern is less about
overheating specifically, and more about extended overheating followed by a bad policy responsea€!

LINK: chttps ://equitablegrowth .org/wp-content/uploads/2021/04/042627-overheating-fs .pdf>

2) This looks very much worth going to see next week:

Equitable Growth: Webinar: How to Strengthen U.S. Labor Standards Enforcement to Protect Worker 
sa€™ Rights: a€~May 20,2021 2:00PM - 3:30PM:
The COVIDa€“19 pandemic that led to record unemployment also devastated state and local government 
revenues across the country. With governments
still facing extraordinary budget deficits, this fiscal crisis makes it even more difficult for 
state and local labor enforcement agencies to respond to labor
violations, such as wage theft, just when this work is needed most. In this webinar, Equitable 
Growth grantees Janice Fine, Daniel Galvin, and Jenn Round
of   the Center for Innovation in Worker Organization at Rutgers University outline how labor 
standards enforcement agencies can strategically target high-
violation industries. They will also describe how agencies can partner with worker centers, unions, 
legal advocacy organizations, and other community-
based organizations to more proactively address labor rights violationsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/event/webinar-how-to-strengthen-u-s-labor-standards-enforcement-to-prot
ect-workers-rights/>

3) A key problem in dealing with a large and dissipative finance sectora€”one that consumes nine 
percent of societya€™ s income rather than the three percent that it consumed
back in the 1950s, and yet does not show any signs of adding anything of value in exchange for that 
extra six percentage points of societya€™ s incomea€”is that the overwhelming
bulk of payments to financial intermediaries are voluntary^C"'nol even semi-voluntary in terms of 
monopoly or monopsony rents. People think that they are getting a good deal
when they pay the financial sector, even though the overwhelming evidence is that they are, in 
fact, not:

Amanda Fischer: The Rising Financialization of the U.S. Economy Harms Workers & Their Families: 
a€~Financialization refers to the process by which
the financial sectora€’’banks, private equity firms, hedge funds, stocks and derivatives exchanges, 
and other conduits through which money flows between
those who have it and those who need ita€’’takes up a larger and larger share of the U.S. economy, 
fails to allocate capital to its most productive uses, and
increasingly results in the hoarding of economic, and thus political, power at the top of the 
income and wealth laddersa€!. Considerations such as worker
welfare,  the economic health of communities, the environment, and U.S. competitiveness on the 
world stage were best left to policymakers and civil
society leaders, with business leadersa€™ only obligation being the maximization of profitsa€!. 
Corporate leaders themselves use their outsized economic
power to influence the policymaking process in their favora€! feedback loops where enhanced 
economic power begets more political power, with workers
increasingly short-changeda€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-rising-financialization-of-the-u-s-economv-harms-workers-and-their-
families-threatening-a-strong-recoverv/>

4) Noah Smith and I thought about what we now believe about capital gains taxes on our podcast:

Noah Smith & Brad DeLong: Hexapodia Podcast: Capital Gains Taxes: a€~Key insights: (1) Arguments 
against higher taxes that may have been somewhat plausible back in the
days of 70% or so maximum individual and 40% or so maximum capital gains tax rates simply do not 
apply now. (2) Right-wing parties that don't think they can credibly make the
argument that cosseting their core constituencies is necessary for rapid economic growth search for 
some non-economic cleavage in which the rich and the right-thinking poor, or
the right-colored poor, can be on one side and the people who seek a fairer and more equal 
distribution of income and higher taxes on the rich can be put on the othera€!. (4) Capital
to fund investment is really not a big constraint right nowa€’’incentivizing savings in financial 
assets really is just pushing on a string. (4) Companies with investments that have
high societal value in expansion need to be properly incentivized, and that is best done either by 
the smell of more profits next year from serving a larger market with lower costs of
production through larger scale, or through the government paying and so getting prices lighter 
than the free market can get thema€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/podcast-hexapodia-xiv-the-capital>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)Truea€”i.e., base-effect adjusteda€”CPI-basis core inflation has been only 1.4% over the past 
year, more than a full percentage point below the Federal Reservea€™ s official
target. We are still in a state in which it would be very good for the economy if there were more 
upward pressure on inflation than their currently is:

Gregory Daco: Base Effects on Inflation: a€™How large was the base effect on US CPI inflation in 
April? About 2.4%-points of the 4.2% year-to-year
headline reading. How large was the base effect on core CPI inflation in April? About 1.6%-point of 
the 3.0% year-to-year headline readinga€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/GregDaco/status/1392803865834237952>

2) The pessimistic view of the coronavirus plague in India is that at the current pace it will kill 
1,500,000 people and infect 90,000,000 over the next montha€”and, in the process,
explore the genetic space it can occupy in a way to make it more virulent (although there does not 
seem to be selection pressure to make it more deadly):

Andy Mukherjee: The Real Covid Variant Risk From IndiaaC™ s Pandemic Wave Is Being Missed: a€~Out 
of self-interest, the rest of the world better
help quickly to understand how a Covid variant is devastating the countrya€! B.1.617a€! unfolding 
disaster in Indiaa€! daily fatalities and new casesa€!
officially reported [as] around 4,000 and 400,000a€! [estimated at] 25,000 deaths and between 2 
million and 5 million infectionsa€! [by] Ashish Jhaa€!.
An  entry driven by the B.l .617 spike protein was a€oepartially resistant against neutralization 
by antibodies elicited upon infection or vaccination with"a€!

Pfizer-BioNTecha€!. Allowing the coronavirus to run its course in a population of 1.4 billion would 
be morally reprehensible. It would also be
dangerous: The longer it takes to tame Indiaa€™ s second wave, the higher the risk of a variant 
that does escape vaccine protection^!. Singaporea€™ s
largest active clustera€! is being chalked up to B.1.617.2a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-05-ll/the-real-covid-variant-risk-from-india-s-pand
emic-wave-is-being-missed?srnd=opinion>


3) Best-casea€”i.e., most optimistic scenario for employments”is employment corresponding to a 
a€cetruea€D unemployment rate of 2.5% in 2023 with core inflation at
2.75%/year. That is enough to get inflation expectations up to the Feda€™ s target of 2.5%/year on 
a CPI basis. That is not enough for anyone reasonable to claim that an ever-
upward inflationary spiral is on the way. The definition of a€oestagflationa€D is a world in which 
expectations are anchored on the belief that inflation is going to rise over time,
hence an unemployment rate greater than the natural rate is required in order to hold inflation 
steady. That does not seem to be the world we are headed for in the optimistic
scenario. And that stagflation equilibrium is much further away in the non-optimistic scenarios:

Laurence Ball & al.: US Inflation: Set for Take-Off?: a€™ How high is the ongoing US fiscal 
expansion likely to push inflation? This column presents
new evidence that underlying (weighted median) CPI inflation has so far steadily declined since the 
start of the COVIDa€“19 crisis, broadly as predicted
by its historical Phillips curve relation. If the ongoing fiscal expansion reduces unemployment to 
1.5a€“3.5%, as some predict, underlying inflation could
rise to about 2.5a€“3% by 2023. If the fiscal expansion is temporary and monetary policy remains 
clearly communicated and decisive, there is little risk of
a 1960s-type inflationary spirala€!

LINK: chttps://voxeu.org/article/us-inflation-set-take>

4) I have not been terribly sympathetic to the view that the Obama administration^™ s focus on 
making the restoration of banker and business confidence job #1 was the best way
to handle the Great Depression. I do note, however, that here John Maynard Keynes provides his 
brief for High Geithnerism: the financiers and the CEOs have us by the p-— so we
must do our best to appease them:

John Maynard Keynes (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest & Money: a€~Enterprise which 
depends on hopes stretching into the future
benefits the communitya€!. Buta€! reasonable calculation^! [must be] supplemented and supported by 
animal spirits, so that the thought of ultimate loss
which often overtakes pioneers, as experience undoubtedly tells us and them, is put asidea€!. This 
means, unfortunately, not only that slumps and
depressions are exaggerated in degree, but that economic prosperity is excessively dependent on a 
political and social atmosphere which is congenial to the
average business man. If the fear of a Labour Government or a New Deal depresses enterprise, this 
need not be the resulta€! ofa€! calculation ora€! a plot
with political intent;a€”it is the mere consequence of upsetting the delicate balance of 
spontaneous optimisma€!. We must have regarda€! to the nerves
and hysteria and even the digestionsa€! of those upon whose spontaneous activity it largely 
dependsa€!

LINK: chttps ://cruel .org/econthought/texts/generaltheory/chap 12 .html>

5) When Tim Duy left the open internet, the public sphere took a big loss:

Tim Duy: Fed Watch 2021a€“05a€“ 10: a€™It strains credibility to argue that the enhanced 
unemployment benefits do not disincentive job search
efforts. That said, I fear unemployment benefits receive outsized attentiona€!. Financial support 
from tax rebates, ongoing pandemic fears, lack of access to
childcare and schools, and retirements. Together, these factors point toward a fairly slow recovery 
of the labor supplya€!. There is also the fundamental
issue   that firing happens more quickly than hiringa€!. A level shift up in wages and prices does 
not by itself equate to a change in the underlying dynamic
that would perpetuate into persistently higher inflation. We most likely will not have much sense 
of the persistence of inflation until the known base and
reopening effects pass. That means the Fed will not want to validate any moves by market 
participants to pull rate hikes forward again on the basis of near-
term inflation numbersa€!

NO LINK

6) Here we see a striking difference between Paul Krugman and Larry Summers. Krugman sees models as 
intuition pumpsa€”and believes strongly, very strongly, that if you
cannot make a simple model of it, it is probably wrong. Summers believes that our models are, at 
best, filing systems (and at worst tools for misleading the unwary)a€”and that the
right way to think about the economy is as, in some way, a two-state system, with expansion being 
one state and recession the other, so that you cannot halt an expansion without
tipping the economy fully into recession. My take? Of the last six tightening cycles, three have 
been followed by demand-shock recessions within two years of the tightening
cyclea€™  s end. I interpret this as: you gotta halt the tightening before you overdo it, and that 
is not the easiest thing in the world. But there is no law-like regularity there:

Paul Krugman: Wonking Out: Braking Bad?: a€~A more explicit critique comes from Larry Summers, who 
has warned that the stimulus may lead to
stagflation. He appears to believe that the Fed cana€™ t use monetary tightening to offset 
overheating generated by fiscal expansion without causing a
nasty recession. But I have to admit to being a bit puzzled about whya€!. Summers[a€™ s]a€! 
underlying macroeconomic model is pretty much the same
as minea€!. And that model seems to say that the Fed can indeed tap on the brakes if needed. 
Indeed, the Fed has done that in the past: in the 80s and again
in the 90s it acted to rein in booms without causing recessionsa€!. Claims that we cana€™ t rely on 
the Fed to rein in inflation if the stimulus turns out to
be too big have to rest on some departure from the workhorse model most sensible people use to 
think about macroeconomic policya€!. Even if youa€™re
uncomfortable with President Bidena€™ s fiscal policies, you should be very cautious about making 
arguments against them that rely on novel
propositions    about why inflation cana€™ t be contained. Conventional analysis says what Janet 
Yellen said: If the stimulus proves bigger than needed, the
Fed   can keep things under control. If youa€™re asserting otherwise, think hard about why youa€™re 
saying thata€!

LINK: <https ://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2>

7) Raising capital gains taxes produces large increases in societal well-being only if it is 
accompanied by effective loophole-closing. The very sharp Len Burman believes that it is
indeed the case that the Biden Plan does this:

Leonard E. Burman: Biden Would Close Giant Capital Gains Loopholesa€”At Least For The Rich: 
a€~Critics of Bidena€™ s proposal have several
complaints. None hold water. Critics worry that raising capital gains taxes would lower the 
after-tax return for individual investors and drive down stock
prices. However, taxable individuals hold less than one-third of corporate stock. The rest is owned 
by nonprofits, retirement plans, life insurance
companies, and foreignersa€”none of whom pay individual income taxes on US capital gains and 
dividendsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.taxpoficvcenter.org/taxvox/biden-would-close-giant-capital-gains-loopholes-least-rich>

8) Be warned, make a $75 donation to hard-right Republican Senator Josh Hawley of Missouri, and 
unless you are very careful you will find you have made a $150 donation, and
unless you watch your credit

Paul Campos: Josh Hawley, Grifter: a€~I clicked on the link so you dona€™ t have to, and discovered 
that my $75 contribution will keep happening every month automatically
unless I unclick an already helpfully checked box that makes my contribution recurring. Also too 
unless I unclick another already clicked box I will make yet another $75
contribution                                                                                on May 
15th, to help stem the yellow red black brown tide of Joe Bidena€™ s and Chuck Schumera€™ s and 
Nancy Pelosia€™ s Radical Left agenda. As always,
Rick Perlsteina€™ s now nine-year-old essay on the Long Con remains essential reading, although I 
suspect Sen. Hawley himself is strictly short-time, as they say in the racketsa€!

LINK: <https://www.lawyersgunsmonevblog.com/2021/05/give-a-man-a-fish-and-he-will-eat-for-a-day>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


