Subscribe now

SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. BRADFORD DELONG

PREORDER NOW • ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

AJ4: Histories of centuries, long or short, are by definition grand narrative histories, built to 
tell the authora€™ s desired story. Setting these years, 1914a€“1991, apart as a century makes it 
easy for Hobsbawm to tell the story he wants to tell. But it does so at the price of missing much 
of what I strongly believe is the bigger, more important story. It is the one that runs from about 
1870 to 2010, from humanitya€™ s success in unlocking the gate that had kept it in
dire poverty, up to its failure to maintain the pace of the rapid upward trajectory in human wealth 
that the earlier success had set in motion.[4][k][l]

Share

Printed Endnotes:

[4] Also seeing a a€celonga€D twentieth century as most useful is the keen-sighted and learned Ivan 
Berend, in An Economic History of Twentieth-Century Europe: Economic Regimes from Laissez-Faire to 
Globalization, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Longer Notes:

[k] Berend makes his choices for essentially the same reasons that I do. He, however, confines his 
book to Europe, and both gains and loses thereby.

[1]    Going way back before 1870 is Giovanni Arrighi (1994): The Long Twentieth Century (New York: 
Verso) chttps://archive.org/details/longtwentiethcen00arri>. He pushes the origins of the long 
twentieth century back to 1500 and mediAlval Genoa, and sees the changes aroud 1870 as simply the 
shifting of the same melody into a different key. There are 324 pages before his a€ceEpiloguea€D 
begins, yet it is only on page 239 that we get to:

The strategies and structures of capital accumulation that have shaped our times first came into 
existence in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. They originated in a new internalization 
of costs within the economizing logic of capitalist enterprise. Just as the Dutch regime had taken 
world-scale processes of capital accumulation one step further than the Genoese by internalizing 
protection costs, and the British regime had taken them
a step further than the Dutch by internalizing production costs, so the US regime has done the same 
in relation to the British by internalizing transaction costsa€!

Thus I cannot buy into his analysis. I do not see the history of 1870-2010 as largely an 
intensified repeat of earlier cycles of internal capitalist development led by a 
hegemonic.’’Genoese, Dutch, British, and now American. That is the grand narrative he tells, 
engagingly and convincingly. But it is definitely not mine, and I definitely do not think it is the 
most important thread of history to follow.
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

