Subscribe now

Diane Coyle: The Slouch of History: a€~Like many people, Ia€™ ve been eagerly anticipating Brad 
Delonga€™ s Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th
Century, and it doesna€™ t disappoint. Brad was a couple of years behind me in the Harvard graduate 
economics programme, was an early adopter of blogging, and has been a
prominent online presence ever since. So his argument in one sense is no surprise, but it comes 
together as an unmissable book, even for a devoted reader of his tweets.

The book starts by framing the central point: the economy, and peoplea€™ s lives, have been utterly 
transformed by the long 20th century of 1870ish to around 2010 in a
continuous tide of change both a€~marvelous and terriblea€™ . During that long 140 year century, 
the average economic growth rate (we are US/west focused here) was just over
2%    a year, before and since, below 0.5% a year. Income levels doubled every 33 years during that 
period: a€oeA revolutionized economy every generation cannot but revolutionize
society and politics, and a government trying to cope with such repeated revolutions cannot but be 
stressed in its attempts to manage and provide for its people in the storms.a€D
Wea€™re now back down to doubling about every 150 years, which actually seems just as stressful for 
governments given the expectations of the previous four or five generations.

The structure of the book is then (unsurprisingly) chronological. It begins with the first era of 
globalization, between 1870 and 1914, when the key global flow was people: a
hundred million people migrated across national borders. Governments embraced openness of all 
kinds, though, and there were revolutionary declines in transport costs. The 1870
launch                                                                                 of RMS 
Oceanic, an iron-hulled steam-powered passenger ship, cut travel time across the atlantic from a 
month to nine days and 3rd class fares opened the journey to all but
the very poorest Europeans. The vast waves of migration helped make the US the dominant economic 
power of the 20th century.

The book moves on to the economy of empires in the first part of the 20th century. The 
mechanization of industry in the imperial North turned the colonized South into an economic
periphery, exporting raw commodities and importing manufactures. These were, a€oeUnable to build 
communities of engineering practice that might provide a path to greater,
industrial, riches.a€D Their labour force was not literate in sufficient numbers, there wasna€™ t 
enough financial capital to invest in factories.

World War I and the Depression follow, and the narrative traces two currents of thought shaping 
post-1918 outcomes. During this period there was no hegemon a€“ only the US
could have been, given the weakness of post-war Britain, and it rejected that role as provider of 
global public goods such as financial stability for all. So the ideas of a return to an
1870-1914 liberal market order competed with ideas focused on social rights and relationships. 
Economists broadly fell into camps a€“ this was the era of the socialist calculation
debate a€“ but policy elites in the West doubled down on austerity.

On we go to Russia and socialism in practice, and the brutality of Leninist and Stalinist 
economics: a€oeOf the 1800 delegates to the 17th Congress in 1934, fewer than one in 10
went on to be delegates to the 18th Congress in 1939.a€D The rest were dead or in Siberia, while 
forced collectivization spread famine and death. Fascism and Nazism deformed
much of the rest of Europe in the 1930s, and then came the catclysm of the second world war and 
Holocaust. As the chapter points out, not everyone shed their opposition to the
bundle of policies that could be characterized as fascist. Some Hayekians in the 1980s, such as 
supporters of Pinochet, found their contrast with socialism appealing. (Mrs Thatcher
gets a favourable passing mention as a firm opponent of the methods, even as she approved of the 
libertarian economics.)

World War II gives way to the Cold War in this sobering march of 20th century history, while the 
spillovers from Cold War led to many false developmental starts in the Global
South a€“ alongside the amazing successes of development in some East Asian countries. The book 
sees the contrast as one between the aim of self-sufficiency in Latin America
and countries in the Soviet orbit versus the assumption of the need to survive in export markets in 
East Asia a€“ the latter had no great powers pouring in resources, or interfering
and advising.

The only bright spot in this long century appears to be les trentes glorieuses, the three post-war 
decades of social democracy. What was their magic? A high rate of investment. Full
employment but no upward wage pressure as there remained (in most of Europe) and under-employed 
agricultural labour force to pull in. Steady growth in industries that reached
their technological maturity in that era, enabling the location of industrial production to spread 
to more places.

But it didna€™ t last. The redistribution of social democracies came into increasing tension with 
the conditions for innovation and growth. The logic of how governments operate
differs from the logic of efficient production, so nationalized industries became wasteful and 
ineffective. Sometimes only moderate efficiency is fine, or indeed welcome, but there
are limits. In 1979 we saw the neoliberal turn. Why so? a€oeln my view the greatest cause was the 
extraordinary pace of rising prosperity during the Thiry Glorious Years, which
raised the bar that a political-economic order had to surpass in order to generate broad acceptance 
.a€D people had come to expect rapidly rising incomes and broad equality of
outcome, and high employment and low inflation. If this stability stumbled, the order had to 
change.

So the book ends with the political success of the neoliberal order a€“ winning the Cold War a€“ 
and its economic failure. And here we are. We havena€™ t reached utopia but
living standards are massively higher than in 1870. It hasna€™ t been a smooth course a€“ far from 
it a€“ a slouch rather than a march. But people are so much better off than the
mass of humanity before the long 20th century.

The strength of the book a€“ as well as its immense scope and depth (more than 500 pages) is that 
ita€™ s a work of political economy, braiding the different strands of ideas,
Hayek, Polanyi and Keynes. Although what it ignores (and fair enough) is the series of technologica 
revolutions. In addition, there are plenty of pleasing asides and details. Humans
love narratives, so, a€oeThe secret weapon of the economist is the ability to count.a€D Or, 
a€oeContests and gift exchanges have more psychological resonance. It is more
satisfying  to receive (or give) a present or to win a prize than to buy the exact same thinga€!. 
By ignoring and trying to suppress these dimensions a€“ to require that everything
pass  through a cash nexus a€“ the market society dehumanizes much of life.a€D I like that it 
doesna€™ t claim there are easy lessons from the history, but insists that there are
indeed subtler lessons. Definitely one to read a€“ or pre-order: out on 15 September.

Subscribe now


