Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Within the space of just a few generations, humanity has created the material conditions for 
establishing the kind of society that our ancestors could hardly imagine. But everything now 
depends on whether we can figure out the politics of wealth distribution.

BERKELEY a€“ Humanity as a whole is wealthier today than at any time in its history. And yet, from 
the short-term challenge of the pandemic to the existential threat of global warming, there is a 
widespread sense that things are going badly wrong. The start of a new year is an occasion for 
hope, but is pessimism the more appropriate default?

To answer that question, we should consider our current situation in a broader context. For the 
first ten thousand years after the invention of agriculture, humanity had no chance of achieving 
any approximation of a€ceutopia,a€D regardless of how one defined that term. Then, within our 
parentsa€™ and grandparentsa€™ lifetimes, something
approaching that ideal came into view. Yet we have repeatedly failed to grasp it. As my friend the 
late Max Singer used to say, a truly a€oehuman worlda€D will remain out of reach until we have 
figured out the politics of wealth distribution.

Until just a few generations ago, humanity marched to a Malthusian drum. With technological 
progress ploddingly slow and mortality extremely high, population size was everything. In a world 
where almost one-third of elderly women had no surviving sons or grandsons, and hence no social 
power, there was immense pressure to have more children in
onea€™ s childbearing years. The resulting population growth (without commensurate growth in the 
size of farms) offset any gains in productivity and incomes from better technology and kept typical 
living standards low and stagnant.

The Malthusian societya€™ s best shot at relative happiness was to foster a custom of delaying 
marriage, thereby pushing down the birth rate. Faced with the problem of unsustainable population 
growth, this practice represented a social rather than a biological solution (which took the form 
of malnutrition). At the same time, the elitea€™ s best shot at
happiness was to establish a smooth process of extracting wealth from the farmers and craftsmen.

It is now the third decade of the twenty-first century, and humanity is almost through what social 
scientists call the demographic transition: a shift from high to low birth and death rates, owing 
to economic development and technological advances. Malthusian population pressure no longer keeps 
us poor. Our productivity vastly exceeds that of all
previous generations, and it continues to grow. In the next two generations, we will achieve as 
much proportional growth in our technological powers as our forebears in 1870 had since the great 
migration out of Africa 50,000 years earlier.

In many parts of the world, there already is enough wealth to ensure that nobody is hungry, 
unsheltered, or vulnerable to many of the health threats that used to shorten most lives. There is 
enough information and entertainment that nobody need be bored. There are enough resources to allow 
everyone to create or pursue whatever his or her calling may
be. True, there will never be enough prestige to satisfy everyone; but if we are willing to settle 
for universal basic dignity, there is no longer any material reason why we should have a society 
where people feel disrespected.

Why, then, do things seem to be going badly wrong? First, the world has failed to build governance 
institutions that can manage global problems like climate change. That challenge could have been 
handled at very low cost a generation ago. Now, averting a disaster and adapting to the change that 
is already here will entail much, much larger upfront
costs. And to what end? Merely to preserve for a few years longer the wealth of fossil-fuel robber 
barons?

Second, the worlda€™ s unprecedented wealth is absurdly, appallingly, criminally maldistributed. 
The bottom billion people may have smartphones and some access to health care, but in many ways, 
they are not much better off than our pre-industrial Malthusian ancestors. It has been 75 years 
since US President Harry Truman wisely added global
economic development to the Global Northa€™ s agenda. Though he would be happy to see that the 
Global South is much, much richer now than it was in 1945, he would be tremendously disappointed to 
find that the proportional gap between rich and developing countries is as large as ever.

Even developed countries like the United States are apparently incapable of properly distributing 
the enormous wealth that has been created by modern post-industrial economies. The past four 
decades have given the lie to the neoliberal claim that a more unequal society would release 
immense entrepreneurial energies, lifting all boats. Yet policies to
accord well-being, utility, and dignity to all people have consistently been blocked.

One major hurdle is the idea that some of societya€™ s non-rich deserve not more but even less. 
This view has long been applied to Hispanics and African-Americans in the US, Muslims in India, 
Turks in Britain, and all those who have ever run afoul of blood-and-soil nationalism. Many now 
seem to believe that the Enlightenment vision of human
equality was wrong and should be replaced with the Aristotelian principle that it is unjust to 
treat non-equals equally.

PROJECT SYNDICATE: Pessimism Amid Progress

<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/human-progress-with-fatal-weaknesses-by-i-bradford-del
ong-2022-01> 2022-01 -07 Fr
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe


Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

