Subscribe now

SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. BRADFORD DELONG

PREORDER NOW • ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

A3 10,11, & 12: A 2.1 percent per year growth rate is a doubling every 33 years. That meant that 
the technological and productivity economic underpinnings of human society in 1903 were profoundly 
different from those of 1870a€’’underpinnings of industry and globalization as opposed to one that 
was still agrarian and landlord-dominated. The mass-production underpinnings of 1936, at least in 
the industrial core of the global north, were profoundly different
also. But the change to the mass consumption-suburbanization underpinnings of 1969 was as profound, 
and that was followed by the shift to the information-age microelectronic-based underpinnings of 
2002. A revolutionized economy every generation cannot but revolutionize society and politics, and 
a government trying to cope with such repeated revolutions cannot help but be greatly stressed in 
its attempts to manage and provide for its people in the storms.
[P]

Much good, but much ill also flowed: people can and do use technologiesa€”both the harder ones, for 
manipulating nature, and the softer ones, for organizing humansa€”to exploit, to dominate, and to 
tyrannize. And the long twentieth century saw the worst and most bloodthirsty tyrannies that we 
know of.

And much that was mixed, both for good and for ill, also flowed. All that was solid melted into 
aira€”or rather, all established orders and patterns were steamed away.[7][q] Only a small 
proportion of economic life could be carried out, and was carried out, in 2010 the same way it had 
been in 1870. And even the portion that was the same was different: even if you were doing the same 
tasks that your predecessors had done back in 1870, and doing them in the
same places, others would pay much less of the worth of their labor-time for what you did or made. 
As nearly everything economic was transformed and transformed againa€”as the economy was 
revolutionized in every generation, at least in those places on the earth that were lucky enough to 
be the growth polesa€”those changes shaped and transformed nearly everything sociological, 
political, and cultural.

Share

Printed Endnotes:

[7] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, London: Communist League, 
1848; Jonathan Sperber, Karl Marx: A Nineteenth-Century Life, New York: Liveright, 2013; Marshall 
Berman, All That Is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, New York: Verso, 1983.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Longer Notes:

[p] A very, very nicely put thumbnail summary of the implications of the coming after 1870 of what 
Simon Kuznets named a€ceModern Economic Growtha€D. It destabilized politics and political economy 
around the globe. Shaky regimes crashed. Solid regimes became shaky. And rock-solid regimes began 
to feel earthquakes building:

Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution: a€~Although the 
Russian case is unique, in this respect too international comparisons are nevertheless very 
important. In the two generations before 1914, European society as a whole had been transformed 
more fundamentally than in centuries of earlier history. It was hard for anyone to keep his balance 
amid dramatic economic, social, and cultural
change; predictions as to where change might lead in the future could inspire even greater 
giddinessa€!

LINK: <https://archive.org/details/endoftsaristruss00001iev>


Also:

Viktor Shvets (2021): The Great Rupture: Three Empires, Four Turning Points, and the Future of 
Humanity (Newark, OH: Boyle & Dalton) <https://www.amazon.com/dp/1633374106/>: High capital 
intensity combined with better-disciplined and trained labor drove the modern miracle of 
productivity that exploded around the 1870s and continued unabated for more than a century. A great 
deal of these gains accrued to labor, thus
creating what later became known as the Western a€oemiddle classa€D and contributed toward 
successful re-inventions of various stages of capitalism and a decline in the attractiveness of 
communism, feudalism, and any other alternative ideology. Any society that refused to participate 
was condemned to both relative and absolute decline. Three factors were critical to success in this 
new world: openness to ideas, trade, and the
extension                                                                                           
                                                                                                    
   of rights to an ever-widening segment of the population. Indeed, these three factors reinforced 
each othera€!

Before 1770, there were historical changesa€”political/military, literary/ideological/cultural, 
religious/social, and economic/technological. They worked on different time scales. 
Political/military affairs could overthrow orders and make new ones inside of a decade; 
literary/ideological/cultural required a generation; religious/social took a few centuries; and 
economic/technological took close to a millennium, at least. What that meant is that people might 
find

themsel vex nnpratincr in a nnlitir.al/militarv rnntp.xt that miaht hp hrand-npw and in a 
1itprarv/idpnlnairal/r.ultnra1 framework that diverged from that nf their narents thev still 
nnerated in a reliairnis/snr.ial context that their errand- and erreat-errandnarents would have 
found familiar and there was hare.lv anv memorv at all that there mierht have, been a time in which 
the natte.rns of tech nolo av were snhstantiallv different The. fact that maior chancres in 
different


realms proceeded along such different time scales had powerful consequences for how patterns of 
action and the institutions and orders that channeled them came under stress and were adopted in 
response.
From 1770 to 1870 the pace of economic change quickened. But it was really not the case that 
a€oeall that was solid melts into aira€D.

That did not become true until after 1870.

But after 1870 it became true with a vengeance. And so over 1870-2010, repeated technological and 
economic revolutions shook, and shook, and shook the human world to pieces over and over again, and 
then people had to try to pick the pieces up and assemble them into something over and over again.

Which of the ancien rAOgimes with capitals in Europe managed to avoid revolution and civil war in 
the transition to a€oemodernitya€n? 1848 saw only Norway, Sweden, Belgium, Holland, and Great 
Britain see little unrest. Piedmonta€”the Kingdom of Sardiniaa€’’avoided domestic insurrection by 
having its ancient rA©gime put itself at the head of the Italian nationalist movement. The Russian 
Empire escaped radical or nationalist revolution in 1848a€”
Poland had already tried to rebel in 1830. But that there would be a Russian Revolution of some 
forma€”more than a series of demonstrations followed by reform or by a coupa€”seemed very much in 
the cards. Nobody with a capital outside Europea€™ s far northwest corner seemed likely to escape.

Why? Because even in 1848 the underlying pace of socio-economic change was too great for an ancien 
rA©gime to maintain its precarious perch. And the pace of global socio-economic changea€”in the 
average global technological underpinnings of societya€”was going to be amped-up by a factor of 4.5 
as the world moved from the already extraordinary Industrial Revolution century of 1770-1870 to the 
post-1870 Modern Economic Growth era. Thus the
post-1500 political-socio-economic history of the long 20th century was indeed, as Eric Hobsbawm 
says of his short 1914-1991 century, the history of an Age of Extremes. But the sheer magnitude of 
the wealth generated by technology those extremes more extreme on the high than on the low side: 
much more marvelous than terrible. But the terrible parts were very terrible indeed.

But why did it have to be terrible at all? Why couldna€™ t increasing wealth simply be 
semi-equitably distributed, and social and political systems adapt peacefully and gradually to 
underlying changing patterns of production and exchange and the relationships of social power that 
those patterns produced? Before 1870 the economy was changing only slowly, too slowly for people's 
lives at the end of a century to be that materially different from how they had
been at the beginning. The economy was thus the painted-scene backdrop behind the stage, rather 
than the action on the stage.

From 1770-1870 there did indeed come an Industrial Revolution. But at its end, in 1870, in every 
country the bulk of people were still peasants, craftsmen, and servants working much as their 
ancestors a century before had donea€”even though the railroad, the steamship, the telegraph, the 
automated factory, the furnace, and the steam engine dominated the wealth-creation process. You 
could hang on.

British politics and governance in 1870 was different from how it had been in 1770, but not as 
different as the British economy was. French politics and governance had been utterly transformed. 
But for the other great powersa€”for their heads Regent Francisco Serrano DomAnguez Cuenca y PA©rez 
de Vargas, King Vittorio Emanuele Maria Alberto Eugenio Ferdinando Tommaso di Savoia, Emperor Franz 
Joseph Karl von Habsburg, Emperor Wilhelm
Friedrich Ludwig von Hohenzollern, Sultan AbdAmaziz of the House of Osman, and Czar AleksAjndr II 
NikolAjyevich Romanov, and for all their ministers, industrialization and its consequences were one 
of the major factors they had to deal with, but not major enough to totally transform how they 
tried to rule.

Then in 1870 we got the final institutional pieces needed to support global economic growth: the 
industrial research laboratory, the modern corporation, and full globalization. One gathered 
communities of engineering practice to supercharge economic growth. The other organized communities 
of competence to deploy the fruits of invention. With globalization, cheap ocean and rail transport 
that destroyed distance as a cost factor and allowed humans in
enormous numbers to seek better lives, along with communications links that allowed us to talk 
across the world in real time. The coming of all three of these more or less at once was a truly 
mighty change, rationalizing and routinizing the discovery and development and the development and 
deployment and not just the local but the global deployment and diffusion of technological 
advances.

To put it another way, the industrial research lab fused science to technological innovation and 
technology to enterprise: a scientist could science, an inventor could invent, and a technologist 
could technologize without one person having to be all threea€”plus financier, manager, chief 
pitchman, human resource department, and so forth. Division of labor. And the bureaucratic 
corporation allowed the visible hand of management to scale a successful workshop
and store nationwide, or worldwide. And then there was diffusion: what one bureaucratic corporation 
could do, another could duplicate. And duplicate worldwide, with globalization. Discovery, 
development, deployment, and diffusiona€”the rationalization and routinization of those are what 
more than quadrupled the proportional rate of technological progress in the years around 1870.

The coming of all these three more than quadrupled the pace at which humanitya€™ s technological 
empire was increasing. And that post-1870 step-up in the growth rate lasted. Thereafter it has 
been, for all politicians, hang on for dear lifea€”and desperately try to rebuild working 
institutions on the fly as the socio-economic underpinnings of society are revolutionized and then 
re-revolutionized every single generation.

Stepping back and looking at the big picture, the post-1870 acceleration in growth and the more 
than twenty-fold amplification of human technological prowess in the years since 180 is a REALLY 
BIG F—ING DEAL. Briefly and very very roughly, what twenty workers were needed to do in 1870 with 
their eyes, fingers, thighs, brains, mouths, and ears, 1 worker was able to do in 2010. To get an 
equivalent proportional jump in the other direction, you have to
go back from 1870 to the Bronze Agea€”to the year -2000 or so. We are, proportionately, as separate 
in technology from the railroad's Golden Spike and the first transoceanic cables of 1880 as those 
were from the earliest chariots and the sculptor of the dancing girl of Mohenjo-Daro:

Moreover, the overwhelming bulk of the potential benefits for humans from that twenty-fold -6000 to 
1870 upward creep of technological knowledge had been eaten up by growing resource scarcity: the 
land and other natural resources available to support 1 person in -6000 had to support 200 by 1870. 
Thus better technology did not lead to as much changes in the life of the average peasant, 
craftsman, or servant as one would think. And so the problems of and
techniques for ruling Russia faced by Czar AleksAjndr II NikolAjyevich Romanov in the year 1870 
still bore a family resemblance to those faced by Ensi Gilgamesh, son of Lugulbanda, in Uruk in the 
year -3000.

Few people know or consider the extent to which, back even in 1870, for the working classes of even 
the richest countries in the world, sheer calories were a considerable constraint on your daily 
activities. You could work and do stuff until you had drained your energy budget and so were tired. 
Then you more or less had to stop. That the work or other stuff you could do was tightly 
constrained because you simply could not afford the calories that you needed to
do ita€”that is not a thing in the global north today. Yet that was an important part of the 
experience of humanity back before 1870.

But thereafter much was different. As much economic change and creative destruction as had taken 
place over 1720-1870 took place every 33 years after 1870. And the pace of change over 1720-1870 
had already been more than fast enough to shake societies and polities to pieces. "All that is 
solid melts into air", Friedrich Engels and Karl Marx had written in 1848: all established 
hierarchies and orders are steamed away. But even they had no real idea what was
coming after 1870. For Freddie from Barmen and Charlie from Trier mistook dawn for high noon. Yes, 
the business classa€”the French term bourgeoisie was the word they ultimately settled on (they had, 
earlier, followed Heinrich Heine is using the unfortunate terms a€oeJews and the Jew-likea€d)a€”had 
done revolutionary things in the century before 1848. But polities and societies had, for the most 
part, creaked and groaned, but had not (yet) shattered.

The post-1870 faster-pace repeated economic creative destruction upended societies, and in addition 
to opportunities posed two problems for governments: How were they to deal with the "destructive" 
part of creative destruction as it upended the lives of their people? And how were they to deal 
with neighboring governments that decided to use enhanced technological powers for evil for 
destruction and oppression? At the sharp end, a government gone horribly
wrong was a genocide-scale problem for the people under its boot, and for the people who were that 
government's neighbors. And so the long 20th century saw the worst tyrannies ever.

I think the best way into understanding the problems thus created by economic creative-destruction 
at the post-1870 is the path blazed by Karl Polanyi, who denounced this technological-advance 
market-economic project, in which humanity is made rich as a byproduct of profit-motivated economic 
agents responding to the price signals sent by the rich as a:

stark utopiaa€! [that] could not exist for any length of time without annihilating the human and 
natural substance of societya€!. Society took measures to protect itself, but whatever measures it 
took impaired the self-regulation of the market, disorganized industrial fife, and thus endangered 
society in yet another way. It was this dilemma which forced the development of the market system 
into a definite groove and finally disrupted the
social organization based upon ita€!

Think of it: Your community and its associated land-use and sociability patterns ("land"), your 
occupations and its remuneration on a scale appropriate to your status and to your desert resulting 
from your applying yourself ("labor"), and the very stability of and your ability to be paid for 
performing your job at all (a€oefinancea€n)a€”all of these melt into air if they do not satisfy 
some maximum-profitability-use-of-resources test (a€oefictitious
commoditiesa€n) imposed by some rootless cosmopolite thousands of miles away. Furthermore, it is a 
maximum-profitability test that is applied, not a societal-wellbeing test The (competitive, 
externality-free, in-equilbrium) market system definitely and certainly maximizes something. But 
what it maximizes is not any idea of the well-being of society, but rather the wealth-weighted 
satisfaction of the rich.

No: a€~The market giveth, the market taketh away; blessed be the name of the market' was not a 
stable principle around which a government could organize society and political economy. The only 
stable principle had to be some version of a€~The market was made for man, not man for the 
marketa€™ .

So society responded: people believe that they have other rights rather than property rights (which 
are valuable only if your particular piece of property is useful for producing things for which the 
rich have a serious jones). And so they strove to organize society to vindicate those other 
Polanyian rights. And so society did so by attacking the market, and by attacking all of those it 
saw as its internal and external enemies that the global market system was
empowering to oppress them. And those enemies included their government, that was trying and 
failing to manage the process to everyonea€™ s satisfaction. Upheaval was inevitable. Revolution 
nearly so.

In addition, there was nationalism. For nationalism, let me give the mic to the very sharp Cosma 
Shalizi, channeling the even sharper Ernest Gellner:

Cosma Shalizi: Ernest Gellner, d€ceNations & Nationalismd€\3 a€~The inhabitants ofa€! 
a€ceAgrariaa€D were economically static and internally culturally diversea€!. Because industrial 
economies continually make and put into practice technical and organizational innovationsa€! their 
occupational structures change significantly in a generationa€!. No one can expect to follow in the 
family professional. Training must be much
more explicit, be couched in a far more universal idiom, and emphasize understanding and 
manipulating nearly context-free symbolsa€!. It must in short take on the characteristics formerly 
associated with the literate High Cultures of Agrariaa€!. States become the protectors of High 
Cultures, of a€ceidiomsa€D; nationalism is the demand that each state succor and contain one and 
only one nation, one idioma€!. Faced with a difference
between onea€™ s own idiom and that needed for success, people either acquire the latter, or see 
that their children do (assimilation); force their own idiom into prominence (successful 
nationalism); or festera€!.

To recap: industrialism demands a homogeneous High Culture; a homogeneous High Culture demands an 
educational system; an educational system demands a state which protects it; and the demand for 
such a state is nationalism. The theory is coherent, simple, widely applicable, convincing, and 
empirically testable (which tests, to all appearances, it passes).a€!.

It is hard to decide whether nationalists or anti-nationalists will find Nations and Nationalism 
more disturbing; rootless cosmopolitan though I am, it changed my mind on a great many subjects. 
This is already a rare enough achievement for a philosopher or social scientistsL Unfortunately for 
those of us not enamoured of nationalism, he wasna€™ t talking rubbish at alla€!
LINK: 
<https://web.archive.Org/web/20130313155341/http://vserverl.cscs.lsa.umich.edu/~crshalizi/reviews/na
tions-and-nationalism/>

Thus it is very comprehensible the pseudo-classical semi-liberal order governments tried to build 
on the fly in the mid- and late-1800s, in what was retrospectively called the Belle A%opoque, fell 
apart into so many different catastrophes. Governments and A©lites failed to manage economic 
creative-destruction at the fever-heat pace at which it lurched forward after 1870, This 
failure-to-manage led to many, many societal reactions against the ongoing rush of
claims that all was OK, and turned Europe into a hellhole and an abattoir until 1945.

[q] Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party, London: Communist League, 
1848 <https: //w ww.marxists .org/archive/marx/works/download/pdf/Manifesto ,pdf>. My suspicion is 
that at least in English standard readings of Marx and Engels, at least of the Marx and Engels 
authorial team in the late 1840s, are not technologically determinist enough. What I see as an 
assertion in the connotations of the German original of Alles
StA^ndische und Stehende verdampft that it is technology that is doing the work is lost in the 
traditional English translation a€oeall that is solid melts into aira€D. Jonathan Sperber suggests 
a€oeE very thing that firmly exists and all the elements of the society of orders evaporate.a€D 
That seems to me too passive: steamed away. See Jonathan Sperber, Karl Marx: A Nineteenth-Century 
Life, New York: Liveright, 2013 <http://books .google .com/?
id=hBpSh9JYAKcC>.

The underlying ideas, however, are in my opinion best developed by Marshall Berman, All That Is 
Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, New York: Verso, 1983 <http://books .google 
.com/?id=mox 1 ywiyhtgC>
See also:

Jem Thomas: On Evans on Sperber on Marx: a€™Richard J. Evansa€™ s comment on Jonathan Sperbera€™ s 
attempt to find a better translation of Marxa€™ s phrase a€~Alles stA^ndische und stehende 
verdampft,a€™ usually rendered a€~All that is solid melts into air,a€™ pinpoints a particular 
difficulty in translating the German term Stand (LRB, 23 May). Sperbera€™ s preferred version a€“ 
a€~Everything that firmly exists
and all the elements of the society of orders evaporatea€™ a€“ is, well, frankly hideous. On the 
other hand it is a lot more accurate than the elegant version it seeks to replace.

The words Stand and its adjective stAPndisch have been variously translated as a€~statusa€™ , 
a€~estatea€™ , a€~estate-typea€™ and now here as a€~a society of ordersa€™ . None of these captures 
what Marx is talking about here, which is inequality organised on a basis other than class or 
market. For Marx the problem of the emancipation of the Jews was that it would a€~freea€™ them only 
to enter an unequal, class-based world
and, in so doing, would dissolve what was distinctive in a Jewish way of life, whatever value you 
might place on that.

Even more than Marx, Max Weber contrasted status-based (stAPndisch) inequality with market-based 
divisions. A status group (Stand) has a distinctive way of life, which is regarded in a particular 
way, and is reflected in legal provisions and even in clothes or diet. An example in our 
contemporary world might be children: we think of them as fully human yet somehow as a different 
order of beings from adults, with a different legal
position and different preoccupations. To some degree, gender divisions too are stA^ndische 
differences. For both Marx and Weber what mattered was that the sweeping away of the old order a€“ 
the ancien regime of, er, a€~social ordersa€™ a€“ is at first experienced as emancipation, only for 
the reality to dawn that what replaces it are different forms of exploitation and oppression and 
new social identities grounded solely in market
position: in buying or selling labour-power.

The German term Stand is first cousin to the English word a€~standinga€™ , and both Marxa€™ s and 
Webera€™ s point was that modernity erodes all identities, honour and relationships in the acid of 
commercial exchange, leaving few of us really happy with where we standa€!
LINK: <https://www.lrb .co .uk/the-paper/v35/n 10/richard-j ,-evans/marx-v.-the-rest>

Indeed, the concerns were much broader:


Hugh Brogan: On Evans on Sperber on Marx'. a€™ As a student of Tocqueville who unfortunately knows 
no German, I am fascinated by the correspondence about Marxa€™ s phrase a€~Alles StAnndischea€™ . 
Jem Thomasa€™ s letter suggests to me that a€~stAnndisch, Standa€™ are exactly what Tocqueville was 
concerned with in Democracy in America. In his opening sentence Tocqueville says that nothing 
caught his attention
in the United States so much as a€'la€™ A©galitA© des conditionsa€™ . This phrase has given modern 
readers and translators a lot of trouble, as a€~conditionsa€™ nowadays are almost always taken to 
be physical a€“ material a€“ economic. I have long preferred to use the word a€~statusa€™ to 
express Tocquevillea€™ s meaning, and it is clear from Thomasa€™ s letter that this is exactly what 
Marx had in mind. a€~Alles
StA°ndische und Stehende verdampfta€™ would have given Tocqueville no trouble (he did know German); 
but he would of course have differed from Marx in not wanting or expecting a proletarian order to 
ensue. What is most striking to me is that both sages laid so much stress on the same phenomenon 
a€“ the collapse of the ancien rA©gime. The irreversibility of this calamity may seem self-evident 
to us, but it was hardly so in
Restoration Europe, the Europe of Metternich, Nicholas II and Guizot, which shaped both men. By 
Thomasa€™ s account, Weber merely deepens and intensifies Tocquevillea€™ s anxious account of the 
new democratic regime. All that was solid had indeed melted into air, and we are still struggling 
with the consequences. I seem to glimpse a new framework of historical interpretation, which will 
leave the stale orthodoxies of left and
right                                                                                               
                                                                                                    
   on the scrapheap at lasta€!

LINK: <https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v35/nl0/richard-j.-evans/marx-v.-the-rest>

Also worth readinga€’’certainly a clearer and more organized thinker than Marx, and one about whom 
I often wonder: What kind of thinker would Friedrich Engels have become if he had never met Marx, 
and thus had not come to regard himself as a mere secretary to the Great Man?a€”is Freddie from 
Barmen, Friedrich Engels:


READING: Friedrich Engels on the Materialist Conception of History
Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

Note that Marx and Engels had no real idea what was coming: the pace of worldwide change of their 
day was less than 1/4 of what it would become after 1870.

The original German phrase in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (1848): Manifesto of the Communist 
Party <https: //oil .liberty fund .org/page/marx-manifest#bourgeois> is a€oeAlles StA^ndische und 
Stehende verdampfta€!a€na€”a€Dall that is solid melts into aira€!a€Da€’’everything that firmly 
exists and all the elements of the society of orders evaporatea€!a€na€”a€Dall traditional estates 
and status-marker fixed patterns are steamed awaya€!a€D

The left and the right do, however, have different reactions to the coming of market societya€™ s 
steaming away of all intermediary structures and sources of social power that are not based on 
property rights recognized by the market economy. The left works to moderate market- (and 
other-)created wealth inequalities and to give individuals equal entitlements based on their status 
as citizens. The right works to shore up traditional hierarchies, liberties,
privileges, and other sources of social powera€”no matter how unequal and unfair they may bea€”in a 
rearguard action against the solvent of the market economy.

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

