Subscribe now

FIRST: Alan Blindera€™s Monetary & Fiscal History:

A History of Economic Whac-A-Mole :: Project Syndicate: Alan S. Blindera€™ s new book, A Monetary 
and Fiscal History of the United States, 1961-2021a€!. There has been neither linear development 
nor much a€oeprogressa€D in figuring out how to manage modern economies in the interest of 
macroeconomic stability. Instead, Blinder describes:
wheels within wheels, spinning endlessly in time and space a€! [with] certain themes a€! waxing and 
waning a€! monetary versus fiscal a€! the intellectual realm a€! the world of practical policy 
making a€! the repeated ascendance and descendance of Keynesianisma€!

Problems appear and are either solved or not solveda€L The response sets the stage for a new and 
different problem to emergea€L Actions taken in the recent past left the economy more vulnerable in 
some waya€!. Can inflation be expected to ebb, or does it tend to be highly persistent, with each 
shift in the rate becoming permanently embedded in the likely future? When Blinder a€oeentered 
graduate school in the fall of 1967 a€! empirical evidence virtually
screamed out that [it could be expected to ebb]  Theory and empirics clashed sharply. As Groucho 
Marx memorably asked, a€~Who are ya gonna believe, me or your own eyes?a€™ a€D Going with your own 
eyes was not the right thing to do. As economist Thomas J. Sargent soon showed in a a€cebeautiful 
five-page papera€D that was a€oeunderappreciated at the time,a€D much of the theoretical debate 
a€oewas beside the pointa€Da€l. Now, the same

problem is back. Do inflation expectations remain well-anchored or not? Is the answer the same as 
it was in the 1970s? It might well be, or it might not bea€!.

Blindera€! lets us ride shotgun along the extremely rocky road that US policymakers have traveled 
in their quest for price stability, full employment, financial resilience, and robust investment. 
Each episode produced by the Wheel of Fortuna is strikingly and a€“ I believe a€“ almost completely 
accurately described. Read and absorb Blindera€™ s account, and you will be qualified to present 
yourself as a respected elder statesmen who has seen much
macroeconomic policymaking up close, and whose advice warrants attentiona€!.

While history (correctly handled) can be very useful in helping us understand current situations, 
theory (at least currently fashionable theory) is nota€L Monetary policymakers who make their 
decisions on political grounds should count on their reputations being permanently tarnisheda€!. 
Using fiscal policy properly to manage demand and support growth is incredibly complexa€l in ways 
that are impossible for the political system to comprehend in real
timea€!

Share

One Image: Aze Labor Market:

Q Sam Ro, CFA
4^ 2 hr ago

— Job Openings: Total Nonfarm                                         ... but trending

12.000

11.000

10.000

9.000

7.000


6. ©a

5.000

4.000

3.000

2013       2014       2015       2016       2017       2018       2019       2020       2021       
2022

Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics               fred.stlouisfed.org

Job openings remain very high. (Source: BLS, FRED;

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Audio: Ezra Klein & Matt Yglesias on Elections:

chttps ://o vercast ,fm/+oiP V S s JkO>
Leave a comment

Must-Read: Matt Levine Is at A%e End of His Rope:

Matt Levine: Elon Musk is busy with Twitter: a€~Elon Musk showed up for his first day of work as 
Twittera€™ sa€! Chief Twit a€” and said a€oehey, do you have any other contracts I could 
violate?a€EL.. He fired Twittera€™ s chief executive, chief financial officer and other 
executives.a€! "Mr. Musk also appears unlikely to pay the golden parachutes.  Mr. Musk terminated 
the executives 'for cause'a€!a€D. I cannot believe wea€™re doing this again.

Another point is that he absolutely did not fire them for cause.... Elon Musk doesna€™ t care.  
Will his lawyers try to clean up the mess by pretending that he had cause?a€! Obviously. Will he 
eventually have to pay them their full severance? Obviously. Is this exactly in every respect like 
his decision to ignore the merger agreement? Pretty much, except that Musk essentially ended up 
having to pay Twittera€™ s legal bills for that, but these executives will

have to pay their own lawyers to go after Musk for this moneya€!. The basic problem with Muska€™ s 
efforts to walk away from his deal to buy Twitter a€” beyond the transparent nonsense of his actual 
arguments a€” was that if he could walk away from this deal then no merger agreement would be 
binding; every buyer could change their mind and go to court and say a€oemeh, contracts, they 
dona€™ t matter.a€D That did not work out for him; the system
helda€!

Give a gift subscription

O A%er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Chance: Tornetta v. Musk: The Tesla Compensation Case: a€~Trial begins November 14th. What will 
this "new" old case bring?a€!

•  Brendan Murray: The Workhorses of Global Trade Are Ringing Recession Alarms: a€~The market for 
$29 trillion in international commerce is a€oemoving backwards.a€D Thata€™ s the bleak assessment 
from Soren Skou, the CEO of Maersk, in an interview Wednesday on Bloomberg Television. (Read the 
full story here.) The Danish company said Wednesday it expects global container demand to decline 
2% to 4% this yeara€!

•  Barry Ritholtz: When Your Only Tool is a Hammera€!: a€~CPI isa€! an imperfect depiction of 
reality. It reports price increases with a very distinct laga€!. The FOMC seems to believe that 
middle-class purchases of homes and automobiles are where they can best strangle inflation. This is 
needlessly damaging at besta€!

• Tommi Johnson: Momentum Factor Investing: 30 years of Out of Sample Data

•  Martin Wolf: Geopolitics is the biggest threat to globalisation: a€~Humanity has, alas, done 
this before. Since the industrial revolution in the early 19th century, we have had two periods of 
deepening cross-border economic integration and one of the reversea€!. History hardly suggests that 
a period of deglobalisation is likely to be a happy onea€L In all, it was an epoch of catastrophea€!
Get 50% off a group subscription

AJs:

The Economist: What went wrong with Snap, Netflix and Uber?: a€~Three business modelsa€! losing 
steam: the movers (which shuttle people or things around cities), the streamers (which offer music 
and tv online) and the creepers (which make money by watching their users and selling eerily 
well-targeted ads)a€!. all turn out to face the same main pitfalls: a misplaced faith in network 
effects, low barriers to entry and a dependence on someone elsea€™ s
platform...


John Gruber: The Math on Twittera€™ s Debt: 'Lauren Hirsch.... "Musk... loaded about $13 billion in 
debt on the company, which had not turned a profit for eight of the past 10 years.... [Interest] 
will now balloon to about $1 billion a year. Yet the companya€™ s operations last yeargenerated 
about $630 million in cash flow.  That means that Twitter is generating less money per year 
thanwhat it owes its lenders. The company also does not appear to havea

lot of extra cash on hand..." Interest payments are a bitch. The optimistic take on Musk taking 
Twitter private is that it frees Twitter from pursuing increased revenue at all costs to please 
shareholders. But whata€™ s the point if Twitter now needs to pursue increased revenue at all costs 
to service its debt?...

a€0 Sylvia Varnham O'Regan: Zuckerberg is Spending Billions on the Metaversea€”Herea€™ s Where 
Ita€™ s All Going: a€~Apple has about 3,000 employees working on its mixed reality headseta€!. 
Meta, in contrast, has more than five times as many people working on multiple virtual reality 
headsets, augmented reality glasses and associated softwarea€!. 2,400 people working in a research 
team led by the divisiona€™ s chief scientist, Michael
Abrasha€! 1,900 people are working on content such as the Horizon Worldsa€! reporting into Vishal 
Shah, head of the metaverse team...

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

