Subscribe now

CONDITION: A Very Nice Foreign Affairs Review of Slouching from A34e extremely sharp Liaquat 
Ahamed:

A full-length review in the Nov/Dec issue!:

A masterfully sweeping accounta€l a joy to read. Few economic historians have as fluent a grasp of 
political or military history or, more important, write as lucidly and with such great flair about 
these subjectsa€! a€’’Liaquat Ahamed, Foreign Affairs

Share

FIRST: Development, & Colonization, External & Internal:

And Matthew Yglesias has joined those posting screenshots from their copies of Slouching Towards 
Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>:

Matthew Yglesias: a€~Interesting thoughts from @ delong on education and development in East Asia 
vs Latin Americaa€’’perhaps a result of a nationalist elite relative to elites who see themselves 
as essentially colonizersa€!

Matthew Yglesias @mattyglesias

Interesting thoughts from @delong on education and development in East Asia vs Latin America a€” 
perhaps a result of a nationalist elite relative to elites who see themselves as essentially 
colonizers. slowboring.com/p/part-2-brad-a€!

BDL Yes, I think education is a powerful leading indicator of growth. And, in fact, this
was, this ought to have been well-established in the 1950s, when Cynthia Taft Morris of
Smith and Irma Edelman of Berkeley did a bunch of pioneering studies attempting to
assess not just economic prosperity, but the social capability of different countries
around   the world. And they came up with the East Asian Pacific Rim as a place that was,
you know, uniquely advantaged in terms of a strong educational background and a
relatively equal income distribution without the kind of poisonous landed aristocracy
that   serves as an internal colonialist for so many countries.

They got very little cites, right? Very hard for a woman to get listened to in economics
in the 1950s. But they were absolutely prescient in what was likely to happen. You know,
invest in your people and you'll find that they are capable of doing remarkable things.

MY Can you explain the point about the landlords and internal colonialists — what do
you have in mind there?

BDL Well, you know, much of the story of Latin America since, you know, well since
1492 to start with has been a bunch of guys who are from Castille, or at least people who
was claimed that their ancestors were from Castille, think that they're there to rule the
country.

And that, you know, they're there to own the land and they’re there to steal any land that
anyone who isn't one of them has a proper deed to. And they're also there to say, worry
that if too many people go to school, you know, they might wind up reading, they might

end up reading some of the works of Karl Marx and get ideas that are not so good. So,

...... L_^...... ...         1                         .1



Leave a comment


One Image: Global Warming: Aze Seven Hottest Years on Record Were A%e Past Seven:

Temperature difference 2021 and 1991-2020


Data source: ERA5

Credit: C3S/ECMWF                          -7 -5 -3 -2 -1 -0.5 0 0.5 1             2 3 5 7 C

TWMVWUMOM y opemeus CECMWF

Air temperature at a height of two metres for 2021, shown relative to its 1991-2020
average. Source: ERA5. Credit: Copernicus Climate Change Service/ECMWF
DOWNLOAD ORIGINAL IMAGE

Give a gift subscription

Must-Read: China:

Guoguang Wu & Lii Yua: The Party Congress and the Future of China: a€~The removal of a former Party 
head, whether with friendly or nefarious intentions and whether for political or health reasons, 
should have at least merited a vague comment or two from Xi Jinping or Li Keqiang. They shoulda€™ 
ve, at minimum, explained to the delegates present that comrade Hu Jintao had to leave
for health reasons and asked everyone to kindly bid farewell, or say that they regret that hea€™ s 
unable to staya€!Li Yuan: a€l or even something like a thank-you, that woulda€™ ve been fine. 
Guoguang Wu: Exactly, thata€™ s just basic human kindness. As we saw, all the people Hu Jintao 
promoted a€” Li Keqiang, Wang Yang, Hu Chunhua, and the many others present a€” sat there
extremely nervously, and none of them expressed any sympathy or tried to comfort him. I actually 
saw lots of positive social media comments about Li Zhanshu, who acted on his instinct and moved a 
bita€!

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• John Scalzi: Staying Or Going at Twitter: Ironically, a Twitter Threada€!

• Ben Thompson & Dan Wang: The China Chip Ban: a€~he U.S. government thinks that Beijing has become 
a much more unfriendly power, even more so than during the Trump years, after President Xi aligned 
himself so closely with President Putin in February with a no limits partnership^!. The reason why 
you see this not only continuity but strengthening in anti-China
sentiment relative to the Trump administration is because this is actually driven much more by the 
bureaucracya€!

•  Jamie Merisotis: Struggles of the Modern Male: a€~Boys are now significantly less likely than 
girls to earn a high school diploma (a gap of 6 percentage points), go to college (14 points), or 
enroll in grad school (nearly 20 points). Outside a small cohort of men who continue to dominate 
elite institutions, most are earning lower wages than they did 40 years ago...

•  Charlie Warzel: Welcome to Geriatric Social Media: a€~Ia€™ ve been trying to talk myself into 
the social-media death-spiral idea, but it feels like the wrong framework to describe what is 
essentially just an evolutiona€!

•  Matt Yglesias: Elon Musk needs to make Twitter better: a€~I hope that some of the people whoa€™ 
ve stopped meaningfully engaging with their accounts for self-defensive reasons will be tempted by 
circles to re-engagea€!. Making it easy to sort your own list of followers would make having a big 
list of followers more valuablea€!. I likea€! MegaBlocka€!. a€oeNobody is
allowed to be annoyinga€D is not a reasonable content moderation goal. What you need is things like 
MegaBlock functionality...

• Joshua Brustein: Musk's Twitter Takeover Is In Its Score-Settling Phase: a€~Musk has obviously 
seen buying Twitter as a great trolla€!. Musk posted an open letter to advertisersa€!. The letter 
was an indication, it appeared, that Muska€! finally wanted to play it straight. Nope. Within days 
Musk had tweeted a risible conspiracy theory about the assault on House Speaker Nancy
Pelosia€™ s husband, then deleted it, then denied having deleted it, calling the New York Times 
fake news in the process. This is what the burn-it-all-down crowd was hoping for from Musk as 
a€oeChief Twita€Da€!

•  Leah Platt Boustan, Jiwon Choi & David Clingingsmith: Automation After the Assembly Line: 
Computerized Machine Tools, Employment and Productivity in the United States: a€~Since the 1970s, 
computerized machine toolsa€!. Industries more exposed to CNC increased capital investment and 
experienced higher labor productivity. Total employment rose, with gains for
college-educated workers and abstract tasksa€!. Employment gains were strongest for unionized 
jobs...

•  Rana Foroohar: After Neoliberalism: a€~Neoliberal policiesa€!immense inequalities within 
countriesa€!. Since the beginning of the neoliberal era, a handful of economists had pushed back 
against the received wisdom of the field. Karl Polanyia€!

•  Jeremy Siegel, Jeremy Schwartz & Barry Ritholtz: Transcript: a€~RITHOLZ: So leta€™ s not bury 
the lead, if market cap isna€™t the most efficient way to organize an index, what is?a€!. SIEGEL: 
We like dividends and/or earningsa€!. RITHOLTZ: And you guys prefer the name fundamental as opposed 
to smart beta?a€! SCHWARTZ: Ita€™ s semantics and branding. We
actually use the term modern alpha nowa€!. RITHOLTZ: I like dumb beta, but thata€™ s just mea€!


Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Dave Karpf: Staring down the Twitterpocalypse: a€~Reduce the size of the Twitter workforce a€” not 
because the employees arena€™ t doing necessary work, but just because he has to slash budgets to 
reduce overhead costsa€! roll out an endless stream of harebrained monetization ploysa€!. Hea€™ s 
just on the hook for way too much money here. The abuse. Fewer employees, less
moderation, and a general return of the worst of the alt-right asshole brigade is going to amplify 
all the worst parts of the Twitter experienced I. The death spiral. As the accounts you like to 
interact with go dark and/or move elsewhere, youa€™ 11 move elsewhere too. If we look at the 
history of social media, this has happened plenty of timesa€!. So my expectation is that Twitter 
will seem
mostly unchanged in a month or two, and then will be a hollo wed-out shell of its former self in a 
year or two. Elon spent too much, he doesna€™ t have a real plan, and hea€™ s stumbled into the 
biggest tech downturn since the dotcom crasha€!

Mark Gongloff: Elon Musk grabs Twitter wheel, aims for cliff: a€~Musk, after paying $44 billion for 
Twitter a€” a struggling social media platform probably worth [spins random number wheel] $12 
billion a€” seems determined to drive its value to $0 billion as fast as possible. In just a few 
days, he has: Fired most top managers and the entire board. Tweeted and deleted a conspiracy theory
about Paul Pelosi. Threatened to charge users $20 a month for account verification. Threatened to 
fire engineers who cana€™t make the $20-a-month thing happen in a week. And outsourced 
content-moderation strategy to @catturd2a€! to name just a few. Ita€™ s not an encouraging starta€!

Parmy Olson: Muska€™ s main policy solution so far: a€~Musk will soon learn that Twittera€™ s most 
valuable service is content moderation itself. Were it not for thoughtful curation, the site would 
become the a€oefree-for-all hellscapea€D that he has promised advertisers hea€™ d avoid. 
Coordinating that is now one of the most challenging jobs in technology, requiring a deep
understanding of law and ethics. Musk at least, has shown some humility in the face of that task: 
a€oeFailure in pursuing this goal, despite our best efforts, is a very real possibility,a€D he told 
advertisers. That may have been his most reasonable statement yeta€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

