Subscribe now

Trevon D Logan: a€™ This is actually a deep point DeLong is making', we have not recognized the 
single largest market failure in the economy. And we rarely talk about it as a
market failure at all. The answer: thata€™ s how they wanted it when they sold it to you! Anyone 
who has seriously thought about equilibrium theory knows that the lack of
attention  to endowments is pretty shameful. DeLong extends that here to thinking of the weights we 
apply and why it should encourage, not discourage, redistribution. But we never
quite get therea€!

Ben Boehlert: a€™ Ia€™ m consistently shocked in my undergrad Econ classes how inequality of 
opportunity almost never comes up. In a world where everyone is perfectly
rational, it seems like pretty big deal!a€!

Brad DeLong: I remember back in thea€\ spring of 1981,1 think it was. I asked my professor, William 
Thomson, visiting from Rochester, roughly this:

The utilitarian social welfare function is I©u = U(1) + U(2) + U(3)a€! The competitive market 
economy maximizes a market social welfare function I©m

= I%o(l)U(l) + I%o(2)U(2) + I%o(3)U(3)a€!, where the I%o(i)s are Negishi weights that are 
increasing functions of your lifetime wealth W(i)a€’’indeed, if
lifetime utility is log wealth, then I%o(i)=W(i). Market failures drive wedges between what the 
economy achieves and what it could achieve. There are
massive, massive differences between the I©u that is the true social welfare function and the 
function I©m that the well-working market maximizes.

Why isna€™t the unequal distribution of ex ante expected lifetime incomea€’’inequality of 
opportunitya€’’conceptualized by us economists as the
greatest of all market failures? And why isna€™ t the distribution of political power that creates 
& preserves a property order of unequal wealth seen as the
greatest of all a€oeregulatory capture by a special interest groupa€D flaws in the working of 
society, economy, and the state?"

Share

Thomson did not have a good answer. My other teacher Joe Kalt, however, did. a€oeThese Chicago Boys 
are all right-wing Marxists,a€D he said:

They buy the Marxian proposition that the state is an executive committee for rigging the economy 
in the interest of the ruling class. But they think that
that is a good thing as long as the ruling class is based on wealth, however previously acquired. 
All their objections are to those who use some form of
societal power other than wealth to try to rig the economy in their interest. And while there is an 
argument that a wealth-based ruling class is in general
best, it is a weak argument.

And do remember that I learned much of my political economy from Richard Musgrave and his TA Manuel 
Trajtenberg, who explicitly conceptualized public finance as having 3
branches: (1) repairing Pigovian externalities, (2) fiscal policy for full employment, (3) 
redistribution to shrink all the Negishi weights in the marketa€™ s SWF toward one.

The Chicago School underwent an enormous change between the Midwestern Populist days of Henry 
Simons, for whom private monopoly was the big foe and large inequalities an
enormous menace, & the monopoly-tolerant fundraising paradise that Stigler & co. created. This 
transformation from Simons to Stigler was possible only by a€ceotheringa€D the
non-rich by every means possible, so that their low weight in the marketa€™ s Negishi-weighted SWF 
could be dismissed as deserved.

I put it to you that taking the Murray Rothbard Road in race relationsa€’’trying to bring to life 
their anti-New Deal monopoly-tolerant union-busting economic policy agenda by
white racism and supremacy, as Frankensteina€™ s monster was brought to life by the lightninga€”was 
a very important part and remains a very important part of that shift away
from economics understood as a policy science that attempts to implement a Benthamite or a Millian 
utilitiarianism that seeks the greatest good of the greatest number.

LINK:

Dr. Trevon D Logan @TrevonDLogan

This is actually a deep point @ delong is makinga€” we have not recognized the single largest 
market failure in the economy. And we rarely talk about it as a market failure at all.
The answer: thata€™ s how they wanted it when they sold it to you!

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!' @delong

@Undercoverhist @Econ Marshall I remember back in the... spring of 1981,1 think it was. I asked my 
professor, William Thomson, visiting from Rochester, roughly this: "The
utilitarian social welfare function is I© = U(l) + U(2) + U(3)... The competitive market economy 
maximizes a market social welfare 1/

2:37 AM r™ Jun 12,2020

159Likes34Retweets

(This has been a rhetorical question: I think we all know why almost all neoliberal and 
further-right economists ignore the greatest of all market failures. I think we know that well.)
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


