Subscribe now

A Dose of Rational Optimism

Slouching Towards Utopia is a rise-and-fall epica€”but it is better at depicting the rise than 
explaining the fall.
Zachary D. Carter a-a Fall 2022

A cover of Scientific American portraying Thomas Edisona€™ s electric dynamometer, mirror 
galvanometer, and electric generator (Universal History Archive/Getty Images)

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century

by J. Bradford DeLong
Basic Books, 2022,624 pp.

There is a masterpiece in J. Bradford DeLonga€™ s Slouching Towards Utopia, and a very interesting 
muddle.

Humanity, the Berkeley economist argues, spent nearly the entirety of its history condemned to 
poverty by an insufficient supply of calories and a chronically excessive birth rate. But in the 
a€oelong twentieth
centurya€Da€’’the period between 1870 and 2010a€”an almost miraculous transformation took place: 
more and more people lived longer, healthier, more prosperous lives than ever before. Arenas of 
intellect and
creative expression that were once accessible only to the most privileged of elites became the 
common experiences of mass cultures. Humans did not find utopia, DeLong argues, but we stumbled in 
its general
direction.

In the grim morass that has followed the financial crisis of 2008, it is refreshing to receive a 
dose of rational optimisma€’’however tempereda€”from a serious intellectual examining our place in 
the grand scheme of
history. DeLong does not avert his readersa€™ eyes from the brutalities of imperial conquest, 
genocide, and revolution gone awry, which define the political milieu of the era under his 
microscope. But his narrative is
fundamentally hopeful: people can accomplish amazing things on a colossal scale. Not that long ago, 
we did so all the time.

This perspective is refreshing precisely because everyone, DeLong included, knows that something 
has gone terribly wrong.

Slouching Towards Utopia is a rise-and-fall epic, but it is better at depicting the rise than 
explaining the fall. a€oeWhy, with such godlike powers to command nature and organize ourselves, 
have we done so little to
build a truly human world, to approach within sight of any of our utopias?a€D DeLong asks in his 
final chapter, only to dodge an answer: a€oeA new story, which needs a new grand narrative that we 
do not yet know,
has begun.a€D Modesty is a virtue in a historian of long centuries, but after the persistent 
enlightenment of the booka€™ s first 450 pages, this limping denouement is a disappointment.

Ah, but those first 450 pages. DeLonga€™ s long twentieth century is a nod to the idea of the long 
nineteenth century developed by Eric Hobsbawm, one of two great economic historians (the other is 
Charles P.
Kindleberger) that DeLong alternately channels and challenges throughout Slouching Towards Utopia. 
For Hobsbawm, everything changed between 1789 and 1914, as humanity established the material 
foundations
that    could support true liberation and the political structures to deliver it. In Hobsbawma€™ s 
telling, the Industrial Revolution and its political handmaiden, the French Revolution, opened the 
door first to liberal
progress and then to the possibility of egalitarian salvation under Soviet Communism. Hobsbawm was 
very good at what he dida€”so good that many of his most strident political opponents still take a 
great deal of his
intellectual framework for granted. DeLong spends much of his book detailing the horrors engineered 
by Stalin and Mao but ultimately offers a revision of Hobsbawma€™ s thesis in lieu of an outright 
rejection. The
era                                                                                                 
 of economic revolution is not 1789a€“1914 but 1870a€“2010; the transition is not from barbarism to 
socialism but from squalor to social democracy.

According to DeLong, the Industrial Revolution was just one of several economic innovations that 
improved humanitya€™ s lot at the margins without fundamentally changing the trajectory of the 
human experience.
He quotes an aging John Stuart Mill, who lamented in 1870 that the triumph of so many liberal 
reformsa€”the abolition of slavery, the expansion of the franchise, the growth of international 
tradea€”had not produced
a healthier or happier world. The planet could support more people than it had been able to when 
Mill was born, but living standards had not improved for anyone outside a tight circle of elites. 
Even those who had
thrown off the yoke of slavery had been delivered from the cruelty of forced labor into the cruelty 
of fate; a bad harvest or an unusually cold winter could bring mass death. Almost everywhere, life 
remained uncertain
and short, if not nasty and brutish. Mill saw no way out absent a rigorous program of global birth 
control.

The wonder of the twentieth century, DeLong observes, was the attainment of previously unimaginable 
material gains amid a global population explosion. As DeLong notes, a€oeFour percent of Americans 
had flush
toilets at home in 1870; 20 percent had them in 1920,71 percent in 1950, and 96 percent in 1970. No 
American had a landline telephone in 1880; 28 percent had one in 1914,62 percent in 1950, and 87 
percent in 1970.
Eighteen percent of Americans had electric power in 1913; 94 percent had it by 1950.a€D

DeLonga€™ s upgrade of Hobsbawm is persuasive, but it inspires an obvious question: why begin the 
story of material triumph in 1870, when the era of broadly shared prosperity did not really begin 
until the 1940s?

For DeLong, the ingredients of economic liberation are the industrial research lab, the modern 
corporation, a globalizing economy, effective demand management, and the rough balance of private 
and public power
discovered during the New Deal. The first three factors arrived much earlier than the other two, 
and for DeLonga€™ s story of technology-fueled growth to hold up, he needs technological fuel, 
which did indeed take
root when he says it did. The number and the significance of new inventions skyrocketed in the 
1870s. It is impossible to imagine twentieth-century life without electricity, the telephone, 
photographic film, recorded
sound, the open-hearth steel furnace, the automobile, the motion picture, and a host of other 
innovations that arrived before 1900.

What distinguishes this technological revolution from Hobsbawma€™ s Industrial Revolution is what 
DeLong calls a€oethe invention of inventinga€Da€”the development of new processes and forms of 
organization
that enabled ideas to build on one another in rapid succession. a€oeWhat was invented in the 
industrial research labs could be deployed at national or continental scale,a€D DeLong writes. 
a€oePerhaps most


importantly, these economies discovered that there was a great deal of money to be made and 
satisfaction to be earned by inventing not just better ways of making old things, but in making 
brand-new things .a€D

Still, the Gilded Age was not an era of great social progress. In many respects, living standards 
for the vast majority of Americans deteriorated. As the historian Richard White details in The 
Republic for Which It
Stands, most Americans living in the final decades of the nineteenth century lived shorter lives 
than their Revolutionary Wara€“era forebears. A typical ten-year-old white boy could expect to five 
only another thirty­
eight years. He was also shorter of stature than his recent ancestors would have been, an 
indication of inadequate childhood nutrition. The data vary across regions and by race, with Black 
lives notably briefer than
white throughout, the South underperforming the rest of the country, and significant divergences 
between rural and urban life, with cities suffering from poor sanitation and deadly disease 
outbreaks. But the broad
pattern is grim. Only after 1890 did things start to look up, and only after 1900 would American 
lifespans begin the general, unambiguous upward ascent that public health experts took for granted 
until very recently.

Why didna€™t the wondrous new inventions of the 1870s lead swiftly to better living? The decade 
also marked the beginning of a revolution in global commerce brought on by the wide acceptance of 
gold as a
common medium of exchange. The gold standard facilitated international trade and helped spread 
efficiency gains from a global division of labor. But the gold standard also established a new era 
of macroeconomic
mismanagement. After the Civil War, the United States experienced chronic deflation until the turn 
of the century. The period between 1873 and 1879 proved so horrific that people called it the Great 
Depression.

DeLonga€™ s story begins in 1870 because you cannot have the diversity of travel, consumption, art, 
and entertainment that defined the twentieth century without the inventions of the Gilded Age. But 
none of these
fancy gadgets would have developed into a transformative mass culture without DeLonga€™ s later 
plot pointsa€’’particularly the coming of John Maynard Keynes. He enters Slouching Towards Utopia 
like Orson
Welles in The Third Man, the brilliant man of mystery whose ideas have colored the entire work at 
last given room to explain the world and its problems. (Keynes was not a sinister villain like 
Wellesa€™ s character,
though he would eventually be chased from the scene.)

Keynesa€™ s great genius, DeLong argues, was his recognition that economic troubles had ceased to 
be matters of resource scarcity alone; they had become problems of systems management. The market 
needed an
economic steward to consciously maintain aggregate demand for the goods it produced. Depressions 
were not the result of bad harvests or a lackadaisical workforce, but rather of a collapse in 
consumer spending.

Keynes concluded that capitalism was dysfunctional, perhaps incoherent, without state economic 
management. DeLong, inspired by Charles P. Kindleberger, adds an international twist: global 
economic progress
cannot take place without the active management of an international economic hegemon. The British 
Empire provided this service with decidedly mixed results through the First World War. When the 
United States
refused to take up the mantle, the period that we now call the Great Depression ensued.

Keynesian ideas opened the door to an extraordinary array of compromises and collaborations between 
liberals and socialists. Keynes, a card-carrying member of the Liberal Party, helped design 
Britaina€™ s National
Health Service (NHS) for the Labour Party. In the United States, Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the 
Social Security and Wagner Acts. Europe and America enjoyed what DeLong heralds as a€oeThirty 
Glorious Years of
Social Democracy,a€D where living standards rose sharply for nearly everyone. In the United States, 
the economic gap between Black and white families narrowed, as did the earning differential between 
men and
women.

And then the neoliberals took over. The great puzzle of neoliberalism, DeLong astutely maintains, 
is how it preserved and even consolidated its intellectual grip even as it straightforwardly failed 
to achieve the social
outcomes it promised. Milton Friedman, DeLong notes, insisted that repealing the elaborate economic 
management apparatus of the New Deal would produce price stability, something close to full 
employment, and a
socially tolerable distribution of income. But none of that actually happened under Reagan and 
Thatcher. Inequality skyrocketed, as did unemployment. There are true believers who insist that 
their program wasna€™ t
sufficiently libertariana€”Social Security, the NHS, and defense spending all survived. But the 
retreat on fiscal and regulatory policy was real, and the results were higher unemployment and 
deeper inequality. That
should  have been enough to discredit the program. Instead, DeLong notes, Bill Clinton declared the 
era of big government to be over, and Barack Obama called for deficit reduction with unemployment 
over 9 percent.

DeLong concludes that the American victory in the Cold War gave neoliberalism an unearned aura of 
triumph. When Reagan was credited with vanquishing the Soviet menace, his brand of capitalism took 
the
ideological win. The market had defeated the state, leaving no conceptual room for the Keynesian 
public-private hybrid, even though the United States continued to function as a thoroughly mixed 
economy. It is a
creative and convincing explanation.

DeLong delivers this material with the clarity and dexterity of Kindleberger at his best. And 
though he does at times take excessive detours into dorky cul-de-sacsa€”the book does not need 
quite so many pages on the
development of alternating current or the transistora€’’these indulgences can be skimmed easily 
enough.

The only truly frustrating element of the book is its treatment of globalizationa€”and here the 
trouble is concentrated near the end. DeLong is a fine chronicler of national economies and of the 
development of Europe
and the United States as economic units. But as he acknowledges, the story of the Global South 
during his period of interest is really dozens of different stories driven by different political 
currents. Beyond the
inevitable narrative disjuncture is a genuinely difficult conceptual problem: how did globalization 
advance the welfare of so many billions of people when protectionist trade policies dominate so 
much of the long
twentieth century?

Once again the Gilded Age is instructive. American trade with the rest of the world expanded 
dramatically after 1870, but it did so as the United States deepened its commitment to protective 
tariffs. There is substantial
variation by year and by product, but generally, European manufacturers could expect to face duties 
of about 50 percent in the American market between 1870, when President Ulysses S. Grant signed his 
postwar tariff
bill, and the outbreak of the First World War.

Over this same period, U.S. exports increased by more than 640 percent, according to U.S. census 
data, while imports more than quadrupled. How could this happen during an era of historically high 
U.S. tariffs marred
by chronic deflation, repeated financial crisis, and a federal government that refused to support 
domestic demand?

The answer appears to be that the British Empirea€’’international economic hegemon of the Gilded 
Agea€”simply didna€™t care much about trade reciprocity with the United States. Free trade was a 
principle of
almost religious devotion in Great Britain, and by the 1870s, the empire had done away with nearly 
all of its tariffs. Yet it refused to punish the United States when it did not follow suit. As a 
result, Americans
simultaneously enjoyed the benefits of both free trade and protectionism. Its farmers maintained 
access to large consumer markets abroad, while its industrialists could undercut foreign 
competitors and generate large
profits   and new jobs.

Britain was not so generous with the rest of the world. For India, one price of expanded trade with 
the British Isles was the deliberate deindustrialization of the Indian economy. India ceased to 
manufacture its own
textiles, and instead provided raw materials to Britain, which handled the factory work. Under the 
traditional free trade theory of comparative advantage, this process should have maximized the 
wealth of both
countries.                                                                                          
      In practice, however, it meant India had to wait decades to develop a high-wage industrial 
sector and experienced a much longer spell as an agrarian economy chained to the standard 
population problem of
human history.

For most of his book, DeLong seems unusually clear-eyed about this phenomenon for an American 
economist, presenting the protective industrial tariff as an essential prerequisite for developing 
economies trying to
shake off the Malthusian devil. Though tariffs were frowned upon after the Second World War, DeLong 
notes, the new economic hegemon, the United States, provided direct industrial investment to 
Europe, Japan, and
other allies, and it looked the other way when those allies provided massive subsidies to their 
manufacturing sectors. Thus Japan and South Korea enjoyed a vast improvement in living standards 
over the second half of
the long twentieth century, while most of the Global South did not.

But DeLong abandons this narrative when the 1990s arrive. Suddenly the principles of industrial 
expansion and material progress that dominated the first 120 years of his story cease to apply. 
Globalization and free
trade now go hand in hand. DeLong is surprised that the North American Free Trade Agreement did not 
substantially raise wages in Mexico, and unsure why so many Americans have been angry about
deindustrialization in the twenty-first century. DeLong maintains that no overall domestic damage 
has occurred, stating that U.S. manufacturing jobs have simply been transformed into warehousing 
and transportation
jobsa€”without pausing to wonder if these new jobs arena€™ t quite so good as the originals.

DeLong is not a triumphalist about the experience of what he calls a€oehyperglobalizationa€n in the 
1990s. He acknowledges that the overwhelming majority of the gains from this project came in China, 
where the
glory of new material prosperity must be balanced against the abuses of authoritarian surveillance 
and ethnic persecution. But he presents the era as a greater puzzle than it really is. The gains 
from hyperglobalization
have been concentrated in China because hyperglobalization was a race to the bottom, and China won 
the race. And it won by pursuing the same development strategy that DeLong chronicles elsewhere. 
Chinaa€™ s
economic managers tried everything they could to give Chinese exports a leg up on international 
competitors, including currency devaluation and massive subsidies to state-owned enterprises. And 
the United States,
like Britain in the nineteenth century, played along, believing that a broader, wealthier Chinese 
middle class would be good for human rights and global stability. The question for China, and the 
world, is whether this
protectionist first step will lead to a€oeThirty Glorious Yearsa€D levels of shared prosperity 
without the social democracy that fostered it in the United States.

DeLonga€™ s story of hegemony as a driver of stability and growth is extremely compellinga€”but 
ita€™ s also a nice way of saying that imperialism isna€™ t so bad when it works. The 
neoliberalization of the
world that began in the late 1970s not only undermined U.S. fiscal policy management, it decimated 
Americaa€™ s effectiveness as an international economic hegemona€”a fact that is obscured by the 
expansion of
American military operations over the same period. Our leaders rely more on death and destruction 
in foreign policy and less on economic coordination and cooperation. They solve political problems 
with guns and
threats, and assume the market will take care of prosperity and harmony.

The last quarter century clearly demonstrates that this program does not work. But DeLonga€™ s 
first 450 pages inspire a question that the American left does not often ask: if we cannot return 
to rising global
prosperity without a responsible international hegemon, what is the proper role for the United 
States? Americaa€™ s wars in Vietnam, Iraq, Afghanistan, and elsewhere make the promise of a more 
balanced and
cooperative geopolitical order attractive. But todaya€™ s world, for better and for worse, runs on 
dollars, and it will not be made to do otherwise without extraordinary dislocation.

And we are running out of time. The acceleration of climate change will stress the global 
economya€™ s capacity to support human life. DeLong is right to fear that humanity is not slouching 
into the next phase of its
history, which looks very little like a utopia.

Zachary D. Carter is the author of The Price of Peace: Money, Democracy, and the Life of John 
Maynard Keynes, winner of the Arthur Ross Book Award and the Sidney Hillman Book Prize.
Leave a comment


cuuiiuiiuu nicuiagcia IHCU cvuiymuig uicy uvwu IU give vauucsc CApuits ci icg up uii 
niiciiiciiiuiicii uuiiipuuiuia, iiiuiuuiiig uuiiciiuy ucvciiuciiiuii ciuu uiasdivu suudiaics io 
suuu-uwuca cuicipuses, /-vua me umicu oiciies,

like Britain in the nineteenth century, played along, believing that a broader, wealthier Chinese 
middle class would be good for human rights and global stability. The question for China, and the 
world, is whether this
protectionist first step will lead to a€oeThirty Glorious Yearsa€D levels of shared prosperity 
without the social democracy that fostered it in the United States.

DeLonga€™ s story of hegemony as a driver of stability and growth is extremely compellinga€”but 
ita€™ s also a nice way of saying that imperialism isna€™ t so bad when it works. The 
neoliberalization of the
world that began in the late 1970s not only undermined U.S. fiscal policy management, it decimated 
Americaa€™ s effectiveness as an international economic hegemona€”a fact that is obscured by the 
expansion of
American military operations over the same period. Our leaders rely more on death and destruction 
in foreign policy and less on economic coordination and cooperation. They solve political problems 
with guns and
threats, and assume the market will take care of prosperity and harmony.

The last quarter century clearly demonstrates that this program does not work. But DeLonga€™ s 
first 450 pages inspire a question that the American left does not often ask: if we cannot return 
to rising global
prosperity without a responsible international hegemon, what is the proper role for the United 
States? Americaa€™ s wars in Vietnam, Iraq, Afghanistan, and elsewhere make the promise of a more 
balanced and
cooperative geopolitical order attractive. But todaya€™ s world, for better and for worse, runs on 
dollars, and it will not be made to do otherwise without extraordinary dislocation.

And we are running out of time. The acceleration of climate change will stress the global 
economya€™ s capacity to support human life. DeLong is right to fear that humanity is not slouching 
into the next phase of its
history, which looks very little like a utopia.

Zachary D. Carter is the author of The Price of Peace: Money, Democracy, and the Life of John 
Maynard Keynes, winner of the Arthur Ross Book Award and the Sidney Hillman Book Prize.
Leave a comment

Leave a comment

