I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish
to join the group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

Ryan Avent: What Is Trumpism, Exactly?

The Bellows

What is Trumpism, exactly?

A few years back, the mathematician and writer Cathy Oa€™ Neill cheekily noted that Trump the 
politician behaved an awful lot like a machine-learning algorithm. He doesna€™ t behave like he has 
any real beliefs, she observed; he more responds to incoming data as an algorithm might if it were 
a politician-bot tasked with soliciting strong reactions from a
crowa€!

Read more

6 months ago A- Ryan Avent

a€~I sat reflecting on the chapter in Brad DeLonga€™ s new book which discusses the rise of 
fascism. Mussolinia€! off socialism, impressed by the power of ethno-nationalism, and keen to lead 
a mass movementa€! crept and felt his way toward a set of core principles, based in large part on 
what seemed to work best: another algorithm,
learning from incoming dataa€!. Brad flirts with the notion that actually there was never much of 
anything coherent there: just an algorithmically learning leader exploiting the intoxicating power 
of nationalism to elevate himself into a position of power.a€l But even if fascism often is that, 
it is also something elsea€”and its capacity to attract
millions of supporters is the proofa€!. It is a belief, first, in the fundamental importance of the 
ethno-nationalist community, appeals to which have a terrible unifying and inspirational power. It 
is implacably opposed to socialism and to liberalisma€!. It embraces a certain economic pragmatism 
and rejects deference to the marketa€!. And yes,
it   is about the leadera€!. It is not on its face a particularly alluring set of principles, and 
its appeal has to be understood in the context of the shortcomings of other ideologies. In the 
middle of the 20th century, those shortcomings were all too obviousa€!.

That Trump has succeeded in the way that he has tells us something profound about the American 
electorate. It tells us that our society has within it certain terrible capacities. If Trump goes 
away, do we imagine that those capacities will too?a€! It took extraordinary material hardship to 
create the conditions in which a fascist regime could
take power in Germany. Even if we say that Trumpism isna€™ t fascism, but is more like the 
half-formed kernel around which an American fascism might coalesce if luck and the flow of history 
were against us, isna€™ t that on its own a remarkable thing? Doesna€™ t that suggest that whatever 
else our current system is and does, it has
within it this extraordinary vulnerability, that some large portion of the population are ready to 
rip up everything to follow a Trump wherever he goes? Mostly sunny with a chance of afternoon 
fascism is one hell of a forecasta€!.

Reading Brada€™ s book, I found myself imagining a future, decades from now, in which people try to 
understand the events that led to a second Trump terma€”still a good bet, according to the 
bookiesa€”and everything which flowed from that. What would they say about us? What choices that we 
are making would seem unfathomable to
them, or unconscionable? What will they think we should have understood, should have seen coming? I 
dona€™ t know. I dona€™ t knowa€!

From one perspective, fascism, neo-fascism, and fascism-adjacent are things that go back to the 
very beginning of democratic politicsa€”back to the election of Andrew Jackson in the U.S. in 1832 
and to the election of Louis Bonaparte in France in 1848. It is a short-circuiting of the politics 
of patron and client, of interests and affinities, and of network connections
for something else: a politics of a parasocial connection to someone whom Max Weber called a 
a€oecharismatica€n leader. And as long as the parasocial bonds are maintained, the leader can 
change course at will and lead the people pretty much anywhere, no matter whether his policies are 
any good for their material interests or indeed for their former ideal interests.

That Max Weber thought it important enough to include this type of leadership as one of his three 
"types" tells you how deep he thought it ran in human affairs. And Karl Marx could not believe that 
the French Revolution of 1848a€”the one that was supposed to see the rapid advance of socialism, as 
the bourgeoisie was moved to the back and the proletariat took the
drivera€™ s seata€”end in the dictatorship of the clown Louis Bonaparte, heading a government 
a€oenot, as was traditional in France, of mistresses, but of gigolosa€D. Indeed, Marxa€™ s rant is 
something to read:

Every observer of average intelligence^! must have anticipated that an unheard-of fiasco was in 
store for the revolutiona€!. The constitution, the national assembly, the dynastic parties, the 
blue and the red republicans, the heroes from Africa, the thunder from the tribune, the 
flash-lightnings from the daily press, the whole literature, the
political names and the intellectual celebrities, the civil and the criminal law, the 
a€oelibertea€™ , egalitea€™, fraternitea€™ ,a€D together with the [succession of power to take 
place on the] 2d of May 1852a€”all vanished like a phantasmagoria before the ban of one man, whom 
his enemies themselves do not pronounce an adept at
witchcraft. Universal suffrage seems to have survived only for a moment, to the end that, before 
the eyes of the whole world, it should make its own testament with its own hands, and, in the name 
of the people, declare: a€oeAll that exists deserves to perish.a€D

It is not enough to say, as the Frenchmen do, that their nation was taken by surprise. A nation, no 
more than a woman, is excused for the unguarded hour when the first adventurer who comes along can 
do violence to her. The riddle is not solved by such shifts, it is only formulated in other words. 
There remains to be explained how a nation of
thirty-six millions can be surprised by three swindlers, and taken to prison without resistance^!

Marx was, in some ways, very traditional and bourgeois indeed.

Marx in the end constructed a convoluted, implausible, and false explanation that Louis Bonaparte 
could become dictator of France because the landlord-bourgeoisie required a king from the Bourbon 
dynasty while the mercantile-industrial-bourgeoisie required a king from the Orleans dynasty, and 
an illegitimate dictator from the Bonapartist dynasty was preferable to
each than the candidate of the other faction because he would follow not pro-agriculture or 
pro-industry policies but would rather compromise.

But that was not it at all.

Marx in the end constructed a theory that Louis Bonaparte could become dictator of France because 
the industrial proletariat was still too small in numbers, leaving France still dominated by the 
agricultural proletariat^”the peasantsa€’’which were not a class able to exert political pressure 
on their own behalf but rather a€oea potato-baga€! prevented] from
generating among them any unity of interest, national connections, and political organization^! 
unable to assert their class interestsa€!representeda€! [by] their master, as an authority over 
them, as an unlimited governmental power, that protects them from above, bestows rain and sunshine 
upon thema€! [and] subjugates the commonweal to its own autocratic
will.a€D

But in history since 1789, it has been only the peasantry that has ever appeared as an effective 
class making a political and social revolution.
Marx thought that Louis Bonapartea€™ s Second French Empire was bound to collapse very quickly

Harassed by the contradictory demands of his situation, and compelled, like a sleight-of-hands 
performer, to keep, by means of constant surprises, the eyes of the public riveted upon himself as 
the substitute of Napoleon, compelled, consequently, everyday to accomplish a sort of a€cecoupa€D 
on a small scale, Bonaparte throws the whole
bourgeois social system into disorder; he broaches everything that seemed unbroachable by the 
revolution of 1848; he makes one set people patient under the revolution and another anxious for 
it; he produces anarchy itself in the name of order by rubbing off from the whole machinery of 
Government the veneer of sanctity, by profaning it, by
rendering it at once nauseating and laughablea€!

But Louis Bonaparte hung on, and gave France internal peace and economic development for two 
decades, until the charismatic spell was broken by defeat in the Franco-Prussian War.

There is a good deal to be said for Ezra Klein's worry that politics in the age of social media is 
not the politics of compromise and consensus that sometimes held when we were in the Gutenberg 
Galaxya€”that we have a good thing going, politically, in our common home, and we should decide 
whether to finish the addition (tack left) or restore the roof by fixing the
leaks (tack right). The fear is that politics in the age of social media is one of a€oedo you have 
the right enemiesa€D, and, as such, is uniquely vulnerable to this kind of charismatic takeover by 
a government that has skills that are, at best, orthogonal to competent government and focused on 
making people unhappy by raising internal and external culture war to a
rolling boil.

But I reject Ryana€™ s claim that this shows that our society has an a€oeextraordinary 
vulnerabilitya€D. It is, rather, I think, a standard failure mode of democratic-ish politics.
Indeed, let me give the mic to James Madison:

a pure democracy, by which I mean, a society consisting of a small number of citizens, who assemble 
and administer the government in person, can admit of no cure for the mischiefs of faction. A 
common passion or interest will, in almost every case, be felt by a majority of the whole; a 
communication and concert, results from the form of
government itself; and there is nothing to check the inducements to sacrifice the weaker party, or 
an obnoxious individual. Hence it is, that such democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence 
and contention; have ever been found incompatible with personal security, or the rights of 
property; and have, in general, been as short in their
lives, as they have been violent in their deaths. Theoretic politicians, who have patronized this 
species of government, have erroneously supposed, that, by reducing mankind to a perfect equality 
in their political rights, they would, at the same time, be perfectly equalized and assimilated in 
their possessions, their opinions, and their passionsa€!

Madisona€™ s view is here inherited from Thucydides, Plato, Xenophon, Aristotle, and also Plutarch 
and company. The principal historical focuses underlying it are Pericles-Cleon-Alcibiades trying to 
guide the city of Athens through the Peloponnesian War, and the ease with which Philip of Macedon 
was able to buy Aeschines and company to spread pro­
Macedonian fake news in the runup to the Macedonian Hegemony. While aristocracies and oligarchies 
have a firm view of what their and the public interest are, and while aristocrats have enough 
ballast in their souls to maintain independent judgment, a democracy will very easily fall under 
the charismatic spella€’’whether that of a wise Pericles, an erratic
Alcibiades, or a destructive Cleon.

But it is surely true that all of this gets taken to a higher power and scale with the coming of 
nationalism, and then again, perhaps, of social media.
Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Kuen Lee: How Realistic Are Chinaa€™s Semiconductor Ambitions? 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentary/china-semiconductor-industry-leapfrog-us-competition-b
y-keun-lee-2022-06>

• Kuen Lee: China's Two Traps 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentary/china-development-faces-two-traps-bv-keun-lee-2022-02>
: a€~As ChinaaC™ s economic slowdown suggests, the next phase of its development is rife with 
challenges. While China does not have to adopt Western-style liberal democracy to avoid the 
a€oemiddle-income
trapa€D and the Thucydides Trap, it will have to devise a viable alternative...

• Slavoj A^6iA%ek: Degeneracy, Depravity, & the New Right 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/putin-alt-right-reviving-male-chauvinist-aggression-bv
-slavoi-zizek-2022-08>

•  William D. Cohan: Neumanna€™s Resurrection & The Trump Orga€™ s Future - Puck 
<https://puck.news/neumanns-resurrection-the-trump-orgs-future/>: a€~Ita€™ s hard to comprehend 
what would compel Andreessen Horowitza€! to entrust Adam Neumann with a fresh $350 million...

•  Raul Pacheco-Vega: 3 Fundamental Lessons About Reading & Academic Writing 
<http://www.raulpacheco.org/2022/08/3-fundamental-lessons-about-reading-and-academic-writing/>a€D 
a€~First, to learn how to write, you need to read.  Second, to learn how to write well you need to 
read folks who write well, whose prose is clear, and whose style

you like.... The third lesson on reading and academic writing I emphasize is that you need to read 
broadly and all sorts of materials...


•  Beam: Bright Paper 
<https://public.beamapp.co/beam/note/c5et3t23-5864-45ad-943e-b75b093555el/Bright-Papei>: a€ Wea€™re 
building beam because we think something is tundamentally broken in the way the tools at our 
disposal have us use the weba€”and thus, our minds. It teels like we have not treely chosen our 
online practicesaL'that they

are habits we have helplessly picked upa€!

• Eric Rauchway: On Harry Dexter White & Pearl Harbor 
<https://crookedtimber.org/2013/04/08/out-of-steil/>

• Jonathan Chait: What Is Really Unprecedented Is Trumpa€™ s Criminality <https 
://nymag.com/intelligencer/2022/08/fbi-raid-isnt-unprecedented-trumps-criminality-is.html>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• John Torres-O'Callaghan: a€~Obviously, Biden should offer Trump a pardon AND the Sudetenland...

John Torres-O'Callaghan @ jocallag42

@gtconway3d @delong Obviously, Biden should offer Trump a pardon AND the Sudetenland.
2:02 AM r™ Aug 22,2022

24Likes7Retweets

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish
to join the group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish
to join the group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

