Subscribe now


Share

Key Insights:

1. We should avoid the tendency to paint the past, nostalgically, as a golden age.

2. If we take the long view there is an overwhelming continuity in the immigrant experience.

3. The immigrant experience is a very positive storya€”both then and now.

4. There is great hope for positive change in our immigration system: comprehensive immigration 
reform is not a third rail in American politics.

5. Remember George Washingtona€™ s take on immigration: a€oeThe bosom of America is open to receive 
not only the Opulent and respected Stranger, but the oppressed and persecuted of all Nations and 
Religions; whom we shall welcome to a participation of all our rights and privileges, if by decency 
and propriety of conduct they appear to merit the enjoymenta€!a€D

6. There is a great deal right with America, but if we want to focus on what is wrong with America, 
look to intersectionality: what is happening to the sons of 1st-generation Caribbean-American 
immigrants?

7. Hexapodia!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Language-Path: Arbwyth->Trade 24->Cherguelen->Tri$kw
From: Twirlip of the Mists

Subject: Blighter Video thread
Keywords: Hexapodia as the key insight


DisrriDution: rnrear or tne Biignt

Approved: yes

Date: 8.68 days since Fall of Relay

I haven't had a chance to see the famous video from
Straumli Realm, except as an evocation. (My only
gateway onto the Net is very expensive.) Is it true

References:

• Ran Abramitzky & Leah Platt Boustan: Streets of Gold: America's Untold Story of Immigrant Success 
chttps: //ww w.amazon .com/S treets-Gold-Americas-Immigrant- Success/dp/1541797833>

• Leah Platt Boustan: Competition in the Promised Land: Black Migrants in Northern Cities and Labor 
Markets <https://www.amazon.com/dp/BO 1 GP3POLU/>

+, of course:

• Vernor Vinge: A Fire Upon the Deep chttps: //archive .org/details/fireupondeepOOving_ 0/mode/1 up>
Leave a comment

Notes & Questions:

1. Americans vastly overestimate how many immigrants are in the country today. Americans guess 36% 
of the country is born abroad, whereas the real number is 14%.

2. The second biggest misconception is that immigrants nowadays are faring more poorly in the 
economy and are less likely to become American than immigrants 100 years ago. That is simply not 
true

3. Immigrants take steps to 'fit in' just as much today as they did in the past.

4. The children of Mexican parents do pretty well today! Even though they were raised at the 25th 
percentile in childhood, they reach the 50th percentile in adulthood on average. Compare that to 
the children of US-born white parents raised at the same point, who only reach the 46th percentile.

5. One of the main changes for Mexican immigrants in the 1980s and 1990s is that they settled in 
larger numbers away from "gateway" communities.

6. The children of poor Irish or Italian immigrant parents outperformed the children of poor 
US-born parents in the early 20th century; the same is true of the children of immigrants 
todaya€”with the exception of the sons of 1st generation Caribbean-Americans.

7. Immigrants tended to settle in dynamic cities that provided opportunities both for themselves 
and for their kids. This makes sense: immigrants have already left home, often in pursuit of 
economic opportunity, so once they move to the US they are more willing to gowhere the 
opportunities are.

8. We suspect that educational differences between groups matter today. Immigrant families can pass 
along educational advantages to their children.

9. For kids in 1910 observed working in 1940, immigrants have lower levels of education than 
otherwise similar children of US-born parents, but yet they earn more. Why? Geography. Immigrants 
and their children lived in more dynamic locations (for example:in cities, and outsideof the 
South).

10. Immigrants that people (somewhat disparagingly) call "low-skilled" are actually pretty 
selected: It takes a lot of bravery, motivation, and resourcefulness to pick up and move to a new 
country, especially without much money or connections or language skills.

11. What role did the Cold War and the Red Scare play in discouraging social movements and 
progressive legislation?

12. What were the effects of the early a€oecomputerized factorya€D on the labor market and on 
productivity?
Give a gift subscription

Get a group subscription

TA — .4— C..I   ’


i>unatc ouL>a>mipiiuH5>


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

