I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


What was life like for the typical human back in the Agrarian Age?

Pretty awful. A life expectancy of less than thirty. Ferocious mortality meaning that in the 
typical couple the woman spent nearly two decades eating for twoa€”eight pregnances for six live 
births to get three chidren surviving to age ten, and barely more than two surviving to reproduce.

But why was infant and other mortality so high?

Because the typical person was undernourished and stunted: human population was too large relative 
to our low (and slowly improving) level of technology and our limited ability to harvest natural 
resources.

But why was population pressing so hard upon the limits of subsistence?

Because patriarchy meant that womena€™s durable social power came pretty much only from being 
mothers of surviving sons. Slowly-improving technology meant that there was only room for the next 
generation to be a bit more numerous than the last: pre-1870 population growth rate of about 10% 
per century, or less. Thus about one woman in three was left without surviving sons. Hence even if 
you already had a son or sons, the
pressure to try to have another just in case your current sons died was immense was immense. Thus 
whenever any technological headroom to support higher productivity and grant a household greater 
resources emerged, the overwhelming pressure was to use those resources to boost the population. 
That was the force that kept humanity poor, thus before 1870 it was Thomas Robert Malthusa€™s 
world: humanity ensorcelled by and
under the spell of the Malthusian devil.

This sounds circular: mortality was high because people were malnourished; people were malnourished 
because resources were scarce; resources were scarce because people kept trying to have more sons 
as insurance; and people kept trying to raise more sons as insurance because mortality was high. 
How can something so circular be an explanation?

Yes. It is a very vicious circle. Once you are in it, there is no way out of it.

But why was Agrarian Age humanity in it?

Only one local geographic group has to fall into it. That group is then under immense population 
and resource pressure to expand. And, because of its higher population density and bias toward more 
reproduction, it then has the resources to expand and crowd out other populations. The Fall of Man 
into the Agrarian Age, the ensorcellment by the Devil of Malthus, only has to take place once. Then 
it spreads over the world.

So the poverty and the malnutrition were the big things wrong with humanity in the Agrarian Age, 
right?

No. There were more big things wrong: the thuggishness, the violence, the theft, and the 
exploitation.

Tell me morea€\?

In a poor world, with limited technology and upward pressure on the population creating resource 
scarcity, it was only possible for a few to have enough. Moreover, the way those few could get 
enough for themselves and their children was for them, through force and fraud, to run an 
exploitation-and-extraction machine against the bulk of humanity. Hence, as I said: the 
thuggishness, the violence, the theft, and the exploitation.

But how can an A©lite create and run such an exploitation-and-extraction machine?

Once again, the incentives push those who control societya€™s resources in that direction. If you 
become a thug-with-a-spear (or one of their accountants or publicists), it works: not only do you 
take stuff, but you then can defend the stuff you have taken from others. And taking stuff is much 
more rewarding than trying to invent better and more productive ways of doing things?

Why isna€™ t trying to invent better and more productive ways of doing things the more rewarding 
option?

How do you get others who copy your techniques to pay you? Even if you are lucky enough to discover 
a good idea, how do you develop and deploy it? There need to be societal systems built to strongly 
encourage such, and they did not exist.

But human knowledge did advance in the Agrarian Age, didna€™ t it?

Yes, but it advanced very slowly. In the world of the exploitation-and-extraction machines, those 
ideas that were promoted and thus flourished were not those that made humanity capable of doing 
more things more efficiently and effectively. They were, instead, the ideas that shored-up the 
force-and-fraud exploitation-and-extraction system. Thus the rate of technological advance was slow 
indeed: figure 5% per century.
Thus my crude guess is that there has been as much proportional technological progressa€’’useful 
ideas discovered, developed, deployed, and then diffused throughout the global economya€’’making 
humanity more productive in the 150-year span since 1870 as there were in the entire nearly 
10,000-year span since the beginnings of the creation of agriculture around the year -8000.

But technology did advance?

Yes. But typical living standards did not, or not by much. Recall that, from -8000 to 1870, 
poverty, patriarchy, and slow technological progress kept humanity ensorcelled by the Devil of 
Malthus, with nearly all of the potential benefits of better technology being eaten up by 
population growth and resulting resource scarcity. Think of something like $900/yeara€”the living 
standard of the poorest half-billion of our eight billion todaya€”
as the living standards of a typical human back before 1870. Then, after 1870, everything changed.

I cannot believe that: surely technological progress made life better off over time?

For the A©lite who benefit from the exploitation-and-extraction machine, yes. But for the rest? 
Perhaps: to the extent that the taste for a€oeluxuriesa€Da€’’production and consumption that does 
not raise your biological fitness to reproduce but that makes you happiera€’’grows over time, yes. 
And to the extent that society develops patterns that keep women chaste throughout large chunks of 
their fertile period, or that promo female
infanticide, yes.

Otherwise?

Otherwise the benefits of technological advance show up as greater human numbersa€”and hence the 
benefits of technology in raising living standards are offset by greater resource scarcitya€”or are 
restricted to the A©lite of thugs-with spears (plus their accountants and their propagandists).

You have painted a picture of two unbreakable vicious circlesa€”one of poverty enforced by 
Malthusian fertility, and one of mass poverty enforced by exploitation-and-extraction. How did we 
escape?

Ah! We economic historians debate and will debate as long as there is a human species and perhaps 
longer exactly what the change was, and why we see the change having major effects starting in 1870 
and not at some other time!

Is that what you debate?

It is indeed! And we also debate whether the changea€’’whatever it wasa€”could have come earlier. 
Perhaps it could have come starting in Alexandria, Egypt back in the year 170 when Emperor Marcus 
Aurelius Antoninus ruled in Rome,. Perhaps it could have come in the year 1170 when Emperor Gaozong 
ruled in Hangzhou. Or we might have missed the bus that arrived in 1870 and still, today, be 
trapped in a Malthusian
steampunk, gunpowder-empire, or neo-mediA!val world.

Can you characterize the change?

Indeed I can! We, after all, did not miss the bus that I think arrived around 1870, when the last 
three elementsa€’’modern science and the industrial research lab to discover and develop useful 
technologies, the modern corporation to develop and deploy them, and the globalized market economy 
to deploy and diffuse them throughout the worlda€”fell into place.

Ever since, advancing science, turned into technology by industrial research labs, deployed at 
scale by modern corporations, and then diffused throughout the world by that magnificent 
crowdsourcing mechanism that is the global market economy have taken us on a wild ride. That triple 
has taken us into high gear, and taken our rate of global technological progressa€”a rate that was 
perhaps 0.05%/year before 1500,0.15%/year over
1500-1770, and perhaps 0.45%/year over 1770-1870a€”up to its post-1870 average of 2.1%/year.


Can you make an abstract number like a€ce2.1% per yeara€LJmore concrete?

Think of it like this: On average, since 1870, worldwide, the deployed-and-diffused technological 
capabilities of humanity has roughly doubled every generation since 1870. And remember the a€oeat 
leasta€D: that 2.1%/year is doubtful because increasingly we live not in a physical-commodity or 
even a service but rather than in an attention economy, and the numbers underlying the 2.1%/year 
estimate barely register that very
important fact about today.

Share


Brad DeLonga€™ s History of Economic Growth Catechism, Part I

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
tha€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 14 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

