Subscribe now

Bernanke v. Kindleberger: Which Credit Channel?

By Perry G. Mehrling

In the papers of economist Charles Kindleberger, Perry Mehrling found notes on the paper that won 
Ben Bernanke his Nobel Prize.

In the 1983 paper cited as the basis for Bernankea€™ s Nobel award, the first footnote states: 
a€oel have received useful comments from too many people to list here by name, but I am grateful to 
each of them.a€D One of those unnamed commenters was Charles P. Kindleberger, who taught at MIT 
full-time until mandatory
retirement in 1976 and then half-time for another five years. Bernanke himself earned his MIT Ph.D. 
in 1979, whereupon he shifted to Stanford as Assistant Professor. Thus it was natural for him to 
send his paper to Kindleberger for comment, and perhaps also natural for Kindleberger to respond.

As it happens, the carbon copy of that letter has been preserved in the Kindleberger Papers at MIT, 
and that copy is reproduced below as possibly of contemporary interest. All footnotes are mine, 
referencing the specific passages of the published paper, a draft copy of which Kindleberger is 
apparently addressing, and filling in


In the papers of economist Charles Kindleberger, Perry Mehrling found notes on the paper that won 
Ben Bernanke his Nobel Prize.

In the 1983 paper cited as the basis for Bernankea€™ s Nobel award, the first footnote states: 
a€oel have received useful comments from too many people to list here by name, but I am grateful to 
each of them.a€D One of those unnamed commenters was Charles P. Kindleberger, who taught at MIT 
full-time until mandatory
retirement in 1976 and then half-time for another five years. Bernanke himself earned his MIT Ph.D. 
in 1979, whereupon he shifted to Stanford as Assistant Professor. Thus it was natural for him to 
send his paper to Kindleberger for comment, and perhaps also natural for Kindleberger to respond.

As it happens, the carbon copy of that letter has been preserved in the Kindleberger Papers at MIT, 
and that copy is reproduced below as possibly of contemporary interest. All footnotes are mine, 
referencing the specific passages of the published paper, a draft copy of which Kindleberger is 
apparently addressing, and filling in
context that would have been familiar to both Bernanke and Kindleberger but may not be to a modern 
reader. With these explanatory notes, the text speaks for itself and requires no further commentary 
from me.

a€oeMay 1,1982
Dr. Ben Bernanke

Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford,  CA 94305

Dear Dr. Bernanke,

Thank you for sending me your paper on the great depression. You ask for comments, and I assume 
this is not merely ceremonial. I am afraid you will not in fact welcome them.

I think you have provided a most ingenious solution to a non-problem.[j.] The necessity to 
demonstrate that financial crisis can be deleterious to production arises only in the scholastic 
precincts of the Chicago school with what Reder called in the last J EL its tight priors, or TP.[2] 
If one believes in rational expectations, a natural
rate of unemployment, efficient markets, exchange rates continuously at purchasing power parities, 
there is not much that can be explained about business cycles or financial crises. For a Chicagoan, 
you are courageous to depart from the assumption of complete markets.[3]

You wave away Minsky and me for departing from rational assumptions. [4] Would you not accept that 
it is possible for each participant in a market to be rational but for the market as a whole to be 
irrational because of the fallacy of composition? If not, how can you explain chain letters, 
betting on lotteries, panics in burning
theatres, stock market and commodity bubbles as the Hunts in silver, the world in gold, etca€! 
Assume that the bootblack, waiters, office boys etc of 1929 were rational and Paul Warburg who said 
the market was too high in February 1929 was not entitled to such an opinion. Each person hoping to 
get in an[d] out in time may be
rational, but not all can accomplish it.

Your data are most interesting and useful. It was not Temin who pointed to the spread (your DIF) 
between governts [sic] and Baa bond yields, but Friedman and Schwartz. [5] Column 4 also interests 
me for its behavior in 1929. It would be interesting to disaggregate between loans on securities on 
the one hand and loans and
discounts on the other.

Your rejection of money illusion (on the ground of rationality) throws out any role for price 
changes. I think this is a mistake on account at least of lags and dynamics. No one of the Chicago 
stripe pays attention to the sharp drop in commodity prices in the last quarter of 1929, caused by 
the banks, in their concern over loans on
securities, to finance commodities sold in New York on consignment (and auto loans). [6] This put 
the pressure on banks in areas with loans on commodities. The gainers from the price declines were 
slow in realizing their increases. The banks of the losers failed. Those of the ultimate winners 
did not expand.

Note, too, the increase in failures, the decrease in credit and the rise in DIF in the last four of 
five months of 1931.[7] Much of this, after September 21, was the consequence of the appreciation 
of the dollar from $4.86 to $3.25.[8] Your international section takes no account of this because 
prices dona€™t count in your analysis.
In The World in Depression, 1929-1939, which you do not list,[9] I make much of this structural 
deflation, the mirror analogue of structural inflation today from core inflation and the oil shock. 
But your priors do not permit you to think them of any importance.

Sincerely yours,

[Charles P. Kindleberger] a€D

References

Bernanke, Ben S. 1983. a€oeNonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the 
Great Depression.a€D American Economic Review 73 No 3 (June): 257-276.
Kindleberger, Charles P. 1973. The World in Depression, 1929-1939. Berkeley CA: University of 
California Press.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1978. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. New York: 
Basic Books.

Kindleberger, Charles P. 1985. Keynesianism vs. Monetarism and Other Essays in Financial History. 
London: George Allen and Unwin.
Kindleberger. Charles P. and Jean-Pierre Laffargue, eds. 1982. Financial crises: Theory, History, 
and Policy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mehrling, Perry. 2022. Money and Empire: Charles P. Kindleberger and the Dollar System. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

Notes

[1] Bernanke (1983,258): a€oereconciliation of the obvious inefficiency of the depression with the 
postulate of rational private behaviora€D.

[2] Reder, Melvin W. a€oeChicago Economics: Permanence and Change ,a€C Journal of Economic 
Literature 20 No. 1 (March 1982): 1-38. Bernanke (1983,257) states explicitly, aCcethe present 
paper builds on the Friedman-Schwartz worka€!a€D

[3] Bernanke (1983,257): aCceThe basic premise is that, because markets for financial claims are 
incomplete, intermediation between some classes of borrowers and lenders requires nontrivial 
market-making and information-gathering service s.a€D And again at p. 263: a€oeWe shall clearly not 
be interested in economies of the
sort described by Eugene Fama (1980), in which financial markets are complete and 
information/transactions costs can be neglected.a€D

[4] Bernanke (1983,258): a€oeHyman Minsky (1977) and Charles Kindleberger (1978) have in several 
places argued for the inherent instability of the financial system, but in doing so have had to 
depart from the assumption of rational economic behavior.a€D It is perhaps relevant to observe that 
elsewhere Kindleberger takes
pains to point out the limitations of the Minsky model for explaining the great depression: a€oeit 
is limited to the United States; there are no capital movements, no exchange rates, no 
international commodity prices, nor even any impact of price changes on bank liquidity for domestic 
commodities; all assets are financial.a€D
(Kindleberger 1985,302) This passage appears in Kindlebergera€™ s contribution to a 1981 conference 
sponsored by the Banca di Roma and MITa€™ s Sloan School of Management, which followed on a 1979 
Bad Homburg conference that also included both men, which proceedings were published as Financial 
Crises:
Theory,  History and Policy (Cambridge 1982).

[5] Bernanke (1983,262): a€ceDIF = difference (in percentage points) between yields on Baa 
corporate bonds and long-term U.S. government bondsa€D.

[6] It is exactly the sharp drop in commodity prices that Kindleberger puts at the center of his 
explanation of why the depression was worldwide since commodity prices are world prices. 
Kindleberger (1973,104): a€oeThe view taken here is that symmetry may obtain in the scholara€™ s 
study, but that it is hard to find in the real
world. The reason is partly money illusion, which hides the fact of the gain in purchasing power 
from the consumer countries facing lower prices; and partly the dynamics of deflation, which 
produce an immediate response in the country of falling prices, and a slow one, often overtaken by 
spreading deflation, in the country with
improved terms of trade, i.e. lower import prices.a€D

[7] Bernankea€™ s Table 1 cites August-December DIF figures as follows: 4.29,4.82,5.41,5.30,6.49.

[8] September 21 is of course the date when the Bank of England took sterling off gold, see 
Kindleberger (1973,167-170).

[9]The published version, Bernanke (1983), still does not list Kindleberger (1973), citing only 
Kindleberger (1978), Manias, Panics, and Crashes. Notably, the full title of that book includes 
also the words a€oeA History of Financial Crises.a€n Kindleberger himself quite explicitly frames 
Manias as an extension of the
Depression book, now including all of the international financial crises he can find. Later 
commentary however follows Bernanke in viewing Kindleberger (1978) as instead an extension of 
Minskya€™ s essentially domestic Financial Instability Hypothesis, which is not correct. On this 
point see footnote 4, and more generally,
Chapter                                                                                             
                                                       8 of my book Money and Empire (Cambridge 
2022).

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


