Subscribe now

CONDITION: Still on Team a€oeThe Fed Has Got Thisa€D:

The five-year forward five-year CPI-inflation breakeven crossed 2.5%, but then retreated on 
Tuesday:

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

3.5

0.0

2004            2006            2008            2010            2012            2014            
2016            2018            2020            2022

The creation of an unwelcome and painful-to-extinguish persistent inflationary wage-price spiral 
would run through this chain of causation:

• (1) the bond market loses its confidence that the Fed will respond to keep inflation anchored af

•  (2) workers in bosses in labor and product markets lose their confidence that the Fed will 
respond to keep inflation anchored af

• (3) spot-market wage bargains and pricing decisions reflect that loss of confidence af

• (4) durable forward contracting arrangements reflect that loss of confidence. It is (4) that 
produces the inflation inertia that is then a wicked problem.
So far, we are still not at (1).

Share

One Video:

Jamie Raskin: Truth & Trauma <https ://www.voutube.com/watch?app=desktop&v=020f-KUK9cQ>:
Share

One Image:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


Very Briefly Noted:

• Yanis Varoufakis: Macrona€™ s Win Is Not Populisma€™ s Defeat 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/macron-has-strengthened-french-far-right-bv-yanis-varo
ufakis-2022-04>

•  Nouriel Roubini: The Gathering Stagflationary Storm: a€“The new reality with which many advanced 
economies and emerging markets must reckon is higher inflation and slowing economic growth. And a 
big reason for the current bout of stagflation is a series of negative aggregate supply shocks that 
have curtailed production and increased costsa€l 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/world-economv-stagflationarv-perfect-storm-by-
nouriel-roubini-2022-04>

• Adrian Wooldridge: Workers Are Winning the Return-to-Office War Because Theya€™ re 
Az^/z?<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-04-25/workers-are-winning-the-return-to-offic
e-war-because-they-re-right>

• Robert Armstrong: Investors Brace for the Feda€™ s Slowdown 
<https://www.ft.com/content/3276a8fd-63f3-4028-95dd-4248841fe28b>

•  Kris James Mitchener & GonA§alo Alves Pina: Causal Effects of Countercyclical Interest Rates: 
Evidence from the Classical Gold Standard: ^“Countercyclical interest rates, defined relative to 
export-price shocks, stabilized both output and the domestic price level. This stabilization was 
more effective for the price level than for outputa€l <https://www.nber.org/papers/w29970>

• Daniel P. Bolger: Dragons at War: 2d€ “34 Infantry in the Mojave 
<https://archive.org/details/dragonsatwar234i0000bolg/>

•  W. Stanley Jevons (1865): The Coal Question: An Enquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation, & 
the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coalmines <https://archive.org/details/bub_gb_ww88bypTQUEC/>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Eric Topol: a€™ -920,000 of confirmed American deaths are in age 50+ which equates to 1 in 125 
chance of dying from Covid in this age groupa€!

Eric Topol @EricTopol

~920,000 of confirmed American deaths are in age 50+ which equates to 1 in 125 chance of dying from 
Covid in this age group

Number Of coronavirus disease 2019 |COV©-19| deaths in the US. as ol April 13,

2022. by ape*

statista.comCOVID-19 deaths by age U.S. 2022 I StatistaBetween the beginning of January 2020 and 
April 13,2022, of the 987,630 deaths caused by CO VID-19 in the United States, around 252,928 had 
occurred among those aged 85 years and older.
10:32 PM r™ Apr 24,2022

272Likes 129Re tweets

•  Matthew Yglesias: Twenty-three theses on Elon Musk and Twitter: a€“Back in 2012 Musk was an 
Obama donor, and Mitt Romney was slamming Tesla as a a€celosera€D company propped up by the Obama 
administration^™ s misguided policiesa€!


Slow Boring

Twenty-three theses on Elon Musk and Twitter

Elon Muska€™ s purchase of Twitter is a Black Hole of Discourse that has engulfed the entire media, 
and Ia€™ m no exception. It touches on so many things a€” climate, space travel, economics, media 
a€” that I couldna€™ t really work my thoughts into a coherent whole. But ita€™ s my blog and I can 
be incoherent if I want, so here are some thoughts in scattered epigrammatic stylea€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 129 likes A- 252 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

Yes, Ken Rogoff is smarter than I am. Yes, the supply shocks arising out of Putin's attack on 
Ukraine and on Xia€™ s doubling-down on Zero-Covid policy are dangerous and destructive things to 
fear.
But.

People who make this argument need to tell me why the right analogy is the 1970s, rather than the 
Korean War inflation, or the World War I inflation (for which Milton Friedman judged a 325 basis 
points increase in the nominal discount rate excessive).

FRED  — Unemployment Rate

15.0


0.0

1950      1955      1960      1965      1970       1975      1980 Q 1985          1990       1995   
   2000       2005      2010      2015       2020

FRED — Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items in U.S. City Average


-5.0

1950  1955    1960      1965      1970      1975      1980   „ 1985         1990      1995      
2000      2005      2010      2015      2020

n                                                                             i


And nobody ever does, as they dismiss even the possibility of a soft landing here in America:

Kenneth Rogoff: The Growing Threat of Global Recession'. a€~Is the global economy flying into a 
perfect storm, with Europe, China, and the United States all entering downturns at the same time 
later this year? The risks of a global recession trifecta are risinga€!. A recession in Europe is 
almost inevitable if the war in Ukraine escalatesa€!. China is finding it increasingly difficult to 
sustain positive growth in the face of draconian
COVIDa€‘T9 lockdownsa€!. The Chinese economy may already be in recession. And with US consumer 
prices currently increasing at their fastest rate in 40 years, prospects for a soft landing for 
prices without a big hit to growth look increasingly remotea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/economic-recession-risk-in-china-united-states-europe-
by-kenneth-rogoff-2022-04>

Why not just call this a€cefascisma€D? It is a perfectly good word. Mussolini set the pattern. It 
is not fair to tar a€cepopulisma€D with this brush.
I                                                                 do suppose that I could live with 
a€oeatavistic populisma€D, however:

Isaiah Berlin: The Inherent Atavism in Populism'. a€~Populisma€! is a vague notiona€! of 
GemeinschaftaCI integral societya€! coherent (all these words are capable of being shot down in the 
same way as a€~populisma€™ )a€! sometimes called Volk, which has roots in the pasta€! a sense of 
fraternity and by a desire for a certain kind of social equality and perhaps libertya€!. Who the 
people are willa€! varya€! any group of persons
with whom you identify the true peoplea€! the discontented people who feel that they somehow 
represent the majority of the nation, which has been done down by some minority or othera€!.. By 
whom have they been damaged? They have been damaged by an elite, either economic, political or 
racial, some kind of secret or open enemya€!. The enemies of the people have to be specified, 
whether it be capitalists, foreigners, ethnic
minorities, majorities or whoevera€!. This disaster has been brought about by some kind of terrible 
event: the Flood, original sin, the discovery of iron and agriculture, or whatever else it may be: 
there was a blissful natural state, then the Fall and the yearning for the original unity. This can 
be restored, possibly by violencea€!. The people is the majoritya€! natural men who have been 
robbed of their proper post in life; then try to point to
groups                                                                                              
                                                                                                    
     of artificial, corrupt men as holding down large groups of natural mena€!

LINK:

Isaiah Berlin on the Inherent Atavism in Populism

Supposing we say that what is common to all populism everywhere a€” this cannot be true, but we 
will try it on a€” is a vague notion, and a vague name for it, which is intelligible to everybody 
here, the notion of Gemeinschaft a€” that is, that famous integral society which everybody talks 
about, some kind of coherent (all these words are capable of being shoa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 6 likes A- Groundhog Notes

a€oePlatformsa€n, a€ceaggregatorsa€Da€’’firms that benefit massively from the network externalities 
arising from the interactions of those who they corral into their Walled Gardens, and yet add no 
marginal value but simply collect a constant-percentage toll off of transactions. Our market 
structures are making the Web much less valuable than it could be. Yet our governments seem unable 
to find a way to properly regulate to advance societal well-being:

John W. Cioffi, Martin F. Kenney & John Zysman: Platform Power & Regulatory Politics: Polanyi for 
the Twenty-First Century. a€~The rise of, and recent political responses to, the often-predatory 
power and manipulative conduct of platform firmsa€! [is] a a€~Polanyiana€™ double movement in which 
the destabilising and destructive effects of unchecked corporate activities and market development 
eventually generates political
and regulatory responses to constrain private power that threaten the social, political, and 
economic ordera€!. The EUa€™ s proposed Digital Markets Act and Digital Services Acta€! shift[s]a€! 
regulatory emphasisa€! towards more intensive and encompassing forms of socio-economic 
regulation^!. The EU may have a first-mover advantage in regulating platform firms, but we are only 
at the very beginning of a protracted and
conflictual transformational processa€!

LINK: <https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13563467.2022.2Q27355

SUBJECT: Hitler & Trump:

Let me flagrantly violate Godwina€™ s Law here. First, let me ask you to read this:



IBrad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: H.L. Mencken (December 1933): On Adolf Hitler

THE LIBRARY, BY H.L. MENCKEN Hitlerismus MY BATTLE, by Adolf Hitler; abridged and translated by E. 
T. S. Dugdalea€L THE EXPERIMENT WITH DEMOCRACY IN CENTRAL EUROPE, by Arnold J. Zurchera€l, GERMANY 
ENTERS THE THIRD REICH, by Calvin B. Hoovera€L THE BROWN BOOK OF THE HITLER TERROR AND THE BURNING 
OF THE REICHSTAG, prepared by the World Committee for the Victimsa€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 3 comments A- Brad DeLong

Jeet Heer cites thisa€”and Christopher Hitchensa€™ s attack on ita€”as a way of lamenting 
Hitchensa€™ s late-life rightward turn, turning HitchensaC™ s lament on how Mencken did not think 
it worthwhile to a€oewrite a serious polemic against Hitlera€! the quack, charlatan, and crank to 
end all quacks, charlatans, and cranks. Such a target!a€! The face grew to fit the mask, and the 
playful Prejudices became the drone of authentic prejudiceaCD. Indeed,
Menckena€™ s was a professional failure of much greater magnitude but along the same lines as 
Hitchensa€™ s subservience to Cheney and Bush in the 2000s:


The Time of Monsters

Hitchens Revived?

As memory of Hitchens the man inevitably recede, the question of his literary reputation inevitably 
comes to the fore. Writing in the Toronto Star, my friend the philosopher Andy Lamey argues that 
Hitchens is enjoying a deserved revival: Recent books by or about Hia€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 6 likes A- 7 comments A- Jeet Heer

But strikes me are that today I hear so many rhetorical and conceptual echoes of Menckena€™ s 
treatment of Hitlera€’’indeed, I hear them almost daily, coming not just from the Anti-Anti-Trump 
Republicans, and from those writing for the New York Times, the Washington Post, Politico, Axios, 
and all the others that travel with them as fellows. Mencken:

•  starts with the argument that the situation that led a critical mass of the German people to 
turn to Hitler was orbit entirely the creation of the French, British, and American 
establishments^!

• continues with observations on how, since all politicians in democracies are venial and corrupt 
duffers, it is not surprising that people turn to demagoguesa€!

• notes that there are real, dreadful enemies and bad actors whom the demagogues are trying to 
fighta€!

• emphasizes the horse race, and the establishments in confidence in being unable to handicap it 
properlya€!

•  denounces and dismisses the demagogue as unserious and dumb with his a€oeeffort[s] by a mob 
orator to make effective rhetoric of the ideas of other mena€!a€D

• dismisses the crimes as par for the course given the culture: a€oe[Hitlera€™ s] anti-Semitism, 
which has shocked so many Americans, is certainly nothing to marvel overa€! latent all over Western 
Europe, as it is in the United Statesa€!a€D

• dismisses the staying power of the movement: a€oethe main questiona€! how long the orgy will 
last, and whether it will wear itself out or have to be put down by external forcea€!a€D

• asserts that institutions and culture will inevitably see him off: a€oesober second thoughta€! 
can be relied on to cure even the wildest and wooliest of public maniasa€!. Germans are much less 
likely to follow Slav and Latin example in this matter than to stick to the waysof their own blood. 
Bryan, inall probability, was actually elected President of theUnited States in 1896,and yet by 
1904 he was already a comic character,and before hedied his
old huge following had shrunk to a feeble rabble of half-wits. Lloyd George was the sole and 
absolute proprietor of Great Britain in 1919, but today he bosses only himself. The Ku Klux Klan in 
1920 had millions of members, could count upon close to a majority in Congress, and controlled at 
least twenty States, but by 1925 it was dispersed and impotent,and its Hitler was in jail.The 
American Legion ran amuck at about thesame time, and
somewhere in my files are at least twenty pounds of newspaper clippings describing the heroic 
mauling of unarmed and helpless persons, including many Jews, by its brave lads. Yet the Legion, 
today, is simply a gang of professional pension-grabbers, and even politicians kick it abouta€!a€C


7he TIME of MONS TERS

The Time of Monsters

Hitchens Revived?

As memory of Hitchens the man inevitably recede, the question of his literary reputation inevitably 
comes to the fore. Writing in the Toronto Star, my friend the philosopher Andy Lamey argues that 
Hitchens is enjoying a deserved revival: Recent books by or about Hia€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 6 likes A- 7 comments A- Jeet Heer

But strikes me are that today I hear so many rhetorical and conceptual echoes of Menckena€™ s 
treatment of Hitlera€’’indeed, I hear them almost daily, coming not just from the Anti-Anti-Trump 
Republicans, and from those writing for the New York Times, the Washington Post, Politico, Axios, 
and all the others that travel with them as fellows. Mencken:

•  starts with the argument that the situation that led a critical mass of the German people to 
turn to Hitler was orbit entirely the creation of the French, British, and American 
establishments^!

• continues with observations on how, since all politicians in democracies are venial and corrupt 
duffers, it is not surprising that people turn to demagoguesa€!

• notes that there are real, dreadful enemies and bad actors whom the demagogues are trying to 
fighta€!

• emphasizes the horse race, and the establishments in confidence in being unable to handicap it 
properlya€!

•  denounces and dismisses the demagogue as unserious and dumb with his a€oeeffort[s] by a mob 
orator to make effective rhetoric of the ideas of other mena€!a€D

• dismisses the crimes as par for the course given the culture: a€oe[Hitlera€™ s] anti-Semitism, 
which has shocked so many Americans, is certainly nothing to marvel overa€! latent all over Western 
Europe, as it is in the United Statesa€!a€D

• dismisses the staying power of the movement: a€oethe main questiona€! how long the orgy will 
last, and whether it will wear itself out or have to be put down by external forcea€!a€D

• asserts that institutions and culture will inevitably see him off: a€oesober second thoughta€! 
can be relied on to cure even the wildest and wooliest of public maniasa€!. Germans are much less 
likely to follow Slav and Latin example in this matter than tostick to  the waysof their own blood. 
Bryan, inall probability, was actually elected President of theUnited States in 1896, and yet 
by1904 he was already a comiccharacter, and before hedied his
old huge following had shrunk to a feeble rabble of half-wits. Lloyd George was the sole and 
absolute proprietor of Great Britain in 1919, but today he bosses only himself. The Ku Klux Klan in 
1920 had millions of members, could count upon close toa majority in Congress, and controlled at 
least twenty States, but by 1925 it was dispersed and impotent,and its Hitler was in jail. The 
American Legion ran amuck at about thesame time, and
somewhere in my files are at least twenty pounds of newspaper clippings describing the heroic 
mauling of unarmed and helpless persons, including many Jews, by its brave lads. Yet the Legion, 
today, is simply a gang of professional pension-grabbers, and even politicians kick it abouta€la€D

I really wish history did not rhyme so much.

