I was browsing through Friedrich von Hayek's The Fatal Conceits.^”although it is not clear to me 
how much of this very late (1988) Hayek is Hayek, and how much is
a€ceeditora€D William Warren Bartley. Why? Because Hayek is playing a larger part in my history of 
the Long 20th Century, Slouching Towards Utopia?, as it moves toward
finality,  and I am concerned that I be fair to him. And I ran across his claim that the 
a€cesocialistsa€D felt:

an urgent need to construct a new, rationally revised and justified morality whicha€! will not be a 
crippling burden, be alienating, oppressive, or'unjust', or
be associated with trade. Moreover, this is only part of the great task that these new 
lawgiversa€’’socialists such as Einstein, Monod and Russell, and self­
proclaimed 'immoralists' such as Keynesa€”set for themselves. A new rational language and law must 
be constructed too, for existing language and law
also   fail to meet these requirementsa€!. This awesome task may seem the more urgent to them in 
that they themselves no longer believe in any supernatural
sanction for morality (let alone for language, law, and science) and yet remain convinced that some 
justification is necessarya€!.

The aim of socialism is no less than to effect a complete redesigning of our traditional morals, 
law, and language, and on this basis to stamp out the old
order and the supposedly inexorable, unjustifiable conditions that prevent the institution of 
reason, fulfilment, true freedom, and justice. The rationalist
standards on which this whole argument, indeed this whole programme, rest, are however at best 
counsels of perfection and at worst the discredited rules of
an ancient methodology which may have been incorporated into some of what is thought of as science, 
but which has nothing to do with real
investigation^!

Who are these Mephistophelean demons seeking to destroy human morality? Keynes, Russell, Monod, 
anda€! Einstein?

Leta€™ s leave John Maynard Keynes to one sidea€”even though the paragraph in his essay My Early 
Beliefs where Keynes calls himself an a€ceimmoralista€D is, in context, a
declaration that when he was young he was foolish, that he is not yet fully wise, and that as a 
result people regard him with justified suspicion as someone who is a€oenot aware that
civilization was a precarious crust erected by the personality and the will of a very few, and only 
maintained by rule and conventions skillfully put across and guilefully
preserveda€!a€D Anybody who makes this and claims that Keynes boasted that he wasa€”and saw himself 
asa€”an a€oeimmoralista€n a la AndrA© Gide is not in the business

of informing but of misleading you.

Leta€™ s leave Bertrand Russell to one side (even though there was nobody more skeptical of 
idealist thinkers suffering from a€oethe fatal conceita€D, and nobody more willing
to seek truth from facts.)

But leta€™ s focus for a moment on Jacques Monod. What seems to have incited Hayeka€™ s (or 
Bartleya€™ s) ire? It is Monoda€™ s short book Chance and Necessity. For
Monod, wea€”indeed, all lifea€”are completely and purely the result of chance and necessity working 
together, through the process of variation and evolution by natural selection.
And what is a choice or a chance decision at one levela€”the cell can choose to admit or not admit 
a virus, the antibody can choose to grab onto and tag the virus or let the virus
pass bya€”is at a lower level the result of necessity as the molecules do or do not fit together so 
that the key can turn the lock or not.

Science, Monod says, has taught us this, and in so teaching has a€oeoutrage[d] valuesa€! 
subvert[ed] every one of the mythical or philosophical ontogenies upon which the animist
tradition, from the Australian aborigines to the dialectical materialists, has made all ethics 
rest: values, duties, rights, prohibitionsa€!a€n Monoda€™ s belief is that as the scientific
pursuit of knowledge has brought us to this wisdom, we should response by wisely taking the further 
advance of scientific knowledge as our ethical touchstone, and accept that our
purpose isa€”we are madea€”to be Francis Bacona€™ s Salomona€™ s House, for which a€oethe end of 
our foundation is the knowledge of causes, and secret motions of things;
and  the enlarging of the bounds of human empire, to the effecting of all things possiblea€!a€D

Now I would have thought that Monoda€™ s ideas would have been attractive to the Hayek who sees the 
peoplea€™ s god as a€oejust a personification of that tradition of morals
or values that keeps their community alivea€D.

So I cannot but believe that Hayeka€™ s (or Bartleya€™ s) real beef with Monod is that he says what 
are supposed to be the quiet parts too loudlya€”that it is good for other
people to believe that their god is more than just a personification of their moral tradition.

And then we come toa€! Einstein.
Einstein?

Einsteina€™ s Theory of Relativity is not opinion or doctrine, but fact: When you measure the 
clocks and yardsticks of others who are moving rapidly relative to yourself, you do
measure that their clocks tick more slowly than yours and their yardsticks are contracted in the 
direction of motion and so measure smaller distances than yours. That is simply a
fact. GPS satellites are so programmed that if that were not a fact, they would not work.

Why this animus against Einstein? It is true that he did say that socialism was a necessity, and 
did say something like: a€oel do not know with what weapons World War III will be
fought, but World War IV will be fought with sticks and stones.a€D But how does that translate into 
Einstein being a crusader a€oeto effect a complete redesigning of our
traditional morals, law, and languagea€D?

Am I wrong in misreading this as, at base, simply Hayek viewing a prominent Jew (pretty much any 
prominent Jew) as an Enemy of the People (George Soros today, anyone?)?

In the same era as The Fatal Conceit was published, you could read the right-wing American 
Spectator stating as fact that Einsteina€™ s Theory of Relativity was simply an
enormous conspiratorial con game played against the righteous and the conservative, and that a€~the 
constancy of the speed of fight, irrespective of the observer's movement, has
not  been demonstrated experimentallya€n. Never mind that that constancy was what had been tested 
and demonstrated in the 1887 Michelson-Morley experiment that the
American Spectator had just referred to on the previous page.

And you could read stated as fact that even though all professional physicists know that Relativity 
Theory is false, for the most part they a€oeshrug and accept relativity theorya€”
theirs is not to quarrel with the sainted genius of the twentieth centurya€D, while:

among intellectuals in general, the theory has been much admired: so abstruse, so deliciously 
disrespectful of the eternal verities, so marvelously baffling to
the bourgeoisie. It doesn't interfere with the daily routine, makes no practical difference to the 
Newtonian world. But it does upset its theoretical
underpinnings. Wonderful !a€D

<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/bethel-einstein-i.pdf>


