chttps ://equitablegrowth .org/?s=delong>

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1.This is when the deadline is for submission of proposals 
https://equitablegrowth.org/research-paper/2021-request-for-proposals/ to Equitable Growth: 
Countdown Timer: _ -Countdown to Feb 7, 2021 11:59 am in
Washington DC https://www.timeanddate 
.com/countdown/generic?iso=20210207T1159&pO=263&msg=Countdown+Timer&font=sanserifa€!

2. Ultimatelya€”no, not ultimately: immediately a€’’whose property the law will protect, in the 
triple senses of protecting it from theft or expropriation, protecting it from damage, and 
protecting it from devaluation, is a
political decision made in the interests of those whom the government listens to. If you dona€™t 
have a political voice, whatever property you do accumulate is likely to be evanescent and to be 
worth little: David Mitchell,
Austin Clemens, & Shanteal Lake: The Consequences of Political Inequality & Voter Suppression for 
U.S. Economic Inequality & 
Growr/ihttps://equitablegrowth.org/research-paper/the-consequences-of-political-

inequality-and-voter-suppression-for-u-s-economic-inequality-and-growth/: a€™ Those who enjoy 
market power are, not coincidentally, often the same citizens who enjoy outsized political 
influence, creating a feedback loop
that perpetuates economic inequality, instability, and slow growth. This report examines 
cutting-edge research on how economic and racial inequality interact around the country among those 
Americans who vote, those who
try to vote but face obstacles in doing so, and those who do not vote altogether. The 
evidence-based research we explore pinpoints the myriad ways that economic and racial inequality 
together subvert our democracy by
aiding and abetting political inequality and voter suppression^!

3. After a very, very rocky initial start, the augmented unemployment insurance benefits system in 
the United States has, in many states, worked very well during the coronavirus plague depression. 
Without it the economic
disaster, and likely the plague disaster, would have been significantly worse. I remain puzzled 
about the form unemployment has taken over the past year: why our initial claims still so large? 
Exactly who and why is being
fired in such large numbers right now?: Equitable Growth: a€™For the week ending January 30

Equitable Growth @ equitablegrowth

For the week ending January 30,816,247 workers filed for regular #unemploymentbenefits. Initial 
regular claims have now remained above 700k for 46 weeks. 1/4

Despite a sharp decline since March's peak numbers, initial claims
remain elevated above their pre-coronavirus levels

Weekly initial unemployment insurance claims, in millions, not seasonally adjusted,
2019-2021. Recessions are shaded.

January
24-30

Source. Employment and Training Administration. U.S. Department of Labor, available at 
https://www.do1.gov/ui/data.pdf [last
accessed February A, 2021]


1:34 PM r™ Feb 4,2021

Equitable Growth

, 816,247 workers filed for regular unemployment benefits. Initial regular claims have now remained 
above 700k for 46 weeks. Another 348,912 workers filed for initial PUA, which extended UI to some 
workers who are not
eligible for regular benefits. In total, 1.2 million workers filed initial PUA or regular 
unemployment benefits last week. Regular continued claims, also referred to as insured 
unemployment, fell to 5.1 million the week ending
Jan.                                                                                                
   23. Adding all Unemployment Insurance programsa€’’including PUA, PEUC, and Extended Benefitsa€”a 
total of 17.8 million workers claimed benefits the week ending Jan. 16. UI is one of the most 
important tools the

U.S. has to stabilize the economy and reign in the negative effects of downturns. And the 
Coronavirus Recession is changing the way scholars and policymakers think about jobless benefitsa€!

4. This week my half-hour videocast is on why I think that the Biden team has done a very good 
political-economic job at designing its proposed $1.9 billion stimulus. If you have a valid 
criticism of it, it is almost surely a
criticism that the policy designers thought of, and then decideda€’’rightlya€’’that other concerns, 
whether narrowly economic, or distributional, or political, or administrative, overrode: 
DeLongTGDAFhttpT/delongtodayxpm:
a€™ Nudging us back to full employment^!

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere :



: a€~This exceeded my high expectations. Come for a crash course in contemporary thinking about 
debt sustainability from @ojblanchardl and stay for @arvindsubramana€™ s depressing but compelling 
case that India is
differenta€!

6. 1 think that this is vastly too Panglossian. If I were Dan Dresner, I would be much more 
Eeyore-like here. Not that many Senate Republicans are willing to cross Trump. And very few House 
Republicans are. Remember:
McConnell thought it was worth spending Senate time after the election on the Judy Shelton 
nomination^”he thought the odds were reasonable that she would get through, even though there is no 
case there for her
appointment whatsoever:

Dan Drezner: What Scares Senate 
RepMMzcans?https://www.washin£tonpost.com/outlook/2020/ll/17/what-scares-senate-republicans/: a€~In 
two recent instances, Senate Republicans have partially or completely broken
with Trump. The first issue is AfghanistanaC!. The other area where some Republicans are pushing 
back on Trump is his appointments to the Federal Reservea€! Judy Sheltona€! so out there that even 
the National Review
thinks she should not be confirmeda€!. Opposing Trump on these issues does not matter politically. 
Few in TrumpaC™ s base care about foreign policy, and no one understands monetary policy. On these 
issues, standing
athwart Trump yelling a€ceStop!a€D carries minimal costs. Publicly contradicting him on his 
election narrative, on the other hand, does alienate his base. Trump has nine weeks left as 
president. He will attempt to lock in as
many of his policies as possible. The congressional wing of the GOP will kowtow to his whims on 
issues of high salience to his base. On everything else, however, expect to see a purely 
transactional partnership^!

7. As I have said elsewhere, the issues of what kind of and how big a relief, support, and stimulus 
package we need right now do not seem to me to be partisan. I could understand if the right wing of 
the Republican Partya€”
with its ideological blinders, its deficiencies, its inability to avoid thinking of an optimal 
policy is very different when a Democrat than when a Republican is pre sidenta€’’were to show up 
with a $600 billion proposal as an
alternative to Bidena€™ s $1.9 trillion reconciliation bill. I am rather embarrassed for the 
moderate, non-fantasy-based wing of the Republican Party when that is what they brings to the 
pot-luck. It is a very bad sign:

Scott Lemieux: Party that Won Election to Govern 
https://www.lawyersgunsmonevblog.com/2021/02/party-that-won-election-to-govern: a€~Fortunately, it 
looks like Senate Dems arena€™t going to let a bad faith decoy
offer from the Gang of Collins meant to stall the process from using the same procedural mechanisms 
Republicans use to pass bad and unpopular legislation to pass popular and urgently needed 
legislation^!. Meanwhile, I
am pleased to inform you that The Daily Beast has put the latest Matt Lewis monument to bad faith, 
a€oeBidena€™ s About to Steamroll the GOP. Herea€™ s Why Thata€™ s Wrong,a€D behind a paywall. I 
have no idea
who on Earth they think is going to pay for this sa€”, but I applaud them from doing their little 
bit to prevent someone in this country from being made a little stupidera€!

8. And another piece outside of my wheelhouse, but I ran across this while reading Scotta€™ s other 
piece on congressional coalition maneuvering, and have to include this as my eighth. This is, I 
think, very important.
Mussolini hypnotized the minds of Italians in order to seize power, rule, and try to Make Italy 
Great Again. Facebook (and Google, and Twitter and Fox) do it toa€! sell ads for overpriced gold 
funds and fake diabetes cures:

Scott Lemieux: The Church of the Poisoned Mind 
https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2021/02/the-church-of-the-poisoned-mind: a€~Ronan Farrow has 
an excellent piece about how Rachel a€oeBullhorn Ladya€D
Powell was a normal, relatively apolitical woman completely radicalized by Mark Zuckerberga€™ s 
firehose of conspiracy bullsa€”a€!. In related news, the disruption of vaccinations at Dodger 
stadium was planned on
Facebooka€!. Sure, Facebook could try to severely curb anti-vaxx disinfo campaigns, but Mark 
Zuckerberga€™ s 11th generation of heirs might inherit slightly less money, so you can see the 
dilemma herea€!

