Subscribe now

2021 UPDATE: Post-BREXIT there is a very keen awareness on the part of e very onea€’’even Great 
Britain, among its less-Neanderthalic and easily-grifted elements, at leasta€”
just how valuable the European Union is, and how useless it is and stupid to play games that could 
undermine the union:

Share

Starting Points

What is the best starting point? The problem is I really have four starting points, or perhaps I 
have five starting pointsa€”fear, surprise, ruthless efficiency, etca€!.

a€oePolitical Uniona€D Vague

First, I would have to be even more rash than Charles le Temeraire, last duke of sovereign 
Burgundy, to opine about classical Dutch history with Jan de Vries in the room, but let me
do so to point out that this session's topic, a€oepolitical uniona€D, is a vague and sketchy 
concept. The political union of the strongest power in 17th century Europe, the seven
United Provinces of the Netherlands, was made up of three components. First, there was a talk shop 
in the Haguea€”which had rather less power than is currently assembled in
Brussels and Strasbourg. Second, the same guy, the Prince of Orange, was nearly always the 
stadthouder, the chief executive, of all seven provinces. Third, one of the provinces,
Holland, was 60% of the total, and so if consensus was not reached could threaten to go it alone 
and do what was necessarya€”but when it did so take down names and have a long
memory of who had played ball and who had not.

Nevertheless, that was enough of a political union to transform seven provinces into a 17th century 
European great power, powerful enough to rule the seas and make everyonea€”
including Louis XIVa€”fear it on land. The most memorable piece of Samuel Pepysa€™ diary about 
Restoration London is his lament one night, as he watched the fleet he had
spent   so much time trying to build burning on the Thames Estuary, that it seemed to him that: 
a€oethe Devil shits Dutchmena€D. That was enough political union for the seven
United Provinces of the Netherlands. Would that be enough for Europe today? I dona€™t know. But I 
do know that a "political uniona€D is a very elastic concept.

Dilemmas of Large-Scale Democracy

Second there are the worries in the classical political tradition that a democratic political union 
on the scale of Europe is impossible. Aristotle believed there were no good
democracies. Democracies were ridden by factiona€”so much so that politics devolved into a 
combination of street fights and purges. And if you did manage to get everyone
together    in the Assembly without their maiming each other beforehand, they would act fairly 
randomly, and fairly irrationally. They would decide today that they should execute
every adult male in the recaptured city of Mytilenea€”even the demosa€’’because the demos had been 
unwise enough to follow the aristoi when they had rebelled and tried to join
affinity with Sparta during the Peloponnesian war.

Then, after what must have been an incredibly furious night by the Mytilenian ambassadors in Athens 
accompanied by lots of bags of gold to make sure the right people spoke in
the Assembly on the following day, they reverse themselves. They promptly send off another trireme 
with an order not to kill every adult male in Mytilene. Faction-ridden,
irrational, prone to aggressive militaristic war (because the demos would vote for a raiding 
expeditiona€”you had the promise of plunder if you were in the fleet, plus regular wages
while                                                                                you were in 
the fleet). Democracies, Aristotle and company said were very bad news.

What you had to have instead was, ideally, politeia’. a republic of mixed governmental principles 
with a strong aristocratic admixture in which, if I may give a Montesquieuian
reading to Aristotle, the ruling passion was virtue. But a republic has to be small: people have to 
see and be seen as practitioners of the kind of virtuous public-spirited behavior that
you can get in a well ordered, not-very-democratic-but-nevertheless-free, city-state politeia. 
Aristotle said you can keep this goinga€”for a while, if youa€™re lucky to have a

good starting setupa€”but only at the level of a city-state, nothing larger.
If                              you want a larger polity, you are stuck.

If, in the Aristotelian cosmos, you want a larger polity, then your options are limited to some 
sort of monarchy where the ruling principle is honora€”if I may continue the
Montesquieuian reading of Aristotlea€”or a despotism wherea€”if I may switch to a Hobbesian 
readinga€”the ruling principle is fear. Perhaps your despotism can be a soft
despotism, maintained-order rather than terror-based. But those are your choices, as Aristotle must 
have reflected many times during his years as tutor to Alexander the

So the classical tradition says that a democratic European political union on a continent-wide 
scale has got to be nearly impossible. James Madison, writing in the Federalist, then
says: a€oeNot so! Leta€™ s look at the Aetolian Leaguea€da€’’which I doubt very few people had 
thought of before James Madison went trolling in the historical record for
possible examples of the United Statesa€”a€oelta€™ s true that democracies tend to be faction 
ridden. Ita€™ s true that politics tends to be irrational, but add enough cooling
constitutional elements to the orrery of a rationalistic constitution for an 18th Century 
Enlightenment system of political order (that curiously just happens to mimic the division of
power between king, lord and commons at the accession of George III in its division of power 
between president, senate and the house) and you can tame the irrationalities of
democracy if you have a broad extent of territory, so that your factions have a hard time 
organizing and communicating across space.a€D

So Madison raises at least the possibility of a large democratic political uniona€”if your factions 
are of the right kind. But I think it is clear that, as Eric Rauchway has just twittered
from 100 miles inland of here, the major faction of the pre-Civil War US, the slavepower, was of 
the wrong king. And I think it is clear that the major factions in Europe today are
the wrong kind for Madison.

Keep Armies from Crossing the Rhine

Third, there is the absolute necessity of political union in Europe today.

Dieter, was it in 111 B.C. that the Cimbri, having moved down from Jutland to Austria, decided they 
didna€™ t like Austria, and would rather cross the Rhine and eat feta cheese
and olives in the Rhone Valley than eat sauerkraut and sausage and auroch jerky in Noricum?

They crossed the Rhine, and ate feta and olivesa€’’burned, looted, raped, and killeda€’’until they 
were broken and defeated by the new model army of the Roman Republic under
Gaius Marius g.f. seven times consul, etc., etc. Ever since then, at an average of once every 37 
years, an army has crossed the Rhine bringing fire and sworda€’’whether ita€™ s the
Helvetii, Julius Caesar and all of his adopted relatives, Goths and Huns, Louis XIV because he 
doesna€™t think hea€™ 11 be able to conquer Holland unless he can first ensure that
no supporting Protestant army can move onto the left bank of the Rhine without starving, on up to 
Remagen Bridge in 1945.

The destructiveness of these Rhine-crossing armies has only increased as time has passed.

37 years after 1945 was 1982. We have been, thankfully, latea€”31 years late so far. We really want 
to stay that way.

Thus we desperately need political union in Europe lest we fall victim to the tragedy of 
great-power politics. It is absolutely essential that European politicians find some way that
their disagreements are thrashed out at conference tables inBrussels and Strasbourg rather than 
settled in some other way, by some other mode, than political discussion and
debatea€’’there are better ways of deciding whether it should be spelled "Strasbourg" or 
"Strassburg" then killing hundreds of thousands of people.

Can a Hegemon Substitute?

Fourth, suppose you need to avoid the tragedy of great-power politics but do not have the natural 
affinity across regions and the parcelization of potential faction that Madison
thought necessary for a democratic republic of large extent. Suppose you dona€™ t have that. 
Suppose you have to do something else a€”have to jury-rig something, much like the
jury-rigged "political union" of the classical Dutch Republic.

The road then is the Kindlebergian a€cehegemona€D route. Find some large state actor large enough 
to claim the role of first mover, of Stackelberg leader: to set the policy and
give everyone else the choice of our way or the highway. Now a soft hegemon would much rather that 
it would be our way, and will allow peripheral countries in one way or
another to free-ride to ensure the system is strongly win-win and thus stable. The hegemon will do 
this because it has an overarching interest in making the whole thing work
peacefully, and because there are long-run benefits to being the hegemona€’’various forms of 
a€oeexorbitant privilege a€D as Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas informs me it was Valerie
Giscard d'Estaing and not Charles de Gaulle said.


Kindlebergera€™ s theory explains the tragedy of the North Atlantic economy between 1919 and 1939: 
Britain no longer and the United States not yet the hegemon. The
Kindlebergian perspective would lead one to think that the problem of Europe today, at some fairly 
deep level, is that it is no longer part of a North Atlantic alliancea€”with the
United States as a Cold War hegemona€”and that Germany does not want to assume the burden, or 
assume the role, or is not wanted by the rest of Europe to assume the explicit
role on terms that Germany wishes to exercise it.

Unifying External Threat?

That brings me to the last possible starting point, which is what Madison left out in his praise of 
the Aetolian League. The Aetolian League was remarkably stable, for a slightly-
more-than-confederation of poloi in classical Greece. They actually had an executive! With powers! 
That could command city states to actually do something rather than simply
make requests!

But the Aetolian League as it was formed was impossible to imagine without Macedon, without a 
potentially a€”nay, an activelya€’’hostile great power to the north.
The deal that struck the United States constitution^’’especially Rhode Islanda€™ s demand for equal 
suffrage in the senate, ita€™ s hard to imagine that Virginia and

Massachusetts would have agreed to such a disproportionate representation of the upper house of the 
legislature without the implicit and perhaps explicit threat from Rhode Island
that if you dona€™ t give this to us, we will go our own way, and Britain will spend money like 
water to have Newport as a naval base as we become the most loyal subjects of the
Hanoverian dynasty youa€™ ve ever seen.

There is a storya€”I dona€™ t know whether ita€™ s apocryphal or nota€”that when Paul-Henri Spaak 
was asked if it wouldna€™ t be a good idea to set up a bunch of statues to
the founders of the European Union, he answered: What a wonderful idea! We should erect a 50-foot 
tall statue in front of the Berlaymont! Of Joseph Stalin! It was the Group of
Soviet forces in Germany and the presence of the tanks of the Red Army at the Fulda Gap that most 
concentrated everyonea€™ s mind on how much they wanted the Coal and
Steel Community, the European Economic Community and then the European Union to succeed.

All that vanished, all that vanished at the start of the 1990s.

Four Lessons from 1919-1939

Where does that leave us? Well, it ought to have left us, when we started the Euro, concentrating 
our minds on the four lessons that history taught us during the 1919-1939 period:

Symmetric Adjustment a Necessity

In order for the world economy to be prosperous, adjustment to macroeconomic disequilibrium needs 
to be undertaken by both a€cesurplusa€D and a€oedeficita€n economiesa€”
not by a€cedeficita€D economies alone.

John Maynard Keynes tried to teach Harry Dexter White this lesson at Bretton Woods. He failed. But 
just because Harry Dexter White did not learn it does not mean that we should
not have. Christina Romer used to stand up at OECD meetings and say that Europe needs both a shift 
to sound finance and austerity in the south but also pro-growth policies in the
north, by which she meant: a€oe4%/year inflation in Germanya€D. Everyone nodded, but did not do.

Integrated Regulation a Requirement

If the world economy is to have any chance of avoiding or limiting crises, an integrated banking 
system requires an integrated bank regulator and supervisor. Either you have to cut
banking systems off from each other and run credits and debits through sovereigns. Or if you let 
banks takes up liabilities from everywhere and loan to everywhere, there needs to
be a common regulator and supervisor to look at the system as a whole.

True Lender of Last Resort a Prerequisite

In order for crises to be successfully managed, the lender of last resort must truly be a lender of 
last resort: it must create whatever asset the market thinks is the safest in the
economy, and must be able to do so in whatever quantity the market demands. And it must not get 
hung up on, say, Pierre Lavala€™ s desire to win points for himself in French
politics                                                                               by blocking 
the possibility that Germanya€™ s Central Bank can come to the rescue of Austriaa€™ s Central Bank 
when Austriaa€™ s Central Bank has overcommitted
itself in coming to the rescue of the credit [0:16:38] [Indiscernible] which had over committed 
itself in trying to maintain prosperity in the Danube Basin.

Fiscal Transfers Essential

In order for any monetary union or fixed exchange rate system larger than an optimum currency area 
to survive, it must be willing to undertake large-scale fiscal transfers to
compensate for the exchange rate movements to rapidly shift inter-regional terms of trade that it 
prohibits. So that monetary union on a scale as large as the Euro zone requires large
fiscal transfers. And those are unthinkable without, in turn, something that is for enough intents 
and purposes a political union.

Why Were the Lessons Not Learned?

I, at least, thought that everybodya€”or everybody who mattered in governing the world 
economya€”had learned these four lessons that 1919-1939 had so cruelly taught us. I do
know that that back at the start of the 1990s those of us in the US Treasury working on 
international affairs thought that everybody or at least enough of us with PhDs in economics
had learned these lessons that history had taught us.

Now it turns out that the princesses and princes of Eurovia do not appear to have learned these 
lessons.

But what were the princes and princesses of Eurovia doing? How did this come about? Why didn't 
Maastricht set up a single Eurovia-wide banking regulator and supervisor to align
financial policy with monetary policy? Why didn't Maastricht set up the fiscal-transfer funds that 
would be needed whena€”as would inevitably happena€”some chunk of the future
Eurovia went into recession while other chunks were in boom? Why did Maastricht leave a good chunk 
of lender-of-last-resort authority in the hands of national governments that
could not print money and so fulfill the lender-of-least-resort function rather than placing all of 
it in the European Central Bank, which could?

And whya€”given that one country's exports are another's importsa€”does the adoption of policies in 
deficit countries to reduce their imports and boost their export not
automatically trigger the adoption of policies in surplus countries to boost their imports and 
reduce their exports?

Some of it was a belief that specifying details at Maastricht would postpone the project for years 
or decades, and that the logic of events would inevitably lead to the organic growth
and development of the missing pieces. The first large regional recession in the monetary union 
would call forth fiscal transfers. The first major banking crisis would see the
European Central Bank immediately adopt the lender of last resort function, and would be swiftly 
followed by banking union. And when have politicians ever turned down an IMF-
blessed demand that they expand their economies? Underlying everything was a background gestalt 
that Maastricht was in large part Germany renewing its commitment to the
closer integration of Europe in the aftermath of the rest of Europe's strong support of the 
Bundesrepublika€™ s absorption of the German East, and that if it turned out that
somebody need to pay somehow for not clearly foreseen consequences of Maastricht, then Germany 
would step up and pay.

It may well work out. 50 years from now historians may well be writing that Maastricht was a 
gamble, but a gamble that turned out well.

Historians may say 50 years from now in 2063 that it has now been 108 years since an army crossed 
the Rhine in fire, in swift fire and sword, and that differences between core and
peripheral Europe are still annoying and a source of trouble and distress, but Europe as a 
continent as a whole is so rich that they have reverted to second-order concerns.

Northern Europeans still rumble that southern Europeans dona€™ t have a proper work ethic. But 
northern Europeans will be very eager to go and visit the periphery. Then the
descendants of the poor Cimbri will finally get to eat the feta and olives that their ancestors 
never got to enjoy as they were driven back out from their own valley up north back into
the Netherlands and Jutland.

Perhaps.


Perhaps not.

And surely most of it right now is the consequence of the fact that, while history taught the 
lesson, the princesses and princes of Eurovia were indeed looking out the window and
gossiping on Facebook.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

2013-04-18

2983 words

<https://www.icloud.eom/pages/0CZ64KeTjcmfWiG0z9Ep0pwNw>

<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/2013-04-18-europe-political-union.pdl>

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

