Subscribe now

CONDITION: Mamma Dona€™t Let Your Babies Grow Up to Vote for Republicans:

Aaron Rupar @atrupar

McCarthy: "Matt Gaetz said, I don't care if we go to plurality and we elect Hakeem Jeffries."1

4:12 PM r™ Jan 3,2023

1,457Likes302Retweets

Aaron Rupar: a€~McCarthy: a€oeMatt Gaetz said, a€~I don't care if we go to plurality and we elect 
Hakeem Jeffriesa€™ a€da€l
Give a gift subscription

CONDITION: Mamma Dona€™t Let Your Babies Grow Up to Vote for Tories:

- Schengen area

EU customs union


EEA

Monaco


Sweden Denmark Czech Republic Hungary Poland

Eurozone                                      Croatia

Northern
Ireland

San Marino


Netherlands      Finland Latvia      Estonia                 Romania

France    Belgium    Germany   Lithuania        Ireland

w

Andorra


Portugal   Luxembourg   Austria    Slovakia

Cyprus

Bulgaria

®

Turkey

Spain    Malta Italy       Slovenia    Greece

EFT A

Iceland Norway Liechtenstein

IN

Switzerland               Gibraltar

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

FOCUS: Welcome to A%e New Cold War Thunder dome!:


Gideon Rachman is, I think, talking a great deal of sense here:

Gideon Rachman: Stopping Chinaa€™ s growth cannot be a goal for the west: a€~Deterrence and trade 
will have to go hand in handa€!

And yet, and yet, and yet, I do not see how this is going to be accomplished.

For I find this from Bidena€™ s National Security Advisor both extremely disturbing and yet hard to 
dispute:

Jake Sullivan: Remarks at the Special Competitive Studies Project Global Emerging Technologies 
Summit: a€~We have to revisit the longstanding premise of maintaining a€cerelativea€D advantages 
over competitors in certain key technologies. We previously maintained a a€oesliding scalea€D 
approach that said we need to stay only a couple of generations ahead. That is not the strategic 
environment we are in today. Given the
foundational nature of certain technologies, such as advanced logic and memory chips, we must 
maintain as large of a lead as possible...

a€oeStopping Chinaa€™ s economic growtha€D would seem to be a key piece of a€oemaintaining as large 
of a lead as possible in foundational technologiesa€D, would it not?
So I am unhappy.

But.

Look: I understand that in many ways the fleet has sailed.

Too much "wolf warriora€D bulls**t in the Infosphere, the PLAa€™ s sea-grabs in the South China 
Sea, the growing tendency to use external displays of military force for internal political 
purposesa€”a Wilhelmine Germany-like ruling A©lite without any plausible domestic utility trying to 
solidify popular support by busying giddy minds with foreign quarrels.
All of these, plus a a€oeno limitsa€D partnership with an adventurist, cruel, and irrational chaos 
monkey of a Muscovy.

All of these have made it not irrational to judge that:

• the value of the US-China trade relationship for domestic prosperity,

• plus the hope that productive economic integration will strengthen forces within China pushing 
for a world rA©gime of a€oegentle commercea€D,

•  weigh less in the balance than the goal of keeping China from even thinking that it should spend 
the resources to seriously challenge American potential military power

It used to be that, if a process promised to substantially strengthen the PLA in the long run, that 
was a negative but not a decisive negative. Can that position still be maintained? I think 
nota€”not until there is a shift in China's rA©gime back towards the principles of the golden age 
of Chinese economic development enunciated by Hu Jintao, Jiang Zemin, and Deng Xiaoping. As Adam 
Smith wrote: defense is more important than opulence.
I                                                                                                   
                                                                                                    
 do have grave doubts that what are now called aCcefrontier AIa€D technologies will be of 
potentially decisive military importance over the next two generations. But I also know that I may 
well be wrong. They are Heavy and Deep Magic indeed.

So I would not say that Jake Sullivan is making a mistake in saying that simply maintaining a 
two-generation lead in advanced information technologies is no longer sufficient as an overriding 
policy goal for the Free World.
And I would not say that Joe Biden is wrong in backing him.

Yes, I find myself in a very unusual position, for me at least. I have, after all, bet my career on 
the a€oegentle commerceaCD rather than the a€oeexplosives and killer robotsa€D approach to foreign 
policy and global order. But Chinaa€™ s alliance with Muscovy keeps me from seeing a way forward. 
And things are complicated by the fact that I do not understand what war will be like in the rest 
of the 21st centurya€”it will not, as it was between 1914 and
1945, be determined by mass society-wide industrial capacity and mobilization.

Share


MUST-READ: Prediction wiA%out Understanding or Parsimonious Modeling:

Noah Smith directs me to:

Arman Khachiyan & al.: Using Neural Networks to Predict Micro-Spatial Economic Growth: a€~We apply 
deep learning to daytime satellite imagery to predict changes in income and population at high 
spatial resolution in US data. For grid cells with lateral dimensions of 1.2km and 2.4km (where the 
average US county has dimension of 55.6km), our model predictions achieve R2 values of 0.85 to 0.91 
in levels, which far
exceed the accuracy of existing models, and 0.32 to 0.46 in decadal changes, which have no 
counterpart in the literature and are 3-4 times larger than for commonly used nighttime lights. Our 
network has wide application for analyzing localized shocksa€!

Leave a comment

BRIEFLY NOTED:

ONE IMAGE: The Most Icelandic Icelandic Lighthouse:



Donate Subscriptions

Very Briefly Noted:

• Dean Baker: More Mind Reading at the NYT: a€~You have to wonder if job applicants at the New York 
Times are tested on their mind-reading abilitya€!. The strike wave hitting the United Kingdom. The 
article [by Stephen Castle] reports on the hardline stance against pay increases by Conservative 
Prime Minister Rishi Sunaka€! tells us that Mr. Sunaka€™ s opposition is actually due to his 
concern for the working classa€!. Sunak
a€oeinsists that agreeing to raises could embed inflation, which he sees as the real enemy of 
working peoplea€Da€!

•  Graham Alison & al.: Case File: Thucydides Trap: a€~It was the rise of Athens, and the fear that 
this instilled in Sparta, that made war inevitablea€!

• Elle Griffin: Let's study all the utopian novels this yeara€!

•  Zvi Mowshowitze: Covid 12/29/22: Next Up is XBB.1.5: a€~Ita€™ s time once again for our favorite 
game show, a€oehow much trouble will this new variant cause?a€Da€l

•  Jake Sherman & John Bresnahan (2015): Scalise: I 'regret' speech to white supremacy group: 
a€~Louisiana Rep. Steve Scalise is in full damage control mode and has publicly apologized for a 
2002 speech to a white supremacist groupa€! the European-American Unity and Rights Organization 
(EURO)...

•  Koichi Hamada: Barbarians at Democracya€™ s Gates: a€~The conventional wisdom, particularly in 
liberal circles, is that the arc of history always bends toward peace, tolerance, equality, 
justice, and democracy. But recent political violence a€“ not least the Capitol riot in the US a€“ 
has made clear that there is no room for complacencya€!

•  Simon Johnson: The Next Stage of the Hot Cold War: a€~Oil demand and supply are quite 
unresponsive to oil prices in the short run, but historically quite responsive over 5-10 years. To 
counter Russia in 2023 and beyond, the West needs to focus more intently on reducing demand for 
fossil fuels, particularly oil, and increasing the supply of alternative energy sourcesa€!

• John Mullahy: Happy (unofficial) 60th birthday to the field of health economicsa€!

•  Timothy B. Lee: a€~Honestly it's 2022 and editors at legacy news organizations should stop 
picking headlines without consulting writers. This was an artifact of print layout requirements and 
limited 20th Century communications technologies. Editors might still want to write headlines for 
freelancers, but at a minimum they should email/text the writer and say "we're planning to run with 
this headline. Is that OK?a€Da€!
Start writing today. Use the button below to create your Substack and connect your publication with 
Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Start a Substack

AJs:

Matthew Klein: For the love of Zeus, stop misusing Thucydides: a€~The Peloponnesian War has 
everything you could want if youa€™re interested in international relations. Complicated diplomacy, 
dramatic battles, tangled and shifting alliances, ideological struggles, rapacious empires, 
political intrigue, revolutions, coups, class warfare, civil strife, and incredibly colourful 
characters are all in there. Study this history carefully and you will gain
important insights into the nature of war and peace. Reading Thucydidesa€™ s account seems like the 
obvious way to do this. He was a thoughtful writer a€” consider the elision between the Melian 
dialogue at the end of book five and the introduction of the Sicilian Expedition at the start of 
book six a€” and the worlda€™ s first proper historiana€L [But] Thucydidesa€! had an enormous axe 
to grind. Absorbing his analysis uncritically would be
comparable to learning about the wars in mid-20th century Southeast Asia solely by reading 
Kissingera€™ s memoirsa€!

John Timmer: What are companies doing with D-Wavea€™ s quantum hardware?: a€~D-Wave's computers are 
especially good at solving optimization problemsa€!. There are quantum systems based on 
superconducting hardware that are being used commercially; it's just that they're not 
general-purpose computers. D-Wave offers what's called a quantum annealera€!. Annealers can't solve 
the same full range of mathematical problems as general-purpose
quantum computers, such as the ones made by Google, IBM, and others. But they can be used to solve 
a variety of optimization problemsa€!. Unlike with general-purpose quantum computers, it hasn't 
been mathematically demonstrated that quantum annealers can consistently outperform traditional 
computers. But unlike general-purpose quantum computers, they have for several years had a high 
numbers of bits, good connectivity, and reasonable error
rates.                                                                                              
                                                                                                    
          And a number of companies are now using them to solve real-world problemsa€!

Doug Jones: Slava Ukraini: a€~Russiaa€™ s attempted seizure of Ukraine this year, and the ensuing 
ongoing war, crystalized a new international divisiona€! [between] a Western/maritime rimland and 
an Old World heartlanda€!. The division in attitudes between the West and the two Eurasian powers 
has developed only recently, but it has rootsa€!. Where access to the sea and trade was limited, 
autocracy was (and is) more likely to prevail. Also,
maritime zones tend to smaller political unitsa€!. Individualism, constitutional government, 
national self-determinationa€! developed in a particular geographic and historical context. A large 
portion of the world does not (pace the American Declaration of Independence) hold these ideals as 
self-evident truths, and even regards them (not always entirely without reason) as a mask for 
cynical power politics. And so The End of History is unfinished worka€!


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

