Subscribe now

The 2020-2022 COVID-19 plague caused by the coronavirus SARS-COVID-19 has, many today think, put 
the world economy in an odd position. For more than a quarter century
now the ongoing revolution in data processing and data communications technology has been 
profoundly altering the basic underpinnings of property and exchange and valuea€”
has been shifting us from a a€cecommoditya€D to an a€ceattentiona€D economy. We have all watched 
this shift gradually lurch forward. But now, many say, our two plague years
are packing, in some aspects, what would have been at least a decade of change and development into 
two years, as requirements of quarantine and social distancing have taught
and humans have had to learn on an emergency basis how to better use information and communications 
technology to try to substitute for much face-to-face interaction.

Share

But what exactly, are we moving away from?

Let me attempt to set out the ideal type of a commodity economya€”more-or-less as Adam Smith two 
and a half centuries ago understood it.

In a commodity economy, in my image of it at least, things of value are concrete easily assayable 
commodities created for and then distributed via sale in competitive markets. The
commodities are rival, excludible, transparent, and as for coordination, market prices creating 
incentives directing small-scale producers are enough to solve coordination problems.
In fact, the properly tuned market economy solves all the problems:

Because in a commodity economy the principal sources of value are rival goods, requiring people to 
pay prices for using them is a very good way to incentive-compatibly
crowdsource the solution to the problem of how what is produced is going to be distributed:

[willingness to pay] = [intensity of demand] x [social power (mediated through their wealth) of the 
demander].

That use of goods is also easily excludible makes it possible to implement such a price and market 
exchange-based system. Then, in addition, it immediately drops out that you have
solve the problem of what should be produced: whatever makes a profit should be produced. And as 
long as you are comfortable with the distribution among people of social power
implicit in the distribution of wealth, and as long as Pigouvian externalities are not 
widespreada€”and you can at least argue in favor of the powerful insights of Ronald Coase (or is
it   a dodge?) that it is possible to a€oecut property rights at the jointsa€D, so to speak, to all 
but eliminate transaction costs and so make externalities truly de     ’’property,
contract, and the market are what you need. What then is not to like?

Well, there may be information problemsa€’’adverse selection and moral hazard. Well, there is the 
question of whether the market and its prices are a thick enough communication
channel to actually do the coordination of human activity required to make production efficient. 
Well, there is the question of who is going to do the R&D, and what is the right
amount                                                                              of R&D to do. 
Well, there is the question of market power.

Of these the last, the problem of market power, was well-known to Adam Smitha€™ s generation. It 
was a major wellspring of his belief that only landlords should have the vote.
The working classa€”even if a well-functioning commercial society made it prosperous and 
comfortable, and even if the government took a hand to moderate the stultifying effects
of the division of labor on the minds of the working class, and make no mistake: Smith thought a 
sophisticated division of labor was both marvelously productive and appallingly
stultifyinga€’’could not handle the required cognitive load of voting. And the mercantile and 
manufacturing classes would, if given the vote, use it to have the government give
them      all monopolies. But landlords, Smith thought, had an interest both in general prosperity 
and in competitive markets.

Of these the next to last, the problem of R&D, was always an embarrassment.

At the start it was a minor embarrassment. Suppose that we are willing to make the brave guess that 
the efficiency-of-labor E in a Solow growth model is equal to the value of the
stock of useful ideas discovered, developed, and deployed in the world economy H times the 
square-root of natural resources per worker R/L.

Then in Adam Smitha€™ s age, from 1500 to 1770, worldwide, the proportional rate of growth h of the 
value of the deployed-ideas stock H was 0.15%/year: less than 5% per
generation; only 16% per decade. Adam Smith saw a world in which the density and sophistication of 
your commercial network and thus the fineness of your societal division of
labor   was much more important as a determinant of the efficiency-of-labor than was the process of 
invention, innovation, development, and deployment. Indeed, he thought of those
largely as immediate consequences of a fine division of labor, rather than as an independent force.

It was soon thereafter clear that that judgment was wrong for the future humanity was then moving 
into. Over 1770-1870 our h becomes 0.45%/year, worldwide. And starting in
1870 it has been approximately 2%: 4.5 times its pace during the 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution 
century, 14 times its pace during the 1500-1770 Imperial-Commercial Revolution
era, (and 55 times its pace during the preceding 1-1500 Late Agrarian Age). By the 1840s Friedrich 
Engels was dismissing classical economists as obvious paid shills for the rich
because of their reduction of:

the production costs of a commodity... [to] three elements: the rent... the capital with its 
profit, and the wagesa€!. A factor which the economist does not
think abouta€“I mean the mental element of invention, of thoughta€!. What has the economist to do 
with inventiveness? Have not all inventions fallen into
his lap without any effort on his part? Has one of them cost him anything? Why then should he 
bother about them in the calculation of production costs?

Land, capital and labour are for him the conditions of wealth, and he requires nothing else. 
Science is no concern of his. What does it matter to him that he
has received its gifts through Berthollet, Davy, Liebig, Watt, Cartwright, etc.a€“gifts which have 
benefited him and his production immeasurably?a€! In a
rational order which has gone beyond the division of interests as it is found with the economist, 
the mental element certainly belongs among the elements
of production and will find its place, too, in economics among the costs of production^!. A single 
achievement of science like James Watta€™ s steam-
engine has brought in more for the world in the first fifty years of its existence than the world 
has spent on the promotion of science since the beginning of
time...

As I say, it was an embarrassmenta€’’subsumed under Pivouvian externalities or discussed as 
requiring a tradeoff between static and dynamic efficiency via patent systems making
legally excludible what was non-rival in is essence. It was a sign that Smitha€™ s mental image of 
what was typical for a a€cecommodity economya€D was not describing reality,
and was describing it less well as time passed.

How about information problems? They do not arisea€”mucha€”in a commodity economy because you are 
buying and selling concrete, visible, assayable things. Neither moral
hazard nor adverse selection has much play.

And problems of coordination? The image of production in a commodity economy is of a small farmer, 
or a small craftsman, or the work of a small team. And, where necessary, the
Coasian insighta€”or, again, is it a dodge?a€”that Darwinian processes would let firms grow in size 
as long as their internal processes were more efficient than market coordination
would have been, but then firm growth would stop, and to inquire into the workings of firms was 
somebody elsea€™ s business.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

That is the mental image of what is typical for a commodity economya€”the Weberian ideal-type. It 
is, of course, only an ideal-type. It was never an actual empirical reality. But it
was close enough in Adam Smitha€™ s day to guide a great deal of useful thought about economy and 
economic policy.

1428 words

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


