Subscribe now

Brad DeLong: The Long 20th Century Comes to a Shuddering End: An era of once-undreamt-of progress 
is overa€”andyou wona€™tlike what comes next:

The history of the long 20th century, stretching from 1870 to 2010, is primarily the history of 
four things:

• technology-fueled growth,

• globalization,

• an exceptional America, and

•  confidence that humanity could at least slouch toward utopia as governments could solve 
political-economic problems. And even that slouch was going to be done at
uneven, unequal, and unfair rates, depending on skin tone and gender.

Still, twice in that long century, 1870-1914 and 1945-75, something every preceding generation 
would have called near-utopia came nearer, rapidly. But these generation-long
episodes of economic El Dorados were not sustained. Individuals, ideas, and opportunities help 
explain why.

Before 1870, only wild optimists had any confidence that humanity might have a path to utopiaa€”and 
even for them, the path was a rugged road requiring massive transformations
of human society and psychology.

One such utopian was Karl Marx. He and his close associate Friedrich Engels, writing in 1848, 
theorized that they were in the midst of what they called the a€oeepoch of the
bourgeoisiea€Da€”a time when private property and market exchange served as fundamental organizing 
principles in human society, creating powerful incentives for scientific
research and engineering development, and spurring business investment to deploy marvels of 
technology to amplify human productivity beyond previous imaginings.

Marx and Engels saw the interrelated phenomena that defined this epoch as both Redeemer and Satan. 
They were Redeemer insofar as they created the possibility of a wealthy
society in which people could, cooperatively, do what they wanted to five full fives. But at the 
same time, their satanic workings kept impoverished and even further impoverished
the overwhelming majority of humanity and would in the end force them into a more bitter state of 
slavery than before.

For Marx, the path to utopia required the descent of humanity into an industrial inferno, for only 
that could trigger it to call forth the descent from heaven of a New Jerusalem, in the
form of a communist revolution and the total overthrow of the existing order of society. But to 
believe that that path was there, and that humanity was certain to walk it, required
great confidence that things hoped for had solid substance and that things not seen were truly in 
evidence.

Another relative optimist, John Stuart Mill, anticipated a lesser utopia that would require less of 
an overthrow. Mill was an ardent believer in freedom, individual initiative, science,
and technology a€’’but he was also deeply fearful of the Malthusian dilemma. The inventions of 
science and the deployment of technology would create fortunes for the rich and
expand the numbers of comforts of the middle class, but the great majority of humanity would remain 
working class and continue to live lives of drudgery and imprisonment. Mill
saw only one out: Government would have to control human fertility via mandatory birth control. 
Then all could be well.

But Marxa€™ s and Milla€™ s rather odd optimisms made them somewhat outliers in their day, not in 
that their optimisms were odd but that they were optimistic at all. Back in
1870, there was great reason to doubt that social equality, individual liberty, political 
democracy, and general let alone abundant wealthy prosperity were in the future. The United
States had just narrowly survived a bloody civil war that had killed 750,000 men, roughly 
one-twelfth of its adult white and one-thirtieth of its adult Black male population. Typical
standards of living were still gravely impoverished. Most people were stunted, by our standards, 
and often hungry and illiterate.

Did Marx and Mill see the trends of their day more clearly than others? Or were they simply lucky 
in seeing something of the magnitude of forthcoming material wealth and the
possibilities that material wealth might deliver for humanity? Humanity had been shaking the 
portcullis before 1870. And in 1870 a few major changes broke the lock. The coming
of   the industrial research lab, of the modern corporation, and of globalization opened up, for 
the first time in human history, the opportunity to solve our problems of material want.

Moreover, at that moment, humanity was lucky enough to have an about-to-be-global market economy. 
As Friedrich August von Hayek keenly observed, the market economy
crowdsourcesa€’’incentivizes and coordinatesa€’’solutions to the problems that it sets itself. 
After 1870, it could solve the problem of providing those with control over valuable
property resources with an abundance of the necessities, conveniences, and luxuries they wanted and 
believed they needed.

Thus, the trail to human material abundance, and to utopia, became visible and walkablea€”or 
runnable. And everything else should have followed from that. Much has. By 1914,
the prevailing pessimism of 1870 appeared old-fashioned, if not completely wrong. The intervening 
years had truly been, for the world, an extraordinary episode in the economic
progress of humanity. And there was every reason to think it would continue: It seemed as if we 
could look forward to a genuine utopia of abundance, a future in which further
scientific discoveries would be developed in the worlda€™ s industrial research laboratories and 
then spread worldwide into the globalized economy by modern corporations.

But then World War I came.

Afterward it was clear that what the optimistic had regarded as aberrant and scandalous was the 
rule and that deep trouble could not be avoided. People were not satisfied with what
the market economy offered them. Governments proved incapable of managing economies to preserve 
stability and guarantee year-to-year growth. Sometimes populations with
democracy threw it away to authoritarian demagogues. Other times, the rich and the top military 
professionals of the world decided that domination was in fact worth trying.

Technology and organization enabled tyrannies of unprecedented magnitude, and economic 
disparitiesa€”both between and within countriesa€”grew and grew. The demographic
transition to low fertility and low population growth was rapid but not rapid enough to prevent the 
20th-century population explosion, with its additional stresses on and
transformations                                                                             of 
societal order.

Throughout this process, the global south was falling further and further behinda€’’growing, on 
average, but not catching up, as decade upon decade saw those countries with less
manufacturing and thus less in relative terms of an engineering and science community on which to 
build up their economiesa€™ productive-knowledge stock. Outside of two
charmed circlesa€”the group of Marshall Plan aid recipients and those clinging to the Pacific Rim 
of Asiaa€”the global south did not even begin to right itself (in the sense of
starting to grow faster than the global north), and so even taking the first step toward catching 
up, rather than falling further behind, until more than a decade after the 1979
neoliberal turn. Those countries that did worst were those unlucky enough to be ensorcelled by the 
spell of Vladimir Lenin and thus took the actually existing socialist road from
1917 to 1990.

The global north was lucky enough to rediscover after World War II what it thought was the path to 
utopia. The pace of economic growth during the Thirty Glorious Years that
followed made, by its end in the 1970s, people dizzy with success: expecting more and tremendously 
upset at what seem in retrospect to be relatively minor speed bumps and
roadblocks. But mere rapid growth did not satisfy those of a right-wing temperament, who felt that 
a prosperity that was shared too equally was unfair and degrading. And mere
rapid  growth did not satisfy those of a left-wing temperament, either, for they felt that the 
problems that the market, even tweaked and managed by social democrats, solved did not
produce even a partial version of the utopia they sought. And so the world took its neoliberal 
turn. But the neoliberal policy prescriptions did not produce a slouching toward utopia
that was more rapid in any sense.

From 1870 to 2010 was 140 years. Who back in 1870, poor as humanity was then, would have thought 
that by 2010 humanity would have the ability to provide each person with
more material resources than could have been imagined in 1870? And who would have thought that with 
those resources humanity would be unable to use them to build a close
approximation to a true utopia?

Back at the beginning of the long 20th century, novelist Edward Bellamy had thought that the power 
to dial up any one of four live orchestras and put it on the speakerphone would
carry us to a€oethe limit of human felicity.a€D There was only one person in Britain in the early 
1600s who could watch a theatrical entertainment about witches in his home: King
James Ia€”and that was only if Shakespeare and company currently had Macbeth in repertory. There 
was one thing that Nathan Mayer Rothschild, the richest man in the first half of
the 1800s, wanted in 1836: a dose of antibiotics, so that he would not die in his 50s of an 
infected abscess. Today, we not only can produce the sorts of things that were produced in
1870 with remarkably less human effort but can easily produce conveniences (that we now regard as 
necessities), former luxuries (that we now regard as conveniences), and things
that previously could not have been produced at any price. Does saying that we are more than 10 
times richer than our 1870 predecessors really capture that sea change in a
satisfactory way?

Yet we found, as of 2010, that we had not run to the utopian traila€™ s end. Moreover, for us the 
end of the utopian trail was no longer visible, even if we had previously thought
that it was.

Driving it all, always in the background and often in the foreground, were the industrial research 
labs discovering and developing things, the large corporations developing and


deploying mem, ana me globalized market economy coordinating it an. But in some ways me market 
economy was more problem man solution.

It recognized only property rights, and people wanted Polanyian rights: rights to a community that 
gave them support, to an income that gave them the resources they deserved, and
to economic stability that gave them consistent work. And for all the economic progress that was 
achieved during the long 20th century, its history teaches us that material wealth is
of limited use in building utopia. It is an essential prerequisite but far from sufficient. And 
this is where economist John Maynard Keynesa€™ s comment about the most permanent
problem being how a€oeto live wisely and agreeably and wella€D comes in once again. His speech was 
an important moment because he perfectly expressed what the essential
difficulty has proved to be.

Of the four freedoms that U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt thought ought to be every persona€™ 
s birthrighta€’’freedom of speech, freedom of worship, freedom from want,
and freedom from feara€”only freedom from want is secured by material wealth. The others remain to 
be secured by other means. What the market taketh and giveth can be, and
often is, overshadowed by hopes and fears arising out of other wants and needs.

The shotgun marriage of Hayek and Karl Polanyi, blessed by Keynes, that helped raise the post-World 
War II North Atlantic developmental social democracy was as good as we
have so far gotten. But it failed its own sustainability test, partly because a single generation 
of rapid growth raised the bar high and partly because Polanyian rights required
stability, the treating of equals equally, and the treating of perceived unequals unequally in ways 
in which neither the Hayekian-Schumpeterian market economy of creative
destruction nor the Polanyian social democratic society of universal egalitarian social insurance 
rights could ever deliver.

In the decades around 2000, four developments together brought to an end the timespan of the long 
20th centurya€”and together might mark the end of humanitya€™ s time
slouching toward utopia. The first came in 1990, when the highly innovative and productive 
industries of Germany and Japan successfully challenged the United Statesa€™
technological edge, undermining the underpinnings of American exceptionalism.

The second was 2001, when forms of fanatic religious violence that we all thought had been in 
retreat for centuries flamed up again, and pundits scratched their chins and opined
about a a€oewar of civilizationsa€da€”but there was no such thing. The third was the Great 
Recession, which began in 2008, when it became clear that we had forgotten the
Keynesian lessons of the 1930s and lacked either the capacity or the will to do what was necessary. 
The fourth was the worlda€™ s failure during the period from roughly 1989
(when   the science became clear) to the present to act decisively to combat global warming. 
History after the confluence of these events looks notably distinct from history before, as
if  it requires a new and different grand narrative to make sense of it.

That the long 20th century was over by 2010 and would not be revivified was confirmed by the 
rupture that came next, on Nov. 8,2016, when Donald Trump won that yeara€™ s

U.S. presidential election. In that moment, it became clear that each of the four defining 
developments of the long 20th century could not be restored. Economic growth in the North
Atlantic had slipped substantially a€”if not all the way to the pre-1870 slower pace, then a 
substantial part of the way. Globalization was definitely in reverse: It had few public
advocates and many enemies.

Plus, people else wherea€’’rightly a€”no longer saw the United States as an exceptional country or 
the U.S. government as a trustworthy leader on the world stage. Those judgments
were massively strengthened when 345,323 Americans (and likely more) died of COVID-19 in 2020 
alone, as the only virus containment reaction the Trump administration could
muster was to spin in circles and whisper sotto voce that the deaths werena€™ t their fault, for 
how could they have been expected to anticipate an unleashed Chinese bioweapon?
Science and technology produced marvels in terms of the extremely rapid and successful development 
of powerful vaccines. U.S .-led global governance, however, proved inept in
vaccinating the world before the virus spread widely and developed new variants.

In addition, confidence in the future was greatly attenuated, if not gone. The threat of global 
warming was the Malthusian devil taking, if not yet flesh, at least a form of shadow.
The only place where confidence in the future was strong was among the cadres of the Chinese 
Communist Party, who saw themselves leading humanity forward holding high the
banner of socialism with Chinese characteristics and guided by Mao Zedong-Deng Xiaoping-Xi Jinping 
Thought. But to all outside, that seemed more like corrupt, authoritarian
state surveillance capitalism with Chinese characteristics (although paying lip service, and 
perhaps someday more, to egalitarian-utopian a€oecommon prosperitya€D aspirations).

So, Chinaa€™ s possible ascendance seemed to outsiders unlikely to promise forward steps on the 
path to utopia. Instead, it seemed to signal a returna€’’albeit at a much higher
level of general prosperity a€”to historya€™ s Wheel of Fortune, to the cycle of rulers and ruled: 
the strong grabbing what they wished and the weak suffering what they must.

Subscribe now
Leave a comment

