Subscribe now

FIRST: In the Generations After 1870, All That Is Solid Does Melt into Air

A very, very nicely put thumbnail summary of what I have been trying to say about the implications 
of the coming after 1870 of what Simon Kuznets named a€oeModern Economic GrowthaCD. It destabilized 
politics and political economy around the globe. Shaky regimes crashed. Solid regimes became shaky. 
And rock-solid regimes began to feel earthquakes
building:

Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution: a€~Although the 
Russian case is unique, in this respect too international comparisons are nevertheless very 
important. In the two generations before 1914, European society as a whole had been transformed 
more fundamentally than in centuries of earlier
history. It was hard for anyone to keep his balance amid dramatic economic, social, and cultural 
change; predictions as to where change might lead in the future could inspire even greater 
giddinessa€!

LINK: chttps://archive.org/details/endoftsaristruss00001iev>

Before 1770, there were historical changesa€’’political/military, literary/ideological/cultural, 
religious/social, and economic/technological. They worked on different time scales. 
Political/military affairs could overthrow orders and make new ones inside of a decade; 
literary/ideological/cultural required a generation; religious/social took a few centuries; and
economic/technological took close to a millennium, at least. What that meant is that people might 
find themselves operating in a political/military context that might be brand-new, and in a 
literary/ideological/cultural framework that diverged from that of their parents, they still 
operated in a religious/social context that their grand- and great-grandparents would have
found     familiar, and there was barely any memory at all that there might have been a time in 
which the patterns of technology were substantially different. The fact that major changes in 
different realms proceeded along such different time scales had powerful consequences for how 
patterns of action and the institutions and orders that channeled them came under stress
and were adopted in response.

From 1770 to 1870 the pace of economic change quickened. But it was really not the case that 
a€oeall that was solid melts into aira€D.
That did not become true until after 1870.

But after 1870 it became true with a vengeance. And so over 1870-2010, repeated technological and 
economic revolutions shook, and shook, and shook the human world to pieces over and over again, and 
then people had to try to pick the pieces up and assemble them into something over and over again.
That was very different than all previous history.

Not immediately relevant to the major point I want to make about what is truly different about the 
history of the 20th century, but very interesting anyway, is what immediately follows in Lievena€™ 
s book: his rant against a€oecivil societya€D:

Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution: a€~a€!A common 
feature across Europe was the growth of civil society and its impact through the press, lobbies, 
and political parties on governments. In contemporary parlance, civil society is always supposed to 
be on the side of the angels. As regards
international relations in prea€“1914 Europe, this was not true. Civil society, meaning above all 
the press, often played a big role in stoking international conflict. This might be just a question 
of pandering to public prejudices and thirst for sensations, but it rattled and bedeviled policy 
makers nonetheless.

More serious were systematic efforts to use foreign policy as a means to generate nationalist 
support for governments at home, in the process undermining the rational calculations on which 
diplomatic bargaining was based. No great power, Russia included, was entirely innocent in this 
respecta€!
LINK: <https://archive.org/details/endoftsaristruss00001iev>

On the one hand, Lieven wants to take the side of sober statesman seeking the public good finding 
themselves overwhelmed by the irrational passions of the gutter press-stoked a€cemoba€D, using the 
old word for "uncivil societyaCD. Consider Winston Churchill on the shift of Britain to anger, 
fear, and launching the pre-WWI naval Cold War against imperial
Germany: a€oeThe [Liberal] government offered [to build] four [dreadnought battleships a year], the 
navy demanded six, and we compromised on eighta€da€’’because of pressure from civil society and the 
press.a€d

On the other hand, Lieven recognizes that a€oebusy[ing] giddy minds with foreign quarrelsa€d, in 
the words of Shakespearea€™ s King Henry IV Lancaster, is often the most convenient tactic that a 
shaky A©lite that is losing any legitimate social role can undertake to try to shore up its 
dominance. The classic statement, according to Count Witte, is supposed to be
that of Czarist Interior Minister Plehve in a cabinet meeting: a€oeAlexei Nikolaevich, you do not 
understand Russiaa€™ s internal situation. To contain the revolution, we need a short victorious 
war!a€D And the classic argument that this tendency was the major root of World War I is: Arno 
Mayer (1981): The Persistence of the Old RAOgime: Europe to the Great
War <https: //archive .org/details/persistenceofold0000maye>.

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Gideon Rachman: Ukraine & the Start of a Second Cold War 
<https://www.ft.com/content/34481fbd-4ca7-4bb3-bef5-e68fefed7438>

• Michele Jamrisko: Has Inflation Peaked? Signs Are Flashing in Chips, Shipping, Fertilizer 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/articles/2022-06-06/peak-inflation-signs-are-flashing-in-chips-shipp
ing-fertilizer#xi4v7vzkg>

•  Elaine Weiss (2013): Mismatches in Race to the Top Limit Educational Improvement: Lack of Time, 
Resources, and Tools to Address Opportunity Gaps Puts Lofty State Goals Out of Reach 
<https://www.epi.org/publication/race-to-the-top-goals/>

• Bob Yirka: Making Blockchains More Efficient: Calculate a Useful Task as Part of the Consensus 
AfechtznZ5m<https://techxplore.com/news/2022-06-blockchains-efficient-task-consensus-mechanism.html>


• William D. Cohan: The SPAC Stars ofa€™21: Where Are They Now?: a€~SPAC-mania, a consensual 
hallucination in which everyone, from Ackman to A-Rod, got in on the SPAC craze. It may have been 
easy to raise all those billions, but it turned out to be much harder to put them to worka€! 
<https://puck.news/the-spac-stars-of-21 -where-are-they-
now/? cio id=f6c60600ef33f033>

•  Ed Dolan: Trust, State Capacity, & the Epidemiological Mystery of Covid: a€~Trust played an 
important role in the response to the CO VID pandemic but it finds a larger role for state 
capacitya€! 
<https://www.niskanencenter.org/trust-state-capacitv-and-the-epidemiological-mysterv-of-covid/>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• John Quiggin: Memo RBA: We Ought to Live with Inflation, More of It: a€~The RBAa€! should reset 
its inflation target to 4%, or better still dump inflation targeting in favour of nominal GDP 
targetinga€!
John Quiggin's Blogstack

Memo RBA: we ought to live with inflation, more of it

Thata€™ s the headline for my latest piece in The Conversation. The article initially ran under a 
different headline, chosen by the publishers with an eye to maximising the number of search terms, 
but this failed miserably, and my preferred headline was restored. The insistence of publishers on 
choosing headlines has been a ca€l
Read more

8 months ago A- 3 likes A- John Quiggin

• Ross Barkan: The Jews & Italians Against Liberalism: a€~a€oeThey feel the pressure, like 
everything is fading away,a€D one local explained. a€oelta€™ s all in danger: the house you always 
wanted is in danger, the kids are in danger, the neighborhood is in danger. Ita€™ s all slipping 
away.a€da€! In 1985, the Barnard sociologist Jonathan Rieder
published a book that is little-known today. Canarsie: The Jews and Italians of Brooklyn Against 
Liberalism^}

Political Currents by Ross Barkan

The Jews and Italians Against Liberalism

An ill wind blew through the land. Life, suddenly crackling, was not what it once was. The young, 
they said, did not respect the old, and the nation they knew now did not resemble the nation of 
their memories, when chaos did not seem to swallow up so much. Crime was up, gas prices were up, 
and the rage they felt was no longer confineda€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 10 likes A- 4 comments A- Ross Barkan

• Ryan Avent: Does Not Compute: a€~The issue isna€™ t just one in which some individuals receive 
bad information, but rather one in which we all engage with each other a little differently, we are 
all part of the problema€!. These networks want us to perform, and that we can instead choose not 
to. We can be silent, or gracious, or botha€!. We can do
better. We have to, if we want to get through thisa€!

The Bellows
Does not compute

There are days when I think that the history of our era, whenever it is written, will say that we 
were a society with manageable problems until the internet came along and ruined everything. Ia€™ m 
not completely convinced of this; not yet. But there are days when I think it, and more of them all 
the timea€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 10 likes A- Ryan Avent

Paragraphs:


What good could those paying tor order ilow possibly be up to? And there are so many ways to get 
dopamine hits that are a lot cheaper in the long-run than is buying GameStop, so doing anything to 
make people think a bit more and so break the dopamine-hit addiction seems worthwhile to me:

Matt Levine: Retail Trading Is About to Change: a€~Surely if market makers are paying retail 
brokers for order flow it is because they are up to no gooda€!. It seems like a conflict of 
interest: If the retail brokers are getting paid to send their orders to market makers, how can you 
trust that theya€™ re doing the right thing for the retail orders?
a€! Will this be good for retail execution? The wholesalers say no, though they woulda€!. And 
nobody exactly says yes. And yet everyone is mad about the current system, so I suppose scrapping 
it and starting over is a political winner. Also the potential bad outcome here is that retail 
investors will get worse execution or wona€™ t be able to
trade for free, and I am not sure that the SEC would mind thata€L GameStopa€!. Too many people were 
buying GameStop at seemingly irrational prices. One could imagine the SEC wanting to rewrite the 
rules to add frictionsa€!. If the retail trading experience got a bit worse, there might be a bit 
less retail trading, and deep down that might
be what the SEC wantsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2022-06-07/retail-trading-is-about-to-change#xj4y7vzkg>

A nice point: I cannot see a newspaper headline and plunk down a quarter to quickly and immediately 
buy a daily copy anymorea€”yet the software technology is easily there:

Steve M.: Disinformation Wants To Be Free: a€~I dona€™ t know why the elite media has given up on 
non-subscribers. In the days of print, newspapers and magazines pursued subscriptions, but they 
also cared about single-copy sales at newsstands. Ia€™ m not aware of any major media outlet that 
makes it easy to read an individual story
for a small micropayment, and you cana€™ t sign up for any site that provides even limited access 
to multiple news sites for a monthly fee. So people with money sign up for a few sites and 
Substacks, and everyone else makes do with what their Facebook friends repost, or what CNN and 
local free news sites offer, or what they see on TikTok
and Instragram and YouTube. And the result is that professional disinformationists and people 
suffering from toxic fandom have opportunities to dominate the news, because most of their content 
is free. Thata€™ s bad for society, but ita€™ s what the market dictates, I guessa€!

LINK: <https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2022/06/disinformation-wants-to-be-free.html>

I really need to read this again, more carefully: I do not understand why their number is so low:

Klaus Adam & al.: Why Central Banks Should Aim For a Positive Inflation Target: a€~Using new micro 
price data, this column investigates how high the optimal inflation rate must be to prevent 
relative product demand from being distorted. In contrast to a common claim, it finds that the 
optimal rate is not zero for a large part of the euro
area, but is, in fact, clearly in positive territorya€! lies between 1.1% and 1.7% in the three 
largest euro area countriesa€!

LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/why-central-banks-should-aim-positive-inflation-target>

The problem is that wherever crypto is gaining the potential for serious used cases, it is 
precisely because people really, really, really do not trust the probable kleptocrats who are going 
to control the levers of financial regulation. My view: in some places, crypto does not have a 
plausible used case that is non-destructive, and in such places it needs to be regulated into
near non-existence because it is a harmful grift; in other places, it may become a response to 
government failure and thus a useful safety valve. Nevertheless, I cannot help but feel that a lot 
less can go wrong with dollarizationa€”adopting the U.S.a€™ s financial framework and using 
thata€”than with cryptoization:

Kenneth Rogoff: WhataC™ s the Crypto Regulation Endgame?: a€~Ultra-low interest rates flattered 
crypto, and young investors are now getting a taste of what happens when interest rates go upa€!. 
Some economists naively argue that there is no particular urgency to regulate Bitcoin and the like, 
because cryptocurrencies are difficult and
costly to use for transactions. Try telling that to policymakers in developing economies, where 
crypto has become a significant vehicle for avoiding taxes, regulations, and capital controlsa€!. I 
am not suggesting that all blockchain applications should be constrained. For example, regulated 
stablecoins, underpinned by a central-bank balance
sheet, can still thrive, but there needs to be a straightforward legal mechanism for tracing a 
usera€™ s identity if neededa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/will-advanced-economies-ban-crvptocurrencies-bv-kennet
h-rogoff-2Q22-Q6>

It does seem that the only reasonable reaction to Ilya Shapiro's panicked dismay at the failure of 
Georgetown University to cancel him, and thus the prospect that he might actually have to do a job, 
is simply laughter:

Scott Lemieux: I Can See by What You Carry that You Come from Bari-Town: a€™ Ilya Shapiroa€!. 
a€oeGeorgetown University Law Center reinstated me last Thursday. Buta€! I concluded that remaining 
in my job was untenablea€!a€D a€oeCancel culturea€D is when you can voluntarily quit your job for a 
more lucrative no-work grift
somewhere else and are given immediate access to the most widely-read newspaper in the country to 
whine about how youa€™ ve been cancelled (even if to be all technical about it you self-cancelled.) 
The free market is being fired because you she up for work 5 minutes after your shift starts 
because the bus was latea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2Q22/Q6/i-can-see-bv-what-vou-cany-that-vou-come-from-bari-tow
n>

a€oeHunicanea€D seems very much the wrong metaphor. a€oeStorm cloudsa€D or a€oepotential storma€D 
seems much more right to me. So what is Jamie Dimon seeing that I am not that leads him to leap for 
that metaphor?:

Scott Krisiloff & E.K. Mokaya: A Hurricane is Coming!: a€~Jamie Dimon see[s]a€! a hurricane 
approaching and venture capitalists saying that wea€™re seeing the end of an era of unprofitable 
growth. On the other hand, economic activity at the moment is still relatively a€oesunny.a€n 
Consumer spending is showing no signs of abating
and supply chains may finally be starting to heal. Still, the Fed is not ready to reverse course 
and so rising interest rates are likely to put pressure on capital markets and, therefore, the 
economya€i. Jamie Dimona€!. "Look, Ia€™ m an optimist. I said therea€™ s storm clouds, theya€™re 
big storm clouds, theya€™rea€”ita€™ s a hurricane;
ita€™ s, wea€”right now ita€™ s kind of sunny, things are doing fine, everyone thinks the Fed can 
handle this. That hurricane is right out there down the road coming our way. We just dona€™ t know 
if ita€™ s a minor one or Superstorm Sandy ora€”yes, Sandy or Andrew, or something like thata€!

LINK: <https://thetranscript.substack.eom/p/06-06-2022-a-hurricane-is-coming-free>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

