Subscribe now

FIRST: There Are Two Not-Positive Reviews of a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D on Amazon

Here is the first, from an account who reviewed six things in 2015-6 and then went completely 
silent:

1       .0 out of 5 stars :: Kulting for Keynes and Keynesians :: Reviewed in the United States on 
September 7, 2022

Economics was one of my beats as an academic editor a few decades back, I quickly learned the bias 
in economics: If the authors of free enterprise going back a quarter of a millennium, Adam Smith
and J. B. Say, were correct, then those actually taking the risks call the shots and not 
economists. However, if British Fabian Lord Keynes, who came to prominence only a century ago is 
correct, then
economists in government, think tanks and academe become indispensable to setting policy.

Look at the laudatory reviews above, and you will see who I am talking about.

It has been challenging to keep Keynes looking respectable. I believe we are looking at version 3.0 
now of rehabilitating his wrongheadedness. Meanwhile, Smith and Say, such ivory tower calumny
apart, have held up well. But to read DeLong's "Slouching Towards Utopia," you would think it is 
not even a close call.

There is no mention of Keynes' frauds and blunders at the Genoa Conference to put the world back on 
the gold standard after World War I that led directly to the Great Depression. There is no
mention of the "Roosevelt Recession," the third depression of the Great Depression that came as FDR 
tried to implement industrial policy after receiving his gift copy of Keynes' "The General
Theory." There is no mention of the body of academic work that claims Roosevelt needlessly 
prolonged the Great Depression by at least seven years. There is no mention that FDR's New Deal
consisted almost entirely of programs Hoover already had in placea€”just the opposite.

There is certainly no mention that Woodrow Wilson was widely credited in Europe as having provided 
the proof of concept for fascist dirigisme by his takeover of American industry in the first world
war.

In short, I do not buy and read academic economics expecting it to be free of slant, but this book 
stands as pure snow job with not a nod I could find to any degree of objectivity.

• 49 people found this helpful

Here is the second:

a€0 3.0 out of 5 stars :: Gives an economic history, but no new ideas for actually moving towards 
utopia :: Reviewed in the United States on September 12,2022

This book provides an economic history with an emphasis on the United States from 1870 to 2010. It 
is well written and I mostly reading it as an opinionated economic history from an American
perspective.

The title "Slouching Towards Utopia" might lead you to expect more, such as what could be done to 
improve the economic system or at least define some elements of a desired utopia. The book does
little new in that direction.

•  8 people found this helpful
Otherwise, I really cannot complain:

Product Details

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Eco...
by J. Bradford DeLong

☆ ☆ ☆ ☆ ☆  4.4 out of 5

58 global ratings

5 star                              64%


