Subscribe now

Why William L. Shirer decided to spend much of the 1960s writing his history of the collapse of the 
French Third Republic:

Sitting in Berlin that summer of heartbreak [of 1940] when almost everyone in Europe, except in 
Britain, belie veda€’’and was this not true also in the United States?a€”that the Old World must 
come under the ruthless rule of Adolf Hitler and the self-styled German Master Race, I pondered 
these questions. The Germans, the men of Vichy, and even some Americans were sure that Hitler 
represented the "Wave of the Future." To many of
us who had lived through the Nazi time in Germany it was clear that a Eiirone dominated bv the 
German Herrenvolk would he doomed to a long night of mindless barbarism. PA ©tain and Wevgand do 
not seem tn have understood this, and I .aval nerhans didn't care                                   
                 


Why William L. Shirer decided to spend much of the 1960s writing his history of the collapse of the 
French Third Republic:

Sitting in Berlin that summer of heartbreak [of 1940] when almost everyone in Europe, except in 
Britain, belie veda€’’and was this not true also in the United States?a€”that the Old World must 
come under the ruthless rule of Adolf Hitler and the self-styled German Master Race, I pondered 
these questions. The Germans, the men of Vichy, and even some Americans were sure that Hitler 
represented the "Wave of the Future." To many of
us who had lived through the Nazi time in Germany it was clear that a Europe dominated by the 
German Herrenvolk would be doomed to a long night of mindless barbarism. PA©tain and Weygand do not 
seem to have understood this, and Laval perhaps didn't care.

Even during that dark summertime of 1940 I could not bring myself to believe, as my broadcasts, 
dispatches, and diary show, that Europe was destined to such a sorry fate. I never lost hope that 
in the end Hitler would be brought down, his savage empire destlryed, and some semblance of decency 
restored in the world. Then I would try to find out how it was that Europe came to the brink of 
such an abyss. First there would be the task of
trying to get to the bottom of the German story and to learn, if possible, out of my own experience 
and whatever documentation came to light, how it happened that a great and cultured people, the 
Germans, succumbed in the twentieth century to the barbarism of the Third Reich. Then I would turn 
to the French, with whom admittedly I was more in sympathy, to try to find out why this people, 
equally great and more civilized, and for
most of the last century and a half the champions of personal freedom, of equality and fraternity 
among men, went down so quickly and easily that early summer of 1940 in a collapse more terrifying 
and more complete than any other in their long history.

Chance had made me an eyewitness to a good part of both of these cataclysmic events. But though I 
had seen them unfold and reported what I saw daily over the turbulent years, there was a great 
deal, obviously, that a journalist, working under the pressure of daily deadlines and largely 
ignorant of the secrets of state, did not know or understand.

Two decades later I accomplished the first task, concerning the rise and fall of the German Third 
Reich, as best I could, then turned to the second one, an inquiry into the collapse of
the French Third Republic. The roots of this story go far back -to the very birth of the Republic, 
and even furthera€!

LINK: William L. Shirer (1971): The Collapse of the Third Republic : An Inquiry into the Fall of 
France in 1940 (New York : Pocket Books) <https://archive.org/details/collapseofthirdOOwill>

Share
Subscribe now

