Subscribe now

From Equitable Growth:

1) The stakes involved in pushing the reconciliation bill to the goalposts are very large indeed:

Alix Gould-Werth & Sam Abbott: Congressional Investments in Social Infrastructure Would Support 
Immediate & Long-Term U.S. Economic Growth'.
a€~President Joe Bidena€™ s Build Back Better agendaa€!. The potential to reshape the U.S. 
economya€!. Supporting workers and families with
investments    in care infrastructure, including a comprehensive paid family and medical leave 
program and increased investment in early care and education,
as   well as income supports, such as a permanent fully refundable Child Tax Credit and structural 
reforms to the Unemployment Insurance program.

Common sense, as well as a robust body of research, suggests these investments would improve 
workersaC™ and familiesa€™ personal well-being,
especially for families of colora€!. But policymakers should not lose sight of the economy wide 
impact these investments will have as wella€!. The
Washington Center for Equitable Growth has released four factsheets summarizing the research 
evidence that demonstrates the economic growth potential
of   key programs and areas considered in the Fiscal Year 2022 budget reconciliation processa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/congressional-investments-in-social-infrastructure-would-support-immedi
ate-and-long-term-u-s-economic-growth/>

2) This will, I think, be our best policy conference yeta€”if only because America now has huge 
amounts of running room given the chaos caused by the plague and by the ongoing
disruptions of American politics I believe its aftermath is likely to bring:

Maryam Janani-Flores, Kate Bahn, &Carmen Sanchez Cumming: Equitable Growtha€™ s 2021 Policy 
Conference Features Key Speakers &
Panelists Discussing Inclusive U.S. Economic Growth After The Coronavirus Recession'. a€~The 
coronavirus pandemica€! revealed underlying systemic
fragility driven by longstanding economic inequalities and structural racism. More expansive, more 
transformative, and more equitable economic policies
have helped power a far more rapid recovery, compared to the years following the Great Recessional. 
Economic policy challenges provide an opportunity
for policymakers to rebuild a more resilient and inclusive U.S. economy and society. In a nutshell, 
this is what is on our agenda at our virtual policy
conference, a€oeEquitable Growth 2021: Evidence for a Stronger Economic Future ,a€D on Monday and 
Tuesday, September 20a€“21a€!. Pathbreaking
leadership and cutting-edge scholarship that recognizes how a stronger economic future is built on 
the linkages between racial justice, climate resilience,
access   to care and family economic security, financial stability, and rebalancing power, so that 
all can share in the gains of economic growth. Headlining
the conference in a series of fireside chats and remarks are the new Equitable Growth President and 
CEO Michelle Holder, U.S. Secretary of Labor Marty
Walsh, U.S. Rep. Hakeem Jeffries (D-NY), Michigan State University economist and Equitable Growth 
Steering Committee member Lisa Cook,
University                                                                       of California, San 
Diego assistant finance professor Carlos Fernando Avenancio-LeA3n, and Marketplace host and 
correspondent Kimberly
Adams. Notable panelists are featured in our four panel sessions, taking place in two concurrent 
blocks on the second day of the conference, focused on the
key economic questionsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/equitable-growths-2021-policv-conference-features-kev-speakers-and-pane
lists-discussing-inclusive-u-s-economic-
growth-after-the-coronavirus-recession/>

3) Yes, global warming is going to have brutal effects across a wide range. Here is one slice:

Michael Garvey: Excessive Heat Harms U.S. Workers Unequally as the Safety Risks from Climate Change 
Soar: a€~Jisung Parka€! Nora Pankratza€l and

A. Patrick Behrera€! the growing safety risks of excessive heata€!. On days with highs of 90 
degrees Fahrenheit, workplace injuries increase by 6 percent
to 9 percent, compared to a day in the 50a€“60-degree F temperature range, while days of 100 F or 
higher increase injuries by 10 percent to 15 percenta€!.
Hotter temperatures caused approximately 260,000 to 450,000 additional unreported heat related 
injuries in California over the period between
2001a€“2018,                                                                     or roughly 15,000 
to 25,000 per year. They estimate the socioeconomic costs of these injuries are on the order of 
$525 million to $875
million per yeara€!. Human physical and cognitive performance to be highly sensitive to heata€!. 
Hotter temperatures significantly increase injuries in
predominantly outdoor industries, such as agriculture, utilities, and construction. But higher 
temperatures also increase injuries in some industries where
work typically occurs indoors. In manufacturing, for instance, a day with highs above 95 degrees 
Fahrenheit increases injury risk by approximately 7
percent, relative to a day in the lowa€“60s F. In wholesale, the effect is nearly 10 percenta€!. 
The effect of heat on injuries is significantly larger for men
relative to women and for younger workers relative to older ones. Men appear to be at least three 
times more affected by heat-related workplace safety
risks, compared to women, and workers in their 20s and 30s are approximately two times more 
affected than those in their 50s and 60sa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/excessive-heat-harms-u-s-workers-unequallv-as-the-safetv-risks-from-cfi
mate-change-soar/>

4) I have long thought that the social-policy literatures and the management literatures need to 
connect with each other, which they currently do not. And the figure of Peter F.
Drucker would, I think, be a good place to begin:

Brad Delong: Peter F. Drucker. a€~The professional manager has not one job, but threea€!an 
entrepreneurial job, a job of moving resources from
yesterday into tomorrowa€! of maximizing opportunity. Then there is a managerial or 
a€~administrativea€™ job ofa€! human resourcesa€[making
strengths productive and weaknesses irrelevant which is the purpose of organizational. Then there 
is a third functiona€!. They are public. They are
visible. They represents!. Managers have a public functions! Royal CommissionsS! the local Boy 
Scout troopS! within their own business by
leadership and example. But they always do discharge itS!. Managers are on the stage, with the 
spotlight on themS!S™

The young Peter F. Drucker was one of the more more interesting young moral philosophers in early 
1900s Vienna all of whom brushed up against one
anotherS’’alongside Karl & Michael Polanyi, their fascist cousin Odon Pol, Victor Adler, Josef 
Schumpeter, Karl Popper, Friedrich von Hayek, and many
more. Drucker, however, then when came to the United States followed a very different trajectory. 
He became the U.S.S™ s BOSS management
consultant and managerial theorist. But he remained someone who always hunted the same game as the 
Polanyis, von Hayek, Schumpeter and company.
Pinned between Schumpeter, von Hayek, Karl Polanyi, and the shadow of Karl Marx, Peter F. Drucker 
sought his reconciliation of the antinomies of
modern industrial society in the figure of the manager, whose social role was precisely to arrange 
things so that society could be an a€oeassociation, in
which the free development of each is the condition for the free development alla€D.

Druckera€™ s manager is the trustee of civilization, a member of a Michael Polanyian-type priestly 
profession in which one works not so much for
onea€™ s principals as for the smooth, efficient operation of the system as a whole in a way that 
makes sense to and reconciles the interests of all
stakeholders: freedom and community, efficiency and equity, order and disruption are then 
reconciled through the judgments and values of this particular
honorable professional caste of managersa€!

LINK: <https://threadreaderapp .com/thread/1421190242195759105 ,html>

Share

From Elsewhere:

1) This is a survey that I participated in. I find myself not far from the center of gravity. I 
think the Fed is likely to raise interest rates in the second half of next year, I think that is
likely to be a mistake, and I think that Jay Powell will be nominated for a second term as Fed 
Chair.

FT-IGM Survey: Economists Predict Us Interest Rate Rise in 2022: a€~Economists predict US interest 
rate rise in 2022a€!. More than 80% of economists
surveyed expect Federal Reserve chair Jay Powell to be renominateda€! Just over 70 per cent of 
respondents believe the Fed will raise rates by at least a
quarter                                                                     of a percentage point 
in 2022, with almost 20 per cent expecting the move to come in the first six months of the yeara€!. 
To be in a position to raise
rates in 2022, most of the 49 economists polled in the FT-IGM US Macroeconomists Survey expect the 
Fed to soon reveal its plans to begin reducing or


afece taper ingafeU its programme ot ^izubn a montn in Dona purcnases and complete tne process by 
next yeara^i.

The survey results, collected between September 3 and September 8, match up closely with the views 
put forward by more a€cehawkisha€D members of
the Feda€™ s policy-setting Federal Open Market Committee, who worry about soaring consumer prices 
and contend that the US economy can withstand
less supporta€!. The economists, who cited further supply disruptions as a top hazard, raised their 
median year-end forecast for the Feda€™ s preferred
inflation measurement a€” core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE a€” to 3.7 per cent, up 
from 3 per cent in June. Almost 70 per cent also said it
was a€cesomewhata€D or a€oeverya€D likely this gauge would still exceed 2 per cent on a 
year-over-year basis by the end of 2022a€!. The
unemployment rate is expected to stay stubbornly high this year, with economistsa€™ median estimate 
at 4.9 per cent for December. As of last month it
hovered    at 5.2 per centa€!.

a€oeThey will make a macro error [and] raise rates too soon,a€D said panellist Danny Blanchflower, 
an economist at Dartmouth University and a former
member of the Bank of Englanda€™ s Monetary Policy Committeea€!. Another risk, according to 
Nicholas Bloom of Stanford University, is a repeat of
the destabilising 2013 a€oetaper tantruma€Da€l. Chair Jay Powella€!. More than 80 per cent of the 
economists surveyed expect him to be renominated,
while 18 per cent believe governor Lael Brainard will be appointed.

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/0a7a4edd-b656-4d6a-b6Q8-454241d0288e>

2) Smart thoughts on a very bad development. I would like to blame ex-senators Baucus and Heitkamp, 
but they were not the deciders here:

Alan Cole: How a Key Biden Tax Idea Got Crushed: a€~The president was forced to retreat on the key 
issue of step-up basisa€! [His] plan is now in
shambles after a public revolt and a decisive push from lobbyists like former senator Heidi 
Heitkampa€!. The step-up fight is a big deal. Ita€™ s not just an
isolated, one-off item on a checklists!. Step-up basis reform is critical for raising effective tax 
rates on the dynastic wealth of billionaires and their
familiesa€!.All in all, step-up reform is valuable to Democrats and the urgency from think tanks 
makes sense. Even centrist or right-of-center tax wonks
are    looking on at the failure to repeal step-up with a bit of pity for their left-of-center 
counterpartsa€!. This lobbying blitz forced a total retreat.

The retreat seems hasty to me; a sufficiently moderate version of step-up repeal with a high 
exemption could probably evade most criticism. But a
moderate provision might still have drawn ire without adding much revenue. a€oeThey were gonna get 
attacked no matter what they did, and the higher the
exemption was, the less it was worth enduring those attacks,a€D Ritz tells me. a€oelta€™ s a damn 
shame.a€Ua€! In many polls, not to mention actual
votes    in Congress, estate taxes tend to fare poorly. Tax historians like Joe Thorndike and 
pro-estate tax academics like Michael Graetz have put a great deal
of thought into why this is, and why Republican strategies have been so successfula€!. Members of 
the public are not always engaged or sophisticated in
their tax policy views, but they can get surprisingly animated about particular issues of fairness, 
even as they ignore othersa€!

LINK: <https ://fullstackeconomics .com/how-a-key-biden-tax-idea/>

3) What happened in Wuhan in the fall of 2019 is frustratingly obscure. This is, I think, a useful 
and sober take on what we know and what we do not:

Natasha Loder: The November Story: a€™ Chinaa€™ s account of what happened in Wuhan is incomplete. 
So too are the accounts of foreign scientists
and the American government^!. Last month the Biden intelligence review into the origin of 
covida€“19a€!. Four parts of the intelligence community
(IC) and the National Intelligence Council assess with low confidence that initial infection was 
most likely by natural exposure to an infected animal

infected with SARS-COVa€“2 itselfa€”or a virus that was 99% similar. However one element of the IC 
dissents. It assesses with moderate confidence that
the first human infection was the result of a laboratory-associated incident. This would be either 
experimentation, animal handling, or sampling by the
Wuhan Institute of Virology (WIV)a€!. The IC in America comprises 18 organisations of varying 
sizes. The Central Intelligence Agency and the National
Security Agency are the most important. Reading this report, then, what we dona€™ t know is how 
important this dissenting branch of the IC is. Is it a
dinky, obscure bit of the IC, or is it a big powerful part? Without knowing this we cana€™ t say if 
there is a standoff among equals or something else
entirely.

It would be a mistake to assume the report said nothing. In fact, the IC agrees... 1: the virus was 
not developed as a biological weapon. 2: Chinaa€™ s
officials did not have foreknowledge of the virus before the initial outbreak emerged (i.e. it was 
surprised). 3: that human infection probably started with an
initial small-scale exposure. 4: this happened a€oeno later than Novembera€D (my highlight). 
Personally, I think it is fair to assume that these points are
relatively stable knowledge in a shifting sea of storylines about what happened in Wuhan prior to 
the official Chinese timeline.

The Chinese timeline begins, entirely implausibly, with a single case on December 8th. The phrase 
a€oeno later than Novembera€D means the outbreak
could have started far earlier. But either way, America is saying that covida€“19 started earlier 
than the Chinese say it dida€!

LINK: <https://overmatter .substack.eom/p/the-november-story>

4) That technological disruption affects workers already in declining industries but does not harm 
the prospects of future entrants may be a durable lesson from the past of
technological disruption and change:

James Feigenbaum & Daniel P. Gross: Automation & the Future of Young Workers: Evidence from 
Telephone Operation in the Early 20th Century:
a€~Telephone operation, one of the most common jobs for young American women in the early 1900s, 
provided hundreds of thousands of female workers
a   pathway into the labor force. Between 1920 and 1940, AT&T adopted mechanical switching 
technology in more than half of the U.S. telephone network,
replacing manual operation. Although automation eliminated most of these jobs, it did not affect 
future cohortsa€™ overall employment: the decline in
demand                                                                 for operators was 
counteracted by growth in both middle-skill jobs like secretarial work and lower-wage service jobs, 
which absorbed future
generations. Using a new genealogy-based census linking method, we show that incumbent telephone 
operators were most impacted by automation, and a
decade later were more likely to be in lower-paying occupations or have left the labor force 
entirelya€!

LINK: <https://www.nber.org/papers/w28061>

5) At the edge of my wheelhouse, but I do note this:

Enabling current holders of bitcoin to unload their currently valuable positions at higher prices 
before the crash, and blocking regulators from limiting the ability of cryptocurrency
grifters to create unstable a€oefree bankinga€C platforms like the wildcat banks of the 
1830sa€”those have extremely little to do with the management of the public sphere of
discourse and discussion in a democracy. BitCoin is one thing. The public sphere is quite anorther.

I do not think right wing literary intellectuals crossed with modern tech crossed with products 
whose principal aim is to separate customers from their money without providing
them anything truly useful is a good thing. Shame on the New York Timeseditorial staff for 
publishing this, and for having nobody on the desk who understood enough about
BitCoin to even notice that it is not a a€oefundamentally new and better way to generate, 
circulate, save, and exchange wealtha€D:

James Poulos: How Bitcoin Can Immunize America From Cancel Culture: a€~Through its recent legal 
threat against Coinbasea€™ s new interest-bearing
cryptocurrency account program, the Securities and Exchange Commission has created a stira€!. 
Industry watchers now expect the Biden administration to
go                                                                     on regulatory offense 
against cryptocurrency. What is at stake is far more serious than the mainstreaming of 
cryptocurrency. Facilitated by technology,
financial companiesa€™ expansion into our private lives threatens to herd Americans into a de facto 
social credit system that punishes them for making
choicesa€”and even voicing opinionsa€”that the people at the controls dona€™t likea€!.

The elimination of a sitting president from social media, whatever its perceived merit or 
rationale, opened the door to a regime where those who can cancel
and suspend accounts do so at whim and in unisona€!. A person who finds his financial and social 
media accounts closed after being identified as a
subversive by the government will have no legal recoursea€!. The regime has deep knowledge of your 
activity online. Think, say and do what it wants, and
you  are allowed to function. Deviate, and you are shut down. This is the un-American logic of the 
social credit system being imposed on us. Without a
fundamentally new and better way to generate, circulate, save and exchange wealth, Americans will 
be increasingly powerless to prevent their financial
system   from being used to transform their country into a technological cage.


LINK: <https ://www.ny times .com/2021709/15/opinion/cryptocurrency-americans-free ,html>

6) The point of Critical Race Theory: dona€™ t make African-Americans poor and excluded from 
networks, keep them poor and excluded from networks, then discriminate against
the poor and those excluded from networks, and claim that you are not then discriminating on the 
basis of race:

The Negro Subversive: Critical Race Theory. a€~There are today three things floating around under 
the name: a€oeCritical Race Theorya€~a€™ : The
first is the original intellectual framework out of legal academia; the second is educational 
theorists applying this intellectual framework to the study of
education; the third and most recent is a buffoonish ploy by Republicans seeking to win back 
Congressa€!. Critical Race TheoryaC™ s founders sought to
understand how a society that had officially disowned racism managed to continue being racista€!. 
To understand how law impacts society, we must
understand                                                                   how law exists in 
society, which means applying insights froma€! the social sciencesa€!.

What all three social objects under the name a€oeCritical Race Theory,a€D have in common is the 
idea of politicizing the allegedly apoliticala€!. The
social sciencesa€! rose in the midst of various national projects and served to justify them. Their 
(very incomplete) transition away from this heritage has
traced an arc similar to their growth toward greater objectivity. The legacy of this transition 
continues, as the social sciences both reflect and condition how
the public thinks about society. The fault lines of the critical race theory a€oedebate,a€D reflect 
the fault lines early social science practitioners faced as
they developed their disciplines out of a€oesocial philosophy,a€D into social science. Recognizing 
that these faults still condition our thinking about the
social world is crucial to recognizing whata€™ s at stake right nowa€!

Du Bois worked amidst a nation that had lost its founding social institution, chattel slavery; to a 
civil war, and was now reforging its a€oebonds of
affection,a€D over the battered bodies of a Black a€oenation within a nation.a€Da€! Weber did his 
work as Germany was willed into being out of a
melange of German speaking states, forcing him to grapple with the basic a€oestuff,a€D of 
nationality. Durkheim was a French Jew whose French
nationalism was challenged by an affair that brought ardent anti-semitism forth out of the center 
of French nationalitya€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/guest-post-vic-bradley-on-critical>

7) Outside my wheelhouse, but essential:

Marc Elias: My Thoughts on ManchinaC™s Compromise Bill: a€~When it comes to voting rights, being 
asked to compromise is typically a warning sign.
There is no middle ground between the arsonist and the firefightera€!. Joe Manchina€! Freedom to 
Vote Acta€! a surprisingly good voting rights bill. It
reflects a sobriety and understanding of the challenges facing voters that is worthy of its lofty 
name. It is not just a reformulation of the prior For the People
Act, but in many places, it is an improvement^!. What makes this new bill exceptional, however, is 
its attention to several small, but important detailsa€!
count provisional ballots cast by eligible voters in the wrong precinct but in the correct 
countya€! a 30-minute limit on wait timesa€! polling locations on
college campusesa€! prevents frivolous challenges to voter qualifications^! increased protections 
for election workersa€! imposes new standards
prohibiting partisan gerrymandering^!. The crown jewels of the Freedom to Vote Act are contained in 
the judicial review provisions. The bill not only
creates    a specific a€oeright to votea€D in federal elections but guarantees ita€!. Senate 
Democrats, took a very big step a€!

LINK: <https://www.democracydocket.com/news/my-thoughts-on-manchins-compromise-bill/>

8) Also outside my wheelhouse, but as essential:

Jeet Heer: Coup and Countercoup: a€~Republicans prevented Congress from checking Trump, full 
stopa€!. As with any book written by Woodward,
ita€™ s best to exercise caution about taking at face value any things that are said by anonymous 
sources. These sources often offer memories to highlight
their heroic role in making history, which Woodwarda€”as a practitioner of access journalisma€”is 
all too willing to present uncriticallya€!.

Zeroing in on Trump and Milley misses the mark. The focus should be on the Republican Party and 
Congress. There are ample constitutional remedies for
an unhinged and lawless president (impeachment and removal, the 25th amendment). These remedies are 
effectively moot if a political party with
substantial seats in congress ties itself to a mad captain, as the GOP did under Trump. The real 
story here is the dereliction of duty by congress, powered
by   GOP partisanship. Unless those problems are tackled, the USA will be living on the edge of 
volcano. The likelihood of coups and countercoups will
remain. As Milley himself worried, America in 2021 might be like Russia in 1905: a nation where a 
failed revolt prefigures a much larger social upheaval.

LINK: <https://ieetheer.substack.eom/p/coup-and-countercoup>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

