Subscribe now

FIRST: Two Concepts of a€oeFree Marketa€d:

In his Free Market: The History of an Idea <https ://www.amazon .com/dp/0465049702/> Jacob Soil 
fakes right, making me think I am going to read an appreciation of 20th century free-market 
thought:

Twentieth-century free-market thinkersa€! Friedrich Hayek to Milton Friedmana€! constituted a 
powerful, conservative force that foresaw the authoritarian and totalitarian dangersa€”on the left 
and the righta€”that lay aheada€!

But no! He goes left! He brings down the hammer, in a way that would make Judah a€oeThe Hammera€D 
son of Mattathias proud:

And yet, along with the great moral achievements and economic insights of free market thinkers came 
a very particular form of paranoia, ideological obsession, and myopiaa€!. Twentieth-century 
orthodox free-market economists believed that pure individual desire and agency were the catalyst 
for all societal and economic good. In their eyes,
any system that deviated from this view became suspect. It was not so much an academic position as 
an article of faitha€!

He brings down the hammer specifically on Friedrich von Hayek:

The Road to Serfdom would become the handbook of postwar free-market and libertarian economicsa€! 
less a work of economic theory than a declaration of total libertarian faitha€!. With hindsighta€! 
the book stands out for its total lack of engagement with the realities of the postwar growth 
period and its fanatical vision of the state as a
force of evila€!

And:

Hayek saw market freedoms in a combative light, emerging from a struggle between good and evil. One 
either chose economic liberalism with no government, or one would be enslaveda€!. Hayek chose to 
forget that Hitler could neither have taken nor held power without the concerted support of German 
capitalists, who saw fascism as an
attractive answer to trade unions, communism, and even social democracya€!

I do understand. I, myself, see von Hayek as 40% Dr. Jekyll and 60% Dr. Hydea€”great insights and 
very valid concerns, somehow married to a majority of crazypants views on macro, politics, and 
moral philosophy.

Solla€™ s book is a book that I very much wish that I had had when writing my Slouching Towards 
Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>, for he takes the von Hayek-Polanyi oppositional dialectic that I use as a 
major focus of my book, and projects it back past the Enlightenment and the MediAlval Era to the 
Classical Age of Cicero. It taught me a lot, and brought much that I
had only dimly realized into focus.

Soil is 100% right in finding and stressing a great divide between what a€cefree marketa€D thought 
meant before and what it meant after 1900. There was a very large shift away from an earlier 
perspective traced by Soil, one in which the free market can work very well indeed when exchange is 
between individuals who are roughly on the same level with respect to
their social power. In that view, a€oethe free marketa€D is only one arrow in a large quiver of 
alternative instruments of statecraft and human cooperation:

By contrast, twentieth-century free-marketeers saw the untrammeled market as both necessary and 
sufficient fora€! something. What was not clear. It did not seem to be any form of general human 
flourishing. Instead, it was, as I quoted above, in Solla€™ s judgment:
Avery particular form of paranoia, ideological obsession, and myopiaa€!

One way to think about this is that pre-1900 Free Marketeers wanted to free entry into the 
marketa€”that people should not be bound to work for another who was their master in the sense of 
dominus, that people should not be prohibited from producing or selling on account of their social 
status, that the king should not sell monopolies. This then bled over into a
concern that the king should not disproportionately tax commercial wealth in order to reward his 
friends, and that individual, small group, or collective entities should not themselves be allowed 
to constitute themselves as monopolies either.

This freedom to enter and participate in a market that was free to work was part of a general 
Enlightenment vision which, Soil writes, was a
vision of progress through benevolent moral discipline, education, radical science, and a worship 
of agricultural!

With Adam Smith being perhaps its foremost exponent. But this is not a a€oefree marketa€D in the 
sense of postl900 Free Marketeers. Indeed, the market of Adam Smith and his predecessors is a 
market that has to be carefully and successfully manageda€”not least in that the people who meet 
each other in the marketplace need to be on the same level, have
comparable levels of social power. If not, then, as Karl Marx wrote, the market appears to be:

a very Eden of the innate rights of man. There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property and Bentham. 
Freedom, because both buyer and seller of a commoditya€! are constrained only by their own free 
willa€! contract as free agentsa€! give legal expression to their common willa€! [to] exchange 
equivalent for equivalent^! [as] each disposes
only of what is his owna€! in accordance with the pre-established harmony of thingsa€! for the 
common weal and in the interest of all.

But in reality, Marx writes, in the market system of rich bourgeois and poor proletarian:

wea€! perceive a change in the physiognomy of our dramatis personae^}. capitalist;a€! [and] 
labourer. The one with an air of importance, smirking, intent on business; the other, timid and 
holding back, like one who is bringing his own skin to market and has nothing to expect but a€” a 
tanninga€!

It was Alfred Marshall who soft-pedaled the income-distribution and social-power worries, and also 
pushed forward the idea that the market did not need government regulation, for it would and could 
regulate itself.

Alfred Marshalla€™ s star pupil John Maynard Keynes disagreed. Keynes saw mammoth defects in the 
ends the market pursued as a result of unequal income distribution and the ability of the market to 
regulate itself and employ resources properly, with the principal resource misuse being the scandal 
of depressions and the result unemployment. Keynes, however,
thoughta€”hoped?a€”that these defects could be repaired easily, with the lightest-hand management 
of the economy possible. He saw that:

the outstanding faults of the economic society in which we live are its failure to provide for full 
employment and its arbitrary and inequitable distribution of wealth and incomesa€!

A market economy managed by his technocratic disciples would, first, attain and maintain full 
employment. Then even someone who owned only his own skin would have at least some social power 
when he brought his self to the marketa€”for without the workera€™ s hands, eyes, and brains, 
expensive machinery would lie idle, rusting away. Yes, the worker had to
find a job or starve. But in a constant full-employment economy the boss would have to find a 
worker or go bankrupt.

But, second, there would be more. The full-employment monetary policy that Keynesa€™ s technocratic 
disciples would manage the economy to would be a very low-interest rate economy. That meant, Keynes 
thought, the euthanasia of the rentier: plutocrats would only be able to use their social power as 
property-owners to control affairs if they spent down their
capital, and then they would cease to be plutocrats.

Keynes was thus a supporter of a€oefree marketsa€D in the older sense. As Soli notes:

in the 1920s, he warned of a battle between communism and individualistic laissez-faire, which 
laissez-faire had to win. But Keynes felt that there were holes in free market theorya€!

Chiefly the two I noted above. Thus the state would have to take a€oean even greater responsibility 
for directly organizing investment.a€D

In some ways, Milton Friedman bought Keynesa€™ s argument about the inability of the economy to 
regulate itself. But Friedman thought that the central bank could do all the regulation and 
management needed. By defining whatever monetary policy achieved constant full employment as a 
a€ceneutrala€D monetary policy that was be definition the opposite of
government intervention, Friedman hoped to win a game of intellectual free-card-monte, in which 
what Keynes called government intervention, regulation, and management was redefined as the real 
hands-off.

This, I think, led to a lot of confusion.
Soli concludes his book:

Free individual action is essential to the dynamism of the market, but it alone does not guarantee 
the economya€™ s steady functioninga€!. We would do wella€! to return toa€! Ciceroa€l [for] 
lessonsa€! Wealth was only good, Cicero thought, insofar as it could be used to support 
constitutional government, civil peace, and decorum. More
important to him than riches were the principles of living in harmony with nature, cultivating 
learning and friendship, and doing the hard work of ethical stewardship. Faith in the market alone 
will not save us, but hewing to these old virtues just mighta€!

In short, be pragmatic: The market should be free to the extent and in the direction that such 
freedom leads to widely distributed prosperity, and wealth should be pursued not as an end in 
itself but a means to the political and societal good.
Should any of us disagree?

Share

One Audio: Aze Ezra Klein Show:

Brad DeLong & Ezra Klein: How the 1970s transformed American politics: 
<https://www.nvtimes.com/2022/ll/04/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-bradford-delong,html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Image:

With a knick-knack, patty-whack, give the dog a phonea€!


Leave a comment

Must-Read: Your Favorite DSGE Model Sucks:

This is a judgment on one of the intellectual communities I have been contributing toa€”or, rather, 
attempting largely unsuccessfully to contribute toa€’’throughout my career. It is funny, in a 
brutal way. Or, perhaps, it is brutal, in a funny way:

Daniel J. McDonald & Cosma Rohilla Shalizi: Empirical Macroeconomics & DSGE Modeling in Statistical 
Perspective: a€~Daniel graduateda€l. Smets and Wouters (2007)a€! needed both a lot of programming 
time and a lot of computing time to churn through thousands of variable swaps and tens of thousands 
of fits to simulations. We
both got busy with other thingsa€!. But what we can tell you now, with great assurance, is that:

1. Even if the Smets-Wouters model was completely correct about the structure of the economy, and 
it was given access to centuries of stationary data, it would predict very badly, and many "deep" 
parameters would remain very poorly estimated;

2. Swapping the series around randomly improves the fit a lot of the time, even when the results 
are substantive nonsense.

The bad news is that even if this model was right, we couldn't hope to actually estimate it; the 
good news is that the model can't be right, because it fits better when we tell it that consumption 
is really wages, inflation is really consumption, and output is really inflationa€!

Recognize that this DSGE model language has for a generation been how highbrow domestic 
macroeconomists (attempt to) communicate with one another.

One way to look at it is that DSGE models are members of the class of macroeconomic models of the 
domestic economy that are, as Chris Sims taught me now long ago, are sufficiently flexible that 
their structure places no restrictions on their forecasts at all. Their forecasts are thus those of 
VARa€”vector autoregressiona€’’models, and fit as well or as poorly as VAR
models fit. Their estimated structural parameters are whatever values are needed to, when processed 
into the reduced form, generate the best-fitting coefficients of the VAR. Beyond that role as 
proto-VAR coefficients, they are thus as close to being pure noise as can be found in this Fallen 
Sublunary Sphere.

Chris Sims originally made this as a critique of the a€cestructurala€D models of the 1970s. But it 
applies to DSGE models as well.

There was one paragraph in McDonald and Shalizi that made me especially wince. It was at the end of 
their a€cereplicating Smets-Woutersa€D section:

Table 1 presents the posterior mode [maximum likelihood estimate of the Smets-Wouters model 
parameters a€oefrom our simulated annealing method, which stochastically explores the likelihood 
surface in a principled mannera€d]. Note first that some of the parameter estimates are similar to 
those presented in Smets and Wouters (2007)a€!
while others differ dramatically. However, comparing the likelihood of of our estimated parameters 
to those in Smets and Wouters (2007), our fit is significantly better. For our dataset, the 
penalized negative log likelihood of the parameters is 1145 compared to 1232a€!

In short, the McDonald-Shalizi computer found a parameter vector that the Smets-Wouters model 
thinks is 60,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000,000 times as likely as the parameter 
vector found by the Smets-Wouters computer back in 2007, and that Smets-Wouters then reported as 
the a€oemaximum likelihooda€D vector of the parameters.
a€oeOur fit is significantly bettera€D, indeed.

And then there is the 
feeding-the-model-data-generated-by-the-model-to-see-if-it-can-recovery-the-truth test:

Variability declines as the size of the training set increases, though not the averagea€!. It 
improves markedly as the training set increases to about 400 observations (=100 years) but then 
plateausa€!. As we get more and more data, we can not predict new data any better. This indicates 
one of three possibilities: (1) that with about 400
observations, we can estimate the parameters nearly perfectly, (2) that the model is poorly 
identifieda€”some parameters will simply never be well estimated, but we can predict well anyway, 
or (3) the data are so highly correlated that the range of training observations we consider is far 
too smalla€”we actually need millions of observations
in    order to see a meaningful decline in out-of-sample predictive performance^!.. The blue line 
in Figure 2 is the out-of-sample mean prediction error for the true parameters. The test error is 
not getting any closera€! plateauing slightly above the baseline by about 400 training points. This 
seems to suggest that explanation (2) is accurate: even
with more data, we will never be able to recover the true parameters, though we get some 
improvement in predictions relatively quicklya€!

Yes, we today have roughly 1,000 times more computer power at our disposal than we did in 2005. 
Yes, high-dimensional likelihood functions are positively Lovecraftian. But at least Claudius 
Ptolemy could fit his model and use it to accurately predict. And his structural parametersa€”the 
commonality of the epicycle vectors of the outer planets with the deferents of
the inner planets and the sun, plus the suna€™ s lack of an epicyclea€”gave powerful clues to a 
better model.

Give a gift subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Mark Lobel: a€~I asked @delong what turnaround would help most countries out of the financial 
crisisa€! over a cup of dY«- a€oethe end of the war in Ukraine and a reversal of the grain and oil 
shocksa€Da€!

•  Nouriel Roubini The Age of Megathreats: a€~For four decades after World War II, climate change 
and job-displacing artificial intelligence were not on anyonea€™ s mind, and terms like 
"deglobalization" and "trade war" had no purchase. But now we are entering a new era that will more 
closely resemble the tumultuous and dark decades between 1914
and 1945a€!

•  Aaron Sojourner: a€~Prime age (25-54 years old) employment to population ratio is an important 
measure of core labor market strength, omits people on the fringes of work. It fell 0.4 pp to 
79.8%, back to its June level, a signal of weakening but monthly numbers are all noisy 
<https://t.co/pdA2U3DVci>a€!

• Benn Stancil: The emperor and his clothes: a€~Ita€™ s possiblea€! that the train wrecka€! at 
Twitter works out. Twitter Blue may work; Twitter OnlyFans may work; Twitter for enterprise may 
work; the Vine reboot may work. Twitter Battle Pass, Twitter Achievements, Twitter Happy Hour, 
Twitter Streaks may work. Twitter for Tesla may worka€!.
Twitter is being run by Silicon Valleya€™ s unchecked id. Move fast and break things? Checka€!

• Michael Ignatieff: The Politics of Enemiesa€!
Get 50% off a group subscription

AJs:

Jamelle Bouie: The Attack on Paul Pelosi Has Unmasked the G.O.P.: a€~An important part of our 
politics has been the pretense that our leaders care about appearances, even as they fight to gain 
and hold power by any means necessary. Abraham Lincoln was both a bare-knuckled partisan brawler 
and a sagacious, broad-spirited political leader. So were many of our
most revered and respected presidents, from Thomas Jefferson to Franklin Roosevelt and beyond. From 
the beginning, Americans saw virtue a€” whether real or feigned, sincere or performed a€” as a key 
ingredient in the practice of republican self-governmenta€!

Jordan Schneider & Irene Zhanga€D: US-China Chip War with the Chip Avengers: a€~What will the Biden 
administration's new export controls mean for the US and Chinese semiconductor industries as well 
as the future of the US-China relationship?a€! I assembled the Chips Avengers: Reva Goujon (Rhodium 
Group), Jay Goldberg (Digits to Dollars), Doug
O'Laughlin (Fabricated Knowledge), and Martin Chorzempa (PIIE)a€!. China can produce 14-16nm logic 
chips. Biren can produce GPUs at these thresholds. YMTC can produce NAND at this threshold too. 
What's very interesting is that they did not set the thresholds at an aspirational level for China. 
They set them at levels that China already is able to do, and it's
cutting                                                                                             
                                                                      off their ability to do it. 
The fact that China's already at this level tells you that the Biden administration was in a bit of 
a rush. They felt like they had to do this now.

Patrick Collison: CEO Patrick Collison's email to Stripe employees: a€~You might reasonably wonder 
whether StripeaC™ s leadership made some errors of judgment. Wea€™ d go further than that. In our 
view, we made two very consequential mistakes, and we want to highlight them here since theya€™ re 
important: (1) We were much too optimistic about the
internet economya€™ s near-term growth in 2022 and 2023 and underestimated both the likelihood and 
impact of a broader slowdown. (2) We grew operating costs too quickly. Buoyed by the success 
wea€™re seeing in some of our new product areas, we allowed coordination costs to grow and 
operational inefficiencies to seep in. We are going to correct these
mistakes...

Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

