Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Brink Lindsey & Samuel Hammond: Faster Growth, Fairer Growth: A New Policy Synthesis: a€~The way 
forward is not to be found in either the ideological fantasies of democratic socialists or the 
reactionary sputtering of
neonationalists, integralists, and other assorted a€oepost-liberalsa€na€! [but] lies in revising 
and updating the basic model that emerged as the clear worldwide winner in the great ideological 
struggles of the 20th century: the liberal
democratic capitalist welfare statea€! <https://www.niskanencenter.org/faster_fairerZa new policy 
_synthesis .html>

• Diane Coyle: What Critics of Economics Get Wrong 
<https://www.chronicle.com/article/what-critics-of-economics-get-wrong>

• Adam Tooze: Chartbook on Shutdown #4: a€~Watching the world watching Chinaa€™ s Evergrandea€!. 
Even in recent months, big Western money was flowing into Evergrande. As late as August, BlackRock 
bought five different
Evergrande dollar bonds for its high yield fundsa€! <


Chartbook

Chartbook on Shutdown #4 - Neither Chernobyl Nor Lehman

As John Authors argues in one of his latest columns, there is little doubt that anxiety about the 
Evergrande crisis has been moving global markets in recent days, though there are plenty of other 
stories to worry about. This latest incident is one more
demonstration of the eerie fact that in the first decades of the 21st century, the trajectory of 
globaa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 29 likes A- 2 comments A- Adam Tooze

• James Pethokoukis: A New Roaring Twenties Would Make America Better, as Well as Richer. a€™ When 
a society experiences rising standards of living, broadly distributed across the population at 
large, it is also likely to make
progress along a variety of dimensions that are the very essence of what a free, open, democratic 
society is all abouta€!


A New Roaring Twenties would make America better, as well as richer

"The only limit to our realization of tomorrow will be our doubts of today. Let us move forward 
with strong and active faith." - President Franklin D. Roosevelta€l
Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- James Pethokoukis

• Matthew Yglesias: The Case for More Energy. a€~The case for more energy America has been on a 
45-year energy diet, and we ought to try and end ita€!


Slow Boring

The case for more energy

Over the centuries, people have invented many different kinds of machines that help us do things 
and improve living standards. But in a very general way, what most of these inventions do is let us 
substitute some form of power for
human effort. And as long as we were totally ignoring the costs of bura€!

Read more

a year ago A- 192 likes A- 262 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

Paragraphs:

Kiona N. Smith: Pompeii Tomb Reveals Formerly Enslaved Mana€™ s Rise to Wealth & Power. a€~The 
tomba€™ s inscription also offers the first evidence of Greek theater in the citya€!. 
Archaeologists rediscovered Marcus Venerius
Secundioa€™ s tomb in the ancient cemetery, or necropolis, of Porta Sarno in the eastern part of 
Pompeiia€! large and imposing, with a colorfully painted facade depicting green plants on a blue 
background; traces of the paint still cling to the stone
even   after 2,000 years. It was also sealed so well that its occupanta€™ s remains had partially 
mummified, preserving some soft tissue and a few tufts of white hair, along with some scraps of 
fabrica€!. Archaeologists were able to match the name
inscribed over the tomba€™ s entrance to a name on wax tablets in the house of a banker named 
Lucius Caecilius Jucundusa€!. The bankera€™ s tablets recorded Marcus as a a€oepublic slavea€D who 
worked as a custodian in the Temple of Venus,
which once stood at the western end of town (thata€™ s almost certainly where the second part of 
his name, Venerius, comes from). But at some point he became a libertus, or freedman, and began to 
build a new life for himself. Slavery in Rome
wasna€™ t always a permanent state, and many liberti went on to build relatively prosperous lives 
for themselves. Evidence of their history persists all over Pompeii. And the libertus Marcus 
evidently did quite well for himself indeed; the epitaph
carved  into the stone over his tomb boasts that he once sponsored four full days of theatrical 
performances for the people of Pompeii, given in both Greek and Latina€!

LINK: 
<https://arstechnica.eom/science/2021/08/pompeii-tomb-reveals-formerly-enslaved-mans-rise-to-wealth-
and-power/>

Alex Power: The Long Twentieth Century. a€~The a€oemain story a€D of the 20th century is that of 
technologya€! the automobile, the skyscraper, and the phonograph recorda€! the cell phone and the 
Interneta€!. It is a non-trivial question to ask if
the Long Twentieth Century is overa€!. Our thesis is that the technological developments of the 
Long Twentieth Century were extraordinary, and cannot be surpassed in breadth. To highlight merely 
some of the most importanta€!. Vehicle
technologies: the automobile, mechanized farm equipment (tractors), mechanized construction 
equipment, tanks, airplanes, and rockets. Advanced agriculture: improved fertilizers, improved 
strains of crops, industrial animal confines, and so on.

Electric appliances: air conditioning, washing machines, refrigerators, microwave ovens, and so on. 
Medical technologies: organ transplants, the elimination of many infectious diseases, hormonal 
birth control, insulin, hearing aids, etc.
Communications technologies: the phonograph record, audio CDs, radio, television, and so on. 
Computer technologies: computer mainframes, desktop microcomputers, cell phones, the Internet, and 
their various applications. Synthetic materials:
plastics, polyesters, and so on. Nuclear technologies: nuclear weapons and nuclear-fission power 
plants. Structural technologies: skyscrapers, long bridges and viaducts, highwaysa€!

LINK:

Yevaud (Newsletter)

The Long Twentieth Century

In his history works, Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm refers to the a€oeshort twentieth centurya€D, 
roughly the period from 1914 to 1991. The period before World War I is considered as part of his 
long 19th century. One could presume that, to a
Marxist, the period after the demise of the Soviet bloc is too depressing to consider; in this case 
his book on ta€ 1

Read more

2 years ago A- 1 like A- Alex Power
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

