Subscribe now

First:

Alice Evans sends us to the very good Arash Nekoei & Fabian Sinn: The Origin of the Gender Gap: it 
is a count of records from the Human Biographical Record, finding that throughout history a€’’save 
for Egypt in antiquity a€’’only about 10% of women as men have records coming down to us that grant 
them a place in Human Biographical Record entries, with no significant changes over the millennia. 
While the 1900s do show the highest female share of entries since
the -2000s, the difference is not (yet) very large:

Arash Nekoei & Fabian Sinn: The Origin of the Gender Gap: a€~International differences in womena€™ 
s status are striking. When and where did those differences first emerge?a€! Over the last 5,000 
yearsa€l records show no long-run trend in womena€™ s share in recorded history. Historically, 
womena€™ s power has been a side-effect of nepotisma€!. Self-made women began to rise among the 
writers in the 17th century before a broader
take-off in the 19th centurya€l. Was it really the case that half of the world population were 
repressed for the entire history of humankind, leaving half of the total brainpower unused?a€! We 
attempt to write a quantitative history of women over the last 5,000 yearsa€!. Our focus is on a 
fixed share of each generationa€! Human Biographical Recorda€™ s entriesa€!. To our surprise, we 
document no long-run trend in the womena€™ s share at the top
when analysing 5000 yearsa€l. Womena€™ s share fluctuates around an average of 10%, the main 
positive outlier is the third millennium BCE, driven by a high womena€™ s presence among Ancient 
Egypta€™ s observations in the Human Biographical Recorda€!. The modern rise of women has a 
distinct and important feature. A closer look at the Human Biographical Record individual-level 
data reveals that for most of history, women who
became part of the elite were either born into influential families or married into thema€l. The 
first rise in the share of women among self-mades is recorded among writers and poets born between 
1620 and 1660. It reflects the birth of a€~the feminine reading marketa€™ in Protestant Europea€!

Figure 1 Women’s share at the top of social hierarchy over history


20%

Ancient Civilizations



Career
Family

"Career & Family": Professor Claudia Goldin

Oct 2021 • ROCKING OUR PRIORS

57:40


Noahpinion

Beware shoveling money at overpriced service industries

The other day I got a CT scan at UCSF, to check for possible aneurysms (dona€™ t worry, I dona€™ t 
have one). My insurance and I were charged a total of over $20,000 for this service. This is over 4 
times the maximum price that most sources will list for a brain CT. Out of pocket, a CT scan can 
cost as little as a few hundred dollarsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 69 likes A- 86 comments A- Noah Smith

• Max Read: Maybe We Need a Moral Panic About Facebook : a€~Sorry, I mean Metaverse, Inca€!


Maybe we need a moral panic about Facebook

I have a friend who's a journalist who writes about surveillance and tech companies. Facebook is a 
frequent subject of his work; like a lot of people who write about the company, he quit both 
Facebook (the main platform) and Instagram a long time ago. His mom, on the other hand, is one of 
the most engaged and enthusiastic Facebook users to cross my Newsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 9 likes A- 4 comments A- Max Read

Paragraphs:

Andrei Frumusanu: Apple Announces Ml Pro & Ml Max: Giant New Arm SoCs with All-Out Performance'. 
a€~The Ml Proa€”laying the ground-work for what Apple calls no-compromise laptop SoCsa€!. Wea€™ re 
seeing a quite larger area of the SoC being taken up by the memory controllersa€!. In terms of CPU 
performance metrics, Apple made some comparisons toa€! Intela€™ s Core i7a€“1185G7, anda€! i7a€“l 
1800H, 4-core and 8-core variants ofa€! Ice Lake
10nma€!. At equal power usage of 30W, the new Ml Pro and Max are 1.7x faster in CPU throughput than 
the 11800Ha€!. At an equal performance level as the peak of the 11800H, the new Ml Pro/Max achieve 
70% less power consumption^!. Applea€™s GPU performance is said to vastly outclass any previous 
generation competitor integrated graphics performance^ I showcasing the Ml Pro against a GeForce 
RTX 3050 Ti 4GB, with the Apple chip achieving similar
performance, at 70% less powera€!. Alongside the Ml Pro, Apple also announced a bigger 
brothera€”the Ml Maxa€! supercharging the GPU to a total of 32 coresa€”essentially ita€™ s no 
longer an SoC with an integrated GPU but ita€™ s a GPU with an SoC around ita€!. The Ml Pro 
transistor counta€! 33.7 billion, while the Ml Max bloats that up to 57 billion transistors. AMD 
advertises 26.8bn transistors for the Navi 21 GPU design at 520mmA2, Apple here has over
double the transistors at a lower die sizea€!. The Ml being at a currently known 120mmA2, the Ml 
Pro would be 245mmA2, and the Ml Max 432mmA2. Most of the die size is taken up by the 32-core GPU, 
which Apple advertises reaching 10.4TFLOPsa€!. I think Apple has managed to not only meet the 
expectation, but also vastly surpass them. Both the Ml Pro and Ml Max look like incredibly 
differentiated designs, much different than anything wea€™ ve ever seen in
the laptop space. If the Ml was any indication of Applea€™ s success in their silicon endeavours, 
then the two new chips should also have no issues in laying incredible foundations for Applea€™ s 
Mac products, going far beyond what wea€™ ve seen from any competitora€!

LINK: chttps://www.anandtech.com/show/17019/apple-announced-m 1 -pro-ml 
-max-giant-new-socs-with-allout-performance>

Jan Eeckhout, Christoph Hedtrich, & Roberto Pinheiro: Inequality Is an Urban Affair Due To New 
Tech'. a€~The adoption of information technologya€! polarisationa€! via the displacement of routine 
cognitive jobsa€!. 200,000 firms in the US from 1990 to 2015a€! labour savings from IT are largest 
in big citiesa€! the polarisation of occupations across geography and accounts for the rise in wage 
inequality within citiesa€!
LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/inequafity-urban-affair-and-it-s-due-new-tech>

JA^rn-Steffen Pischke: Natural Experimenters: Nobel Laureates David Card, Joshua Angrist, & Guido 
Imbens: a€~The 2021 Nobel Prize in Economic Sciences has been awarded to David Card of the 
University of California, Berkeley, a€oefor his empirical contributions to labour economicsa€D, and 
to Joshua Angrist of MIT and Guido Imbens of Stanford University a€oefor their methodological 
contributions to the analysis of causal relationshipsa€D. This column
explains how the use of natural experiments in empirical economics has ushered in much progress in 
the analysis of causal relationships. The ensuing a€~credibility revolution^™ over the past three 
decades has been transformational for the study of key policy challenges, including education, 
immigration and the minimum wagea€!

LINK: 
<https://voxeu.org/article/natural-experimenters-nobel-laureates-david-card-joshua-angrist-and-guido
-imbens>

Dylan Patel: Intel Betting The Farmd€”Shrinking Business, Margins Down For Few Years, But 
Aggressively Investing $40B-$43B A Year And More With Subsidies: a€~Pat Gelsinger laid it all out 
on the table and stopped the charade. He was once a farm boy from rural Pennsylvania who moved out 
to Silicon Valley at the age of 18 to work at Intel. Now he has the keys to the company, and hea€™ 
s betting the entire farm on its future technological dominance. Ita€™ s been
very clear Intel will lose market share for at least the next couple of yearsa€!. Intel finally 
learned their lesson. Instead of continuing to milk the cow, they realize ita€™ s time to put the 
pedal to the metala€!. Intel will be spending $25B-$28B in capital expenditure alone plus another 
~$15B of R&D each year. This amount will be spent on additional fabs, process technologies R&D, 
improving the design, and other intellectual property. In just the last 8 months since Pat
Gelsinger joined Intel, they have hired an additional 6,000 engineersa€!. Intela€™ s plan just 
feels insane to us. a€oe5 nodes in 4 years.a€D After the firm struggled on the 14nm replacement for 
nearly a decade, to believe they can execute on this vision takes a whole lot of kool-aid. What we 
can believe is that Intel will spend a lota€!. Executives and shareholders in firms like Applied 
Materials, Lam Research, KLA, ASML, and Tokyo Electron are likely cheering about
Intel    not backing down in the face of adversity. Pat will take the lower margins, but instead of 
figuring out how to cut costs like all prior leadership since and including Paul Otellini, he is 
willing to potentially light money on firea€!. We are very skeptical this can be executed on. 
Therea€™ s no way to emphasize how difficult this will be, but ita€™ s also the only path forward. 
Intel could follow the path of many other American goliaths such as IBM and General Electric. A
slow slide to irrelevancya€!. Pat Gelsinger and Intel are saying no to thisa€!. We doubt 100% 
success from Intel, but we will leave it off with a quote from the man himself. a€oeThis is a 
tremendous period of time. Wea€™re seizing the opportunity. Carpe Diem.a€D Pat Gelsinger, Intel 
CEOa€!

LINK:




semi

Intel Betting The Farm a€“ Shrinking Business, Margins Down For Few Years, But Aggressively 
Investing $40B-$43B A Year And More With Subsidies

Pat Gelsinger laid it all out on the table and stopped the charade. He was once a farm boy from 
rural Pennsylvania who moved out to Silicon Valley at the age of 18 to work at Intel. Now he has 
the keys to the company, and he's betting the entire farm on its future technological dominance. 
Ita€™ s been very clear Intel will lose market share for at least tha€l
Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- 1 comment A- Dylan Patel

SemiAnalysis

Adam Tooze: Yaled€™ s Grand Strategy Program'. a€~A ripple went through the media recently 
following the resignation of Prof Beverly Gage from Yalea€™ s Grand Strategy Program. I dona€™ t 
have anything to add on that affair. Ia€™ 11 just say that whilst at Yale, I taught pretty 
regularly on the program, alongside John Gaddis, Paul Kennedy and Charlie Hill. Given my interests, 
you might have thought it would have been a natural fit. It wasna€™ t. An ideology of
cultural conservatism was hardwired into the program and not just by the donorsa€!

LINK:


SemiAnalysis

Intel Betting The Farm a€“ Shrinking Business, Margins Down For Few Years, But Aggressively 
Investing $40B-$43B A Year And More With Subsidies

Pat Gelsinger laid it all out on the table and stopped the charade. He was once a farm boy from 
rural Pennsylvania who moved out to Silicon Valley at the age of 18 to work at Intel. Now he has 
the keys to the company, and he's betting the entire farm on its future technological dominance. 
Ita€™ s been very clear Intel will lose market share for at least tha€!

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- 1 comment A- Dylan Patel

Adam Tooze: Yaled€™ s Grand Strategy Program'. a€~A ripple went through the media recently 
following the resignation of Prof Beverly Gage from Yalea€™ s Grand Strategy Program. I dona€™ t 
have anything to add on that affair. Ia€™ 11 just say that whilst at Yale, I taught pretty 
regularly on the program, alongside John Gaddis, Paul Kennedy and Charlie Hill. Given my interests, 
you might have thought it would have been a natural fit. It wasna€™ t. An ideology of
cultural conservatism was hardwired into the program and not just by the donorsa€!

LINK:

Chartbook

Top Links #27 Yale's Grand Strategy Program, 5000 years of interest rates & fascist wine

Welcome to Top Links #27 your regular collection of excellent reading and viewing from around the 
web. If you enjoy the Chartbook feed, why not share with a friend. Early Mondrian is surprisinga€l
Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 1 comment A- Adam Tooze
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

