Subscribe now

A week before first lecture is a good time to undertake an overview of the current state of the 
Delta variant plague wave, the fourth wave that is now beginning to hit the United States. The best 
source I have found so far is Max Roser & al.: Our World in Data: COVID-19 Data Explorer 
<https://ourworldindata.org/explorers/coronavirus-data-explorer>
At the moment, the United States is reporting that every day brings 400 new confirmedcases per 
million peoplea€”that means that a month will see about 1/1000 people confirmed to have caught the 
SARS-Cov-2 plague:

Daily new confirmed COVID-19 cases per million
people

Shown is the rolling 7-day average. The number of confirmed cases is lower than the number of
actual cases; the main reason for that is limited testing.

(LINEAR    LOG

Our World
in Data


United Kingdom
United States

Source: Johns Hop  Mar 1,2020   5E COVID-19 Data                          Aug 18,2021     CC BY


Share

But that is just confirmed cases. There are many others, some of them asymptomatic, who catch the 
virus. The United States right now is only testing 1/400 of the population each day:

Daily new COVID-19 tests per 1,000 people

Shown is the rolling 7-day average.

Our World
in Data

LINEAR   LOG


Israel

tests performed

United Kingdom

tests performed

10

5

United States

te^ts nerformed


Source: Officia   Mar 1,2020    ur World in Data                              Aug 16,2021      CC 
BY

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

If you are not tested, you cannot become a confirmed case. How many unconfirmed cases are there? 
And how serious are they? The Center for Disease Control has been disappointingly and 
irritatinglya€’’and, I would say, incompetentlya€’’evasive at providing us with reasonable 
scenarios on how our testing frequency and the number of confirmed cases our testing infrastructure 
reports scales up to a sense of how the plague is moving through the population.
What we do know is that, right now, 1/7 of all COVID-19 tests are positive:


The share of daily COVID-19 tests that are positive

Shown  is  the  rolling  7-day  average.  The  number  of  confirmed  cases  divided  by  the
number  of  tests,  expressed  as  a  percentage.  Tests  may  refer  to  the  number  of  tests
performed  or  the  number  of  people  tested,  depending  on  which  is  reported  by  the
particular country.

(LINEAR    LOG

30%

Our World
in Data


Suppose we were testing at the rate Israel was testinga€’’testing seven times as large a fraction 
of the populationa€’’would we be reporting 7 times as many confirmed cases? No: we are testing 
people because we have reason to think that they might have the disease, or because there is some 
requirement that they get tested. But we would be reporting perhaps three times as many confirmed 
cases. We really do not know. And the CDC, again disappointingly and
irritatinglya€’’and again, I would say, incompetentlya€’’never set up the random sample of people 
in the country to be repeatedly tested to allow us to use standard statistical tools to find out.


Daily new confirmed COVID-19 deaths per million

people

Shown is the rolling 7-day average. Limited testing and challenges in the attribution of the cause
of death means that the number of confirmed deaths may not be an accurate count of the true
number of deaths from COVID-19.

(LINEAR   LOG)

Our World

in Data


United States
Israel

United Kingdom

Marl, 2020 Aug 8. 2020                      Feb 24,2021 Aug 18,2021

Source: Johns Hop  Mar 1,2020   BE COVID-19 Data                          Aug 18,2021     CC BY

We do know that right now 2/1,000,000 Americans are dying each day of this plague. If you are going 
to die, it takes about a month from your confirmed diagnosis to death. A month ago the United 
States had 1/8 as many confirmed cases as it does now. That means we can look forward to a likely 
daily death toll in a month of 16/1,000,000 Americans.
How high will the Delta wave of this plague go? We do not know.

The university places great trust in vaccination. Guy Nicolette and Anna Harte write 
<https://calmessages.berkeley.edu/archives/message/89204>

The extremely good news is that while the current vaccines are not 100% protective against 
infection, especially with the delta variant, they clearly remain very effective against severe 
disease. CPC data show that to date, the prevalence of a fully vaccinated person experiencing a 
breakthrough infection resulting in hospitalization or death is 0.0048%. We cannot completely 
contain this virus.  There will be infections on campus and we must accept that. Our

main focus is to avoid significant spread and to avoid severe disease that puts... [people] in the 
hospital, or worse. Given our vaccine mandate and extremely high vaccination rate, we feel 
confident stating that your risk of contracting and transmitting is going to be higher when you are 
out and about in the community than when you are on campus.... With nearly 90% of the campus 
community reporting vaccination. wea€™ ve been incredibly successful in this

effort. We expect these numbers to go even higher as the mandate is enforced. Our rates 
significantly outpace the fully vaccinated populations in our surrounding communities...

For context, the 1/20,000 vaccinated people dying of the plague covers a period in which confirmed 
cases amounted to a total of 2% of the population. If the Delta wave leads to confirmed cases of 
10% of the populationa€’’which it might, but which I think is likely to be an upper bounda€”then 
only 1/4000 vaccinated people will die. And for vaccinated students in their 20s, the fraction will 
be more like 1/40000. In other words, it is not unlikely that we will see
1 healthy student without comorbidities die of SARS-CoV-2 this fall as the Delta wave sweeps over 
the country. But it does now, right now, seem unlikely that we will see more.

Thus healthy students' concerns should be overwhelmingly focused on how to keep themselves from 
getting the plague and then infecting those more vulnerable, and more at risk, rather than on 
risk-to-self.
Yours,

Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€ I weblog-like newslettera€l here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

