I very much hope that Matt Yglesiasa€™ s new weblog http://slowboring.com becomes the place to see 
and be seen on the internet.
Not, mind you, that I expect Matt to get everything right. Or that I expect all of his quick takes 
to be sound takes:

https://threadreaderapp.eom/thread/l 330313756522536963 .html
Matt--

I find myself more with Tom Scocca here than you. You write 
https://www.slowboring.com/p/whats-wrong-with-the-media:

The problem here, to me, is not that Walker ought to a€oestick to sports .a€D Ita€™ s that the 
analysis is bad. But because ita€™ s in a video game console
review rather than a policy analysis section and conforms to the predominant ideological fads, it 
just sails through to our screens...

And then you say:

What actually happened is that starting in March the household savings rate soared. Middle class 
people are seeing their homeownersaC™ equity rise

and. their debt payments fall, while cash piles up on their balance sheetsa€!

This makes sense as a criticism of Ian Walker only if you think that when Ian Walker wrote 'Ia€™ d 
be remiss to ignore all the reasons not to be excited for the PlayStation 5. ', it

was meant to be the start of an argument that the PS5 will not sell very well because of the 
epidemiological-economic-cultural uproar of the plague year.
https://www.icloud.com/keynote/0HbVeT91VG7G41I6FMjrekmQw

But I do not think that was what Ian Walker was doing at all. When he wrote 'Ia€™ d be remiss to 
ignore all the reasons not to be excited for the PlayStation 5. ', he was doing what

Chaucer does at the end of the Canterbury talesa€”saying: 'OK. You have had a good read and a good 
laugh. But now I need to remind you of the most important things
https://www.gutenberg.org/files/22120/22120-h/22120-h.htm that all his readers join him in praying:

Graunte me grace of verray penitence, confessioun and satisfaccioun to doon in this present lyf; 
thurgh the benigne grace of him that is king of kinges and
preest over alle preestes, that boghte us with the precious blood of his herte; / so that I may 
been oon of hem at the day of dome that shulle be saved: Qui
cum patre, &c.'

Ian Walker is doing something very similar to Geoffrey Chaucer here. Ian Walker is very excited 
about the PS5 https://kotaku.com/plavstation-5-the-kotaku-review-1845588904:

This review has spent 3,000 words talking about the PlayStation 5, which is the most Ia€™ ve 
written about anything. Ita€™ s as good a video game
console as there has ever been. The combination of ultra high-definition video, increased 
framerates, high-end graphics techniques like ray tracing, and the
lightning-fast SSD make it feel like a real-deal, next-gen successor to the PlayStation 4. And if 
youa€™re not ready to give up on the previous console, the
PlayStation                                                                     5 reliably runs a 
vast majority of the PlayStation 4 library, with many of those games receiving upgrades to 
fidelity, framerate, and loading
times.

That is the passage that immediately precedes 'But I would be remiss'. What Ian Walker is doing is 
an act of confession: he is excited about the PS5, but he is letting that excitement
crowd the important things out of his soul, and he wants to mark that allowing that to happen is a 
sin. His idea of sin is very different from Chaucer's: rather than calling to mind his
need to 'thanke I oure lord lesu Crist and his blisful moder, and alle the seintes of hevene. ', 
Ian Walker wants to call to mind the a€~covid-19 pandemica€! Americans out of

work... that the worst people arena€™ t going away just because a new old white man is sitting 
behind the Resolute desk. a lot of people simply wona€™ t be able to buy a

PlayStation 5... [his own] privilege... [that he can] simply tune out the world as it burns around 
you. '

This is not 'analysis [that] is bada€L But because ita€™ s in a video game console review rather 
than a policy analysis section and conforms to the predominant ideological fads, it
just sails through to our screens. '

Ian is not forecasting how the pent-up hoarded cash is going to show itself in spending on consumer 
electronics next yeara€”that is the thing I am doing, not the thing he does.
What Ian Walker is doing is shifting into Woke Theology Mode.

And, Matt, I think you miss his point because you take him to be doing a bad version of the 
forecasting exercises that I do.
&, by the way, good luck with Slow Boring. I have subscribed.

But how many weblogs-flying-the-jolly-roger-of-Substack-&-costing-$100-a-year am I supposed to 
subscribe to?
Yours,

Brad DeLong

.#noted #publicsphere #wokeness #2020-11-21


