I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press
the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: 1870-1914: Was Civil Society on the Side of the Angels?: An Outtake from Slouching Towards 
Utopia

<bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

From 1815 to 1914 Europe avoided the society-shaking Moloch of multi-year great-power 
high-mobilization war. 1859,1866, and 1870 were all settled quickly, with the victors in the 
opening battles careful not to demand so much at the conference table as to lead the losers to roll 
the dice with the levA©e en masse and industrial mobilization as well.
But that did not happen in 1914.

And the very sharp Dominic Lieven blamesa€! civil society.

Lieven takes the view of an oligarchic establishment politician simply trying to calm things down, 
but a€oerattled and bedevileda€D by a press and a public opinion that wants WAR:

Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution: a€~A common 
feature across Europe [before 1914] was the growth of civil society and its impact through the 
press, lobbies, and political parties on governments. In contemporary parlance, civil society is 
always supposed to be on the side of the angels. As regards international
relations in prea€“1914 Europe, this was not true. Civil society, meaning above all the press, 
often played a big role in stoking international conflict. This might be just a question of 
pandering to public prejudices and thirst for sensations, but it rattled and bedeviled 
policy-makers nonetheless.

More serious were systematic efforts to use foreign policy as a means to generate nationalist 
support for governments at home, in the process undermining the rational calculations on which 
diplomatic bargaining was based. No great power, Russia included, was entirely innocent in this 
respecta€!
LINK: chttps://archive.org/details/endoftsaristrussOO>

He also, it is true, blames aristocratic and oligarchic governments thinking that what their 
rA©gimes needed to stabilize themselves against democrats and socialists was a€oea short victorious 
wara€D.
Is this an accurate and adequate analysis? I think that it, by and large, is.

You see, in the generation before World War I the right was thinking up new justifications for its 
basic principle: a€oeWhat I have, I hold!a€D English naturalist Charles Darwina€™ s Origin of 
Species had set intellectual waves in motion: ideas that turned into social Darwinism. The social 
Darwinists justified economic inequality not by looking to the past, to the descent of the rich 
from the
henchmen of William the Conqueror, but by looking to the present and the future, by claiming that 
inherent and inherited traits accounted for their economic success and justified the existing 
economic inequalities that had them at the top. (But why? You did nothing to get your genes, other 
than choosing the right parents.)

As John Maynard Keynes was to remark a generation later, in the eyes of the social Darwinists:

socialist interferences became ... impious, as calculated to retard the onward movement of the 
mighty process by which we ourselves had risen like Aphrodite out of the primeval slime of 
oceana€!.

One step further, and they were identifying genes with races.

One step further, and they were identifying races with geographical, linguistic, and cultural 
nations.

One step further, and they were proposing that the superior nationsa€”racesa€”should be encouraged 
to breed, and others should not.
One step further, and the road to doing so was to launch or accept genocidal war.

Social Darwinists justified economic inequality within societies as part of a progressive struggle 
for existence that, via evolution, improved the gene pool. Why not, then, take the next step, and 
see relationships between nations as a similar struggle for existence that, again via evolution, 
improved the gene pool? a€oel am better than youa€D became, all too easily, a€oeWe are better than
they.a€D And a€cewea€D had to have the weapons to prove it, should it come to a fight.

In the decade after 1900 Britaina€™ s alarm at the growing size of the German battle fleet mounted. 
Britain imported half its food. A German battle fleet that controlled the seas around Britain could 
starve half of Britain to death. So, as Winston S. Churchill told the story, the Liberal Party 
government to appease the navy and the press offered to fund four new dreadnought-class battleships 
a year
to defend against the growing German fleet.

The navy demanded six.

And, Churchill said, a€oeWe compromised at eight.a€D

The political, social, cultural, and economic barometer was dropping. The warning signs were 
abundant: a right-wing upper class had, by and large, lost its social role; politicians were 
increasingly anxious to paper over class divisions with appeals to national unity; a social 
Darwinist ideological current advocating strugglea€”even or especially military struggle by 
peoples-in-armsa€”over not
what language a province would be administered in, but whose grandchildren would live there, was 
growing. These issues were storing up trouble as 1914 approached. The unleashing of unprecedented 
economic growth had shaken the world and transformed politics. And at the end of that 
transformation was a pronounced imperial and militaristic turn.

In 1919, John Maynard Keynes would write, bitterly, that he, his peers, and his elders among the 
well-thinking, self-confident establishment had all shrugged off the warning signs and passively 
sat by. They had regarded:

the projects and politics of militarism and imperialism, of racial and cultural rivalries, of 
monopolies, restrictions, and exclusion, which were to play the serpent to this [pre-1914 economic 
growth] paradise .. . [as] little more than the amusements of [the] daily newspaper.a€D To him and 
his ilk, Keynes would say, looking back through the rearview mirror, the idea that
the progressive system of increasing prosperity might break down was a€oeaberrant [and] 
scandalousa€Da€”and easily avoidablea€!

As 1914 approached, there was no intellectual or organizational antimilitarist countermobilization 
to speak of to try to head off catastrophe.

Consider the venerated Max Weber, for one. Note that Weber was, in prea€“World War I Germany, 
solidly in the center-left. He was no socialist, but he was otherwise a friend to political 
democracy, to mass education, and to economic prosperity, and a foe to parasitic aristocracies and 
rigid social orders. In his inaugural lecture as professor at Freiburg university in 1895, a€oeThe 
National State
and Economic Policy,a€D Weber summarized the worldview he shared with many:

We all consider the German character of the East as something that should be protected.  The German 
peasants and day-labourers of the East are not being pushed off the land in an open conflict by 
politically-superior opponents. Instead, they are getting the worst of it in the silent and dreary 
struggle of everyday economic existence, they are abandoning their homeland

to a race which stands on a lower level, and moving towards a dark future in which they will sink 
without trace.  Our successors will not hold us responsible before history for the kind of economic 
organization we hand over to them, but rather for the amount of elbow-room we conquer for them in 
the world.

Weber, a dark-haired square-headed German-speaking Caucasian male greatly feared dark-haired 
square-headed Caucasian males who spokeaCI Polish. Half a century later, the largest single 
military command of German speakers ever,Adolf Hitlera€™ s Army Group South, would be fighting even 
larger formations of the Red Army in Ukraine in a war seeking to win German aCceelbow-
rooma€D. Its commander would be a man named at birth Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Lewinski.

The a€cevona€D signifies that the name is a German noble name. But a€ceLewinskia€D (Levi-ski)a€”is 
not a name that springs from the Germanic branch of the Indo-European language tree. The suffix 
a€ce-skia€D is Slavic: it signifies that the name is a Polish noble namea€”ita€™ s the Polish 
analog to the German a€cevon.a€D And then there is what is in between the a€cevona€D and
the a€oeskia€D: a€ceLevi.a€D

There is not a more Jewish surname in the world than a€oeLevi.a€D Yet Fritz Erich Georg Eduard 
worked diligently and enthusiastically for Adolf Hitler.

He was Helene nA©e von Sperlinga€™ s tenth child and fifth son. Helenea€™ s sister Hedwig was 
childless. So Helene gave Fritz Erich Georg Eduard to Hedwig, and she and her husband von Manstein 
adopted him.
It was under that namea€”von Mansteina€”that he made his career in the Imperial, Weimar Republic, 
and Nazi armies.

Fritz Erich Georg Eduard von Manstein nA© von Lewinski was a nationalist, and a militarist. He, and 
millions like him, believed this to such an extent that either Hayekian or Polanyian notions of any 
sort of peaceful market path toward utopia shrank to near invisibility. The von Lewinskys, von 
Sperlings, and von Mansteins had five Prussian generals among them, including both of Ericha€™ s
grandparents. Helene and Hedwiga€™ s sister Gertrude married Paul von Hindenberg, which made that 
field marshal and right-wing Weimar Republic president Ericha€™ s uncle.

The scary thing is that German nationalism was not exceptional in prea€“World War I Europe. Rather, 
if not quite the norm, it was close to it. Usually manifest, nationalism was understood as destiny 
in a winner-take-most (maybe all) contest in which war was viewed not as a catastrophe but as an 
opportunity: an opportunity for national assertion, national mobilization, and the creation of a
stronger national identitya€”as well as an opportunity to win the spoils of war, whatever those 
might be.

Share

One Video:


Wu-Tang Is For The Children @WUTangKids

Since Biden will be announcing the Al-Zawahiri killing tonight ita€™ s a good time to repost this 
gem

11:05 PM r™ Aug 1,2022

41,345Likes 11,118Retweets

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

Global Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

-48000

-8000

-6000

-3000

-1000

Ideas
Growth
Rate      h

0.002%

0.003%

0.009%

0.018%

0.030%

Ideas
Stock
Level      H

0.011

0.036

0.043

0.074

0.136

Real
Income/
Capita       y

$1,200

$1,200

$900

$900

$900

Popula­
tion P
(millions)

0.2

2

5

15

50

Total
Income Y
(billions)

$0.24

$2.4

$4.5

$14

$45


150

800

1500

1770

1870

0.060%     0.272

0.014%     0.297

0.052%     0.429

0.149%     0.643

0.442%     1.000

$900

$900

$900

$1,100

$1,300

200

240

500

750

1300

$180

$216

$450

$825

$1,690


2010

2100

2.159%

2.000%

20.557

108.893

$11,600

$53,802

6900

9000

$80,040

$484,214

Get 50% off for 1 year

Very Briefly Noted:

• Garrison Lovely: Do We Need a Better Understanding of a€~Progressa€™ ? 
<https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20220615-do-we-need-a-better-understanding-of-progress>

•  Jon S. Cohen & Martin L. Weitzman (1974): A Marxian Model of Enclosures'. a€~A model is 
constructed which provides a coherent and logically consistent framework for analyzing the 
enclosure movementa€!. Marxa€™ s analysis of a€~so-called primitive accumulation^™ can be given an 
interpretation that is more reasonable, logically consistent, and empirically sound than
is commonly acknowledgeda€! 
<https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/weitzman/files/marxianmodelenclosures.pdf>

• Corbin Davenport: US CHIPS Act: What Is It, and Will It Make Devices Cheaper? 
<https://www.howtogeek.com/821941/us-chips-act-what-is-it-and-will-it-make-devices-cheaper/>

•  Jeffrey Sonnenfeld & Steven Tian: Russiaa€™ s Economy Really Is Crumbling Under Sanctions: 
a€~Nine myths about the effects of sanctions and business retreats, debunkeda€! 
<https://foreignpolicv.com/2022/07/22/russia-economv-sanctions-mvths-ruble-business/>

• Kelsey Piper: A Q&A with Development Economist Charles Kenny on Studying How The World Gets 
Better 
<https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/23198871/charles-kennv-interview-economist-getting-better>

•  Emily Hamilton: Why Tokyo Works: a€~A new book helps explain why Tokyoa€™ s land use and 
development policies have helped make it an enticing and affordable citya€! 
<https://www.discoursemagazine.eom/uncategorized/2022/06/07/whv-tokvo-works/>

•  Eric J. Topol & Demis Hassabis: How DeepMind Unlocks Medicinea€™ s Secrets: a€~Ita€™ s Not All 
Fun and Gamesa€! <https://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/975013>

• Wikipedia: List of Japanese Inventions & Discoveries <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List 
of_Japanese inventions_and discoveries>

•  Charles Schumer: Summary of the Energy Security and Climate Change Investments in the Inflation 
Reduction Act of2022 <https ://w w w.democrats .senate .gov/imo/media/doc/summary _of_the energy _ 
security _and climate_change_investments_in the_inflation_reduction_act_of_2022.pdf>

• Om Malik: The Future of Tech as I See It <https://om.co/2022/07/21/tech-future-four-trends-2022/>

•  Brendan Bordelon & Eleanor Mueller: Biden Wants an Industrial Renaissance. He Cana€™ t Do It 
Without Immigration Reform 
<https://www.politico.com/news/2022/07/31/microchip-immigration-tech-00Q48242>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Tim Miller: a€™ [Susan Collinsa€™ s] 'Twill oppose an overwhelmingly popular bill to protect gay 
marriage that I would otherwise support because Ia€™m mad that the Democrats held a vote on a 
microchip bill that I also supported" has got to be the best example of DC brain worms I have ever 
encountereda€!

Tim Miller @Timodc

"I will oppose an overwhelmingly popular bill to protect gay marriage that I would otherwise 
support because I'm mad that the Democrats held a vote on a microchip bill that I also supported" 
has got to be the best example of DC brain worms I have ever encountered


Amanda Terkel @aterkel

Susan Collins tells @JNicholsonInDC that same-sex marriage bill may be doomed now be of what Dems 
did on the inflation reduction bill https ://t.co/ndnTOLxbEt
8:05 PM r™ Jul 28,2022

5,508Likes 1,309Retweets

•  Bruce Bartlett: a€™ The media is hyping inflation because it gets lots of eyeballs and clicks. 
Right-wingers hype inflation because it creates political pressure on Democrats to abandon their 
agenda and support Republican ideas about budget-cuttinga€!

Bruce Bartlett @BruceBartlett

This is not really correct. The media is hyping inflation because it gets lots of eyeballs and 
clicks. Right-wingers hype inflation because it creates political pressure on Democrats to abandon 
their agenda and support Republican ideas about budget-cutting.

Robert Reich @RBReich

Why is the establishment spewing myths about inflation? Because one of the main drivers of 
inflation is corporate profits. Corporations get away with price gouging because they face little 
to no competition. They use the specter of inflation as cover to rip us all off.
12:30 PM r™ Jul 30,2022

104Likes37Retweets

• Josh Barro: The Big Question About The Inflation Reduction Act: How Well Will Added Tax 
Enforcement Work?

The Big Question About The Inflation Reduction Act: How Well Will Added Tax Enforcement Work?

Dear readers, Ita€™ s highly likely that Democrats will lose control of at least one house of 
Congress in elections this November. That means theya€™ 11 soon need to work together with 
Republicans to set the countrya€™ s fiscal course. If you remember the last time a Democratic 
president had to do a lot of this with a Republican House a€” from 2011 roughly through a€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 30 likes A- 13 comments A- Josh Barro

AJs:

Suppose you knew that the world was about to begin a giant wheel away from global warming producing 
technologies to clean, greener technologies. Suppose you knew that, as a result, the money was 
going to flow like water to grease this transition. Suppose you were a company with many engineers 
with expertise in energy, transportation, and energy-intensive manufacturing systems. Would
not you see this forthcoming transition as a gold mine, for your engineers could place you at the 
head of it, and make sure that your organizations profited immensely from this mobilization?

What kind of a strange and sinister, fuck wit would seek to create great poverty and misery in the 
future by trying to stop this wheel, would view it as a danger to your personal piggy bank, rather 
than as an opportunity to become rich, do good, and become honored?

Jane McMullen: The Audacious Pr Plot That Seeded Doubt About Climate Change: a€~Thirty years ago, a 
bold plan was cooked up to spread doubt and persuade the public that climate change was not a 
problem. The little-known meeting - between some of Americaa€™ s biggest industrial players and a 
PR geniusa€’’forged a devastatingly successful strategy that
endured for years, and the consequences of which are all around usa€!. The prospective client, the 
Global Climate Coalition (GCC)a€’’which represented the oil, coal, auto, utilities, steel, and rail 
industriesa€”was looking for a communications partner to change the narrative on climate change. 
Don Rheem and Terry Yosie, two of Harrisona€™ s team present that day,
are sharing their stories for the first timea€!

LINK: chttps://www.bbc .com/news/science-environment-62225696>

It is only 1/3 of Republicans in the Senate, Noah. It is only 1/8 of Republicans in the House, 
Noah. Remember: this is a party that designed a capital tax cut that managed to provide no net 
incentives to boost investment. Policy effectiveness is not their game. Rent-seeking is:

Noah Smith: Industrial Policy Starts with Semiconductors: a€~The CHIPS Act,., in absolute sizea€! 
is not incredibly hugea€! sufficient to build only 2 to 4 [Fabs]a€!. TSMCa€! is spending almost 
twice as much as the U.S. government over the next three years to build its own new facilities. And 
the total amount that Apple invested in China in the last few years
(mostly not for semiconductors, but for other manufactured goods) wasa€! over five times the CHIPS 
Acta€™ s total outlay. But CHIPS is still important, becausea€! 17 Republicans joined Democrats [in 
the Senate] in voting for the billa€!. Why did Republicans and Democrats join together to throw 
dominant a€ceneoliberala€D economic orthodoxy out on its ear?


well, partly Decause ttiereafe1" s a general snnt away trom tmnKing mat economistsafe1"1 nostrums 
about tree trade and government non-intervention contain anything worm listening to. But in me case 
ot semiconductors, mere were some pretty Dig reasons on top ot mat. cnips were me natural industry 
tor industrial policy to make a comeDackafei

LINK:

Noahpinion

Industrial policy starts with semiconductors

Huge story in the world of industrial policy today: The U.S. Senate just passed the CHIPS Act, a 
bill aimed at reviving the flagging semiconductor industry. The lionafe™ s share of the $52 billion 
in the bill will go to support chip companies building fabs, with some going to train workers and a 
bit going to research and development. There are also tax credafe!
Read more

6 months ago A- 51 likes A- 21 comments A- Noah Smith

Viewing 1989 through a nationalist, rather than a democratic or a liberal lens may well be correct. 
And do consider that the world of 2100 is likely to have an annual average income-per-capita level 
of $50,000. That is indeed going to be a very different world:

Branko Milanovic: On Import Substitution, Fukuyama, Eternal Growth & More’. afe'Fukuyamaafe! got 
1989 wrongafe!. Essentially nationalist revolts were proclaimed by Fukuyama and other maA®tres A 
penser of the time to be the revolutions of democracyafe!. Butafe! the broader pointafe! regarding 
a terminus in the evolution of human institutionsafe! democracy in
the political sphere and capitalism in the economic sphere, is simplisticafe!. The human desire for 
afeoebettermentafen, as Adam Smith called it, has no limitsafe!. Every development creates new 
needs. We did not have a need for mobile phones before they existed. But we have that need now. We 
do not have a need to fly to Mars for a weekend right now (even if Elon
Musk might feel that way). It seems slightly bizarre to us today to have such a afeoeneedafeD. But 
in several generations, it will not be so bizarre. It will be like our afeceneedafeD to go on 
vacation to Mexico or Italy. Thus economic growth and needs are, if you will, in a dialectical 
relationship: more growth creates new needs that require more growth to satisfy them.

There is no end to thatafe!
LINK:

Global Inequality and More 3.0

On import substitution, Fukuyama, eternal growth and more

1. Russia is a nation with vast natural resources, a well-educated population, and a deep 
scientific base. Yet on a per person basis, Russia is only the 67th richest nation in the world. 
Why? The problem with Russia is what I called her afeoecircular economic historyafe!
Read more

6 months ago A- 19 likes A- 5 comments A- Branko Milanovic

Matt appears to be confused and uncertain about what works, and what should be the take away from 
all of this. My takeaway is:Tthings worked! We accomplished a great deal, more than we had any 
business, hoping for! And everybody played a part! The people who pressured Manchin played a part! 
And Manchin played a big part!
If it does not all fall apart at the last minute, that is:

Matthew Yglesias: How the Green New Deal Became the Inflation Reduction Act'. a€~The IRA is a good 
bill, and to the extent that the left wants to embrace it and claim credit, I donafe™ t want to 
discourage themafe!. Bernie Sanders and other left-wing members of Congress are proving to be 
pretty pragmatic about voting for bills that can passafe’Tafe™ ve always
thought itafe™ s striking how much more sensible Bernie-the-legislator is than 
Bernie-the-Twitter-personality. But I think itafe™ s instructive to consider the success of the IRA 
negotiations through the lens of the Green New Deal construct. afeoeGreen New Deala€D was a 
strikingly successful sloganafe!. On policy content, though, I think the IRA owes this idea
relatively littleafe!. The erroneous conceit of the climate left is a kind of political romanticism 
about the climate issue. They not only want the government to take major action on climate change, 
but they also want it to be the case that the mass public is crying out for the government to do 
this with special interests standing in their wayafe!. [It took] reducing greenhouse
gas emissions, something the public supports but doesnafe™ t think is very important, and pairs it 
with multiple unrelated and highly controversial social changes as if deliberately trying to 
maximize political backlashafe!. If you look at what ultimately brought Manchin around to the 
energy title of IRA, itafe™ s that Biden and Ron Wyden and Chuck Schumer embraced a
technology-agnostic view of decarbonization that envisions roles for hydrogen, nuclear, and 
point-of-source carbon capture. Manchin is aware that the coal industry is dying no matter what 
America does on climate (it kept dying during Trumpafe™ s four years in office) and wisely sees an 
opportunity to capture upside for his state if America can go beyond oil into a
future of nuclear, clean gas, and hydrogenafe!. I really donafe™ t want to be too churlish here. At 
the end of the day, the climate left wanted to put their issue on the agenda, and they succeeded. 
To get something done they had to compromise, and they did. If they and their allies see it as a 
success story, thatafe™ s genuinely goodafe!

LINK:


Slow Boring

How the Green New Deal became the Inflation Reduction Act

David Wallace-Wells sees vindication for the climate left in Democratsa€™ apparent success cobbling 
together an Inflation Reduction Act that centers on historic increases in zero-carbon energy 
production. I disagree with that and stand by most of my criticisms of the climate left from a year 
agoa€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 62 likes A- 47 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

I confess I do not understand British politics a€“ neither the Tory, the Liberal, nor the Labour 
side of it. But it does look significantly worse than American politics. Our Trump is at least in 
exile. They have lots of little Trumps, all of them running loose, wild, and free:

Rachel Sylvester: The Tory Coalition Is Fracturing Without Johnsona€”& It Will Only Get Uglier. 
a€~The Tory Party has still not resolved the inherent tension between the economic populism 
favoured by its voters in the red wall and the fiscal conservatism of its traditional supporters in 
the true blue shiresa€!. Eurosceptic Conservative MPs are insisting that the next
prime minister delivers a a€oeproper Brexit ,a€D echoing Faragea€™ s criticism that the UKa€™ s 
departure from the EU was a€oeBrexit in Name Only.a€Da€! This time it will not just be Farage 
shouting a€oebetrayala€n from the sidelines, unconstrained by the realities of power, Johnson will 
be sitting in the House of Commons offering the promised land and
whipping up dissent against his successor. The petition demanding that his name is added to the 
list of leadership candidates shows his capacity to become the figurehead of the rebel righta€!. We 
need to ask ourselves how we wended up with this parade of gargoyles in the first place. Why did 
the British political class acquiesce in the Brexit fiasco? Why couldna€™t
they continue with the sensible, a€cegrown-upa€D policies of the Thatcher/Blair consensus? Since 
2007 it has become increasingly difficult to sell the political idea that home ownership and rising 
property values can provide economic security for alla€!

LINK:   
<https://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/politics/the-torv-coalition-is-fracturing-without-iohnson-and-it
-will-onlv-get-uglier>

a€oeBecome deadly in an instanta€D is a very good thing to remember. Trump is a clown. But thugs 
and murderers can work for clowns, and win applause from them:

Steve Schmidt: Do We Want Democracy Too?: a€~ Avner Lessa€! observed that there are Adolph 
Eichmanna€™ s everywhere. They are all around us, he said. He said they are a€oelatent in a 
democracy,a€D but that in a a€oedictatorship of the left or right, they become deadly in an instant 
.a€Da€! American democracy remains a fragile experiment that has entered a
period of contestation^!. It is important to remember the American flag when thinking about 
Americaa€™ s progress towards being a full democracy in which all people are equal under the lawa€!

LINK:



The Warning

Do we want democracy too?

Avner Less was a Jew. A German Jew. His family was murdered in the extermination camps. His destiny 
required his survival. He became a policeman and rose through the ranks. He was an Israeli. Eichman 
was the organizer of the Wansee Conference, chaired by Reinhardt Heydrich in January 1942. It was 
the meeting dura€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 135 likes A- 62 comments A- Steve Schmidt
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press
the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

