Subscribe now

MUST-READ: Jonathan Sperbera€™s The Age of Interconnection:

The first review I have seen:

Gavin Jacobson: How the world turned global: Jonathan Sperbera€™ s The Age of Interconnection 
surveys the second half of the 20th century but fails to explain the ideas that shaped if. a€~To 
impose a master concept on a period between 1945 and the Millennium that eludes more rhapsodic 
description^! an extensive panorama of the
global trends and realignments that shaped the six decades that followed the Second World War. 
Scientific and technological developments during the two warsa€! determined the social trends, 
economic institutions and industrial policies in the period that followed. What was different about 
the second half of the 20th century, in

Sperbera€™ s account, was the depth and speed of political, economic and informational exchanges 
that criss-crossed the globe, a€ reintegrating far-flung continents and countries of very different 
levels of economic development, social structures, and political systemsa€Da€l. Global uniformities 
and interconnections were forged by
designa€L Smartly defined at the outset, the analysis subsequently dissolves in a bath of granular 
detail. Brute empiricism has won an expensive victory over both synoptic vision and, presumably, 
wider readershipa€!. Those in the market for minutiae such as crop breeding, Asian stewardesses, or 
international sales of Tupperware will find
The  Age of Interconnection useful; those looking for overarching theories or conceptually rich 
accounts of the modern order, as found in the macrosociology of Michael Mann or the world-system 
analysis of Immanuel Wallerstein, will find little revelation. Sperbera€™ sa€! reverence for The 
Transformation of the World, JAUrgen
Osterhammela€™ s 1,000-page opus on the 19th centurya€!. Sperber shares Osterhammela€™ s view that 
it isna€™t possible a€reto fix the dynamic of an epoch in a single schemaa€Da€!. And what of 
neoliberalism? The term itself, as well as a€celiberalisma€D, appears only once in the book, a 
striking absence given its dominance over
the thought-world of the West for the last half century...

This is a a€rehe did not write the book that I would have written !a€D review.
Herea€™ s my thumbnail excerpt from Sperber:

Jonathan Sperber: The Age of Interconnection: A Global History of the Second Half of the Twentieth 
Century: a€~Imagining the Eraa€!. 1. The rate of global economic and population growth over the 
years 1950a€“ 73a€! greater than at any previous timea€!. 2. In 1950, the United States was the 
only country in the world with at least 250

privately owned automobiles per thousand peoplea€!. By 2000, there were twenty-four countriesa€!. 
3. In the five years after the end of the Second World War, one person in thirteen in the world was 
a refugee. 4. About one-tenth as many people were killed in wars of the second half of the 
twentieth century as during the two World Warsa€!.

5. The decolonization of Asia and Africaa€! saw the end of the largest colonial empires in human 
history. 6.a€! Human presence in space has been limited to low earth orbita€!. 7. As late as 1960, 
atmospheric CO2 levels were little above their preindustrial valuesa€!. 8.By 2000, therewere more 
women university students than mena€!.9. In
1960a€! commercial passenger aircraft were propeller planes; by 1970a€! jets. 10a€!. antibioticsa€! 
DDT, anda€! mass vaccinationa€! reduced infectious disease so drastically in the quarter century 
after 1945a€!. 11. In  1995, there were only sixteen million users of the Interneta€!Five years 
latera€! 361 milliona€!. How [can]    all thesea€!
be understood as part of a broader historical process, and not merely as a succession of 
disconnected headlines [?]a€!

As I have said, I remember one coffee with Berkeley colleagues where all three of us agreed we 
would each give a limb to write something as great as Jonathana€™ s Karl Marx: A 19th-Century Life.

This book is not quite so good. I am not so sure that there can be a thematic unity for the period 
1950 to 2000. But, if there can be, Jonathan's decision to make it a€ceinterconnectiona€D appears 
to me to be the most fruitful theme to explore.

And so I blurbed it: a€reA truly brilliant, gripping, and readable history of the 1945-2001 world, 
making a very persuasive case that globalization is the main thread for economics, politics, and 
sociology in moving toward not utopia but at least a world in which a smaller proportion of us are 
in dire want and desperate fear.a€D
Share

ONE IMAGE: Elon Musk Did Nazi This Coming!:

But he really should havea€!


cion IVIUSK ^eiuiiiiiubK - on

I hope that the people of Brazil are able to
resolve matters peacefully

Q 16.5K              12.1K           124.7K

Elon Musk© @elonmusk • Dec 14, 2022
Replying to @elonmusk @conexaopolitica and
@VitalikButerin

Twitter may have people on the Brazil team that
are strongly politically biased

Q 1,353          tl 3,071            Q? 15.8K

Elon Musk© @elonmusk • Dec 3, 2022
Replying to @OzraeliAvi


I VO OCCI I Cl IUL UI UUI IUUI I III Ig ivvuuio auuui LI IO

recent Brazil election. If those tweets are
accurate, it’s possible that Twitter personnel
gave preference to left wing candidates.

Q 15.9K         tl 52.3K               239.4K

Elon Musk: Sufficiently stupid to buy Peter Theila€™ s line that to be pro-democracy is to be 
a€oepolitically biaseda€D. And sufficiently stupid to believe that, as a plutocrat, kleptocrats 
regard him as their friend rather than their prey.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

ONE VIDEO: Christy Romera€™s Presidential Address:

Christy Romer: AEA Presidential Addressa€!
Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Jonathan Koren: a€~This episode of NPRa€™ s Planet Money has an absolutely wild ending. The 
episode feature the reporter reading childrena€™ s books to 3rd graders in an Ohio school. The 
stories were screened by the school district, and a district official sat in on the class. The 
final story is Dr Seussa€™ s Sneetches. The district official cuts the
story off, because shea€™ s afraid ita€™ s talking about how racism is bad. Think about thata€! The 
Ohio Republican Party has decided that a€oeall of us here are Americansd€d is an un-American thing 
to say.

•  Martin van Creveld (1982): Fighting Power: German & U.S. Army Performance, 1939-1945: a€~The 
[Nazi] Armya€! [made] a deliberate choicea€! to maintain at all costs that which was believed to be 
decisive to the conduct of war: mutual trust, a willingness to assume responsibility, and the right 
and duty of subordinate commanders at all levels to
make independent decisions and carry them outa€! I really want a very good sociologist to teach me 
about a€oeinstitutionsa^2 in the sense of how they with their performative excellences and 
incapacities absorb and traina€”rapidly absorb and traina€”individuals and persist over time.

•  Tom Chivers: Three Amigos & Goldilocks: a€~Kevin McCarthy... made a series of concessions to his 
critics.... The most globally important vote comes in September, if McCarthy lasts that long: 
whether to raise the limit on U.S. government borrowing.  Failing to increase it could trigger a 
limited default, throwing the world economy into chaosa€!

Were I a Republican a€oemoderated€U, I would hold up the Rules Package for three days until I got 
my own Secret Protocola€\

• Rana Faroohar: Hyper-efficiency is bad business: a€~Southwest shows management by numbers has 
gone too fara€! I am not sure if it is " management by numbers" as, rather, invulnerability to 
certain kinds of disruptions, and a failure to have gamed-out in advance how they would recover 
from them.

• Mike Sington: a€~In a a€oespeecha€D at Mar-a-Lago, psycho ex-president Trump claims President 
Biden a€oeconvinced Putin to go into Ukrainea€Da€! In a sense, yes: Biden's policies convinced 
Putin that last winter was his last chance to reabsorb Ukraine into Muscovy. This was, I think, a 
genuine use-it or lost-it d€oeThucydides trapa€U
(even though naming it after Thucydides is mostly fake.)

• Dan Hon: a€~Ken MacLeod's Beyond the Hallowed Sky was a quick enjoyable read, first in a trilogy. 
Quietly resigned as to its explicable unavailability as an ebook in the US despite coming out in 
November 2021 in the UKa€! Mamma did not teach Bradford to read the first volume of any trilogy 
before the third volume isout.

• Julian Sanchez: a€~Deleted the app a while back, but still poking my head in at Twitter every few 
days and hoo boy is it giving off late-stage MySpace vibesa€l I am not seeing this. Maybe my 
Twitter feed is overcurated?

•  Brian Katulis: Why Biden Should Build New Coalitions to Support Americaa€™ s Foreign Policy: 
a€~Americaa€™ s global engagement offers the best option to make Americans more secure and 
prosperousa€! Well, yes. But the only politically viable way forward is to focus not on 
globalization, but on freeworldization..

•  Daniel Rasmussen: Venture capitala€™ s reckoning looms closer: a€~Valuations on holdings will 
have to converge sooner rather than later with listed tech sectora€! Why do they have to? This is a 
kind of thing that happens only immediately after the top two levels of any organization I've been 
forced to resign in disgrace.

•  Howard Schneider: Fed has 'difficult' call to avoid overdoing rates shock, Romer says: a€~Tough 
for the U.S. central bank to avoid overdoing it with higher-than-needed interest rates, a top 
economic adviser in the Obama White House said after a fresh review of Fed policy since World War 
Twoa€l. a€oeWe are just now entering the window where the
effects might start to be noticed" Christina Romera€! told a national gathering of economists late 
on Saturdaya€l yes. Of course. But the little birdies are all telling me that the median member 
oftodaya€™s FOMC does not appear capable of understanding the magnitude of all the tightening that 
is still in the pipeline..

Start writing today. Use the button below to create your Substack and connect your publication with 
Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Start a Substack

AJs:

This strikes me as substantially premature. Throwing huge amounts of money at the creation of 
communities of engineering practice is likely, in the end, to create a quality of its own. The 
question, I think, is whether the Chinese government has the will and the resources to persist. And 
to the extent that there are a few clearly visible pathways to technological
developments’’the extent to which things are like rocket sciencea€”the odds of Chinaa€™ s success 
may well be better than Noah thinks:

Noah Smith: China's industrial policy has mostly been a flop: a€~Not the juggernaut that people 
thoughts!. ChinaS™ s leaders got the idea that they needed to throw resources at favored 
industriesS!. The amount of money China was throwing around had become much bigger (in absolute 
terms or relative to GDP) than anything Japan or
South Korea had ever spentS! focused on leapfrogging the U.S. and its allies in new high-tech 
fields... Made in China 2025 initiative.... China still doesnS™t look on track to achieve 
dominance.... AI... aerospace... top robot makers  ChinaS™ s bid to dominate the IT sector was 
quashed when Xi Jinping decided he didnS™t really like

the IT sector. [However,] China is on track to dominate the electric vehicle industry, and is an 
important player in railway equipments!. And of course, the biggest disappointment has been the 
semiconductor industry.  ChinaS™ s desire to make its own chips increased. But desire doesnS™t 
equal reality. A lot of the money that

ChinaS™ s government was hurling at the semiconductor industry seemed to wind up in the pockets of 
corrupt griftersS!. Mass production of high-end chips is still not happeningS!

The possibility that Microsoft may be able to solve the LLM SoehallucinationS□problem and so 
disrupt search in a way that Google cannot even attempt to do is, I think, a live one. Otherwise, I 
think this is premature. We really do not know enough about what these technologies will be to even 
begin starting to guess how individual companies will take advantage


of or be challenged by them:

Ben Thompson: AI & the Big Five: a€~Apple... a€oeSmart companies try to commoditize their 
productsa€™ complementsa€!a€D. Stable Diffusion is remarkable... because the model is surprisingly 
small.  Apple, to its immense credit, has seized this opportunity.a€! Metaa€! I think that AI is a 
massive opportunity for Meta and worth the

huge capital expenditures.... The long-term solution to ATT, though, is to build probabilistic 
modelsa€! by massive fleets of GPUs.  ATT hurt Meta more than any other companya€! but in the long 
run it should deepen Metaa€™ s moat. This level of investment simply isna€™ t viable fora€! thea€! 
also-rans in digital advertising^!.

Google.... And yet... there arena€™t any actual products.... Generative AI may, in the specific 
context of search, represent a disruptive innovation instead of a sustaining one.... Ia€™m not 
calling the top for Google; I did that previously and was hilariously wronga€!. Microsoft... seems 
the best placed of all.  Binga€! is like the Mac on the

eve of the iPhone: yes it contributes a fair bit of revenue...

I so do wish. Maranatha! Maranatha! Maranatha!:

Dan Shipper: The End of Organizing: a€~Note taking is building a relationship with a future version 
of yourselfa€!. For a long time, the way wea€™ ve tried to make this relationship work is by 
creating organizational systems. The best way to make sure future versions of ourselves had the 
right notes at the right time was by constructing
Rube Goldberg machines of tags, notebook hierarchies, and bi-directional linksa€!. But ultimately, 
the organizing solutions wea€™ ve built are brittle. We build and abandon new systems all the time, 
and rarely, if ever, go back to look at old notesa€!. Paying for a new notes tool is like signing 
up for a gym membership on January 1. You
know youa€™ 11 abandon it, but the money you spend soothes your anxiety about not making the most 
of what you have. AI changes this equationa€!. When you have intelligence at your disposal, you 
dona€™ t need to organizea€!

I think there is an implicit assumption inside here that Tyler needs to examine: "reading" is not 
one thing. I there are several very different processes that take place between the ears, depending 
on the kind of thing that one is reading. And I do not think we know enough about how we acquire 
the ability to make these different processes work. Putting a copy of Plato in
front of somebody is not sufficient:

Tyler Cowen: How AI will reshape politics, education, creativity, & pet ownership: a€~Reading 
Plato, Kant, or Adam Smith gives you a sense of a vision and big-picture thinking that the Ais 
won't be able to give us for some while a€” maybe never. [If] simply scanning the internet for 
facts, the AI might give you a very good digesta€! and
you'll then seek out thea€! radically original big-picture thinkinga€!. ChatGPT and other devices 
are smart in a way humans are not. So you have to up your estimate on the possibility of other 
kinds of intelligences being quite impressive. ChatGPT gets smart in large part because it has so 
much training data. [In terms of] just having access to
a  lot of training data in your environment, it seems a lot of animals, plants, etc. have that. So 
your estimate about how easy it is for intelligence to evolve should go up somewhat. That means the 
number of intelligent aliens out there should be higher than it was a few months agoa€!

As I said above, the a€cemoderatesa€n in the Republican caucus need to make it very clear to Kevin 
McCarthy that for him job number one is helping them get reelected in their swing district in two 
years, not legislatinga€’’since that is not going to happena€”and not appeasing the Handmaid 
Caucus. Holding up the Rules Package for three days until they get their
own Secret Protocol seems the best way to do that:

Jake Sherman & John Bresnahan: Punchbowl News AM: a€~The first test of the Speaker Kevin McCarthy 
era will come tonight as House Republicans try to pass their rules package for the 118th Congress. 
It should get through, but after last weeka€™ s excruciating fiasco on the floor, House Republicans 
cana€™ t take anything for
granteda€!. Yherea€™ s also a secret three-page addendum that McCarthy and his allies hashed out 
during several days of grueling negotiationsa€!. Tony Gonzales (Texas) and Nancy Mace (S.C.)a€! 
complaina€! McCarthy gave up too mucha€!. Moderates feel like they need to stand up to GOP 
leaderships™ s catering to conservatives
now                                                                                                 
                                                          or else theya€™ll get steamrolled for the 
next two yearsa€!. Furthermore, there are potential cuts to defense spending as part of the deal 
with McCarthya€™ s opponents, which rankles hawksa€!. Social programs will get slashed by an ever 
bigger margin, maybe $100 billion or more. Vulnerable Republicans will have to vote for these
cuts knowing they wona€™ t go anywhere in the Senatea€!

Supercool! Underlines how little we know, still, about materials science:

David L. Chandler: Riddle solved: Why was Roman concrete so durable?: a€~Researchers have assumed 
that the key to the ancient concretea€™ s durability was based on one ingredient: pozzolanic 
material such as volcanic ash... shipped all across the vast Roman empire to be used in 
construction... described as a key ingredient.  [Also]

]millimeter-scale bright white mineral features... a€oelime clastsa€D... "not found in modern 
concrete formulations, so why are they present in these ancient materials?a€O... Hot-mixed concrete 
that incorporated both ancient and modern formulations, deliberately cracked them, and then ran 
water.  Within two weeks the cracks had

completely healed and the water could no longer flow...

Give a gift subscription

Get 33% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

