Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth

This is the best testimony that I have seen this month. In America today, we do not have enough 
within-the-household work to be done nor a sharp enough gendered division of labor for it to make 
any sense at all no matter what your theory of society to confine large groups of people
to household production and care work. Yet in America today there is enough care work and household 
production to be done that it makes no sense to confine anybody to working full-time 
outside-the-home with zero flexibility. The neoclassical economist in me wants to believe that
private agents seeking win-win bargains would have figured out these workforce and work-structuring 
questions in an optimal way long before now. But it manifestly is not true:

Michelle Holder: House Select Committee on Economic Disparity and Fairness in Growth: a€~Fully 
investing in paid leave will spur economic growth through increased labor force participation and 
improved productivity today, and through enhanced human
capital in the workers of tomorrow. Many people in the United States play dual roles as workers in 
the paid labor force and as unpaid caregivers to their loved ones. Occasionally, workers need weeks 
or months away from work to devote themselves fully to
caregiving, such as when a new child enters a family through birth, adoption, or foster placement, 
or when a loved one struggles with a serious medical condition such as cancer, or even when workers 
themselves experience a serious medical needa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/house-select-committee-on-economic-disparity-and-fairness-in-growth/>

This is the best conference panel I have watched this month. Discrimination continues to be an 
incredibly stubborn fact in our economy and society even though next to nobody will ever confess up 
to wishing to discriminate. As best as I can tell, most discrimination that takes place
takes place either because of leisure and past-employment social-network structure, and because of 
a widespread albeit largely false belief that statistical discrimination is somehow 
wealth-maximizing:

Kate Bahn & al.: Discrimination in the Labor Market: a€~A Model of Occupational Licensing and 
Statistical Discrimination, Bobby (Wing Yin) Chung... [and] Peter Blair.... The Civil Rights 
Enforcement and Racial Wage Gap, Jamein P. Cunningham... [and]
Jose Joaquin Lopez.... A Jury of One's Peers: The Effects of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 on Jury 
Trials, Jose Joaquin Lopez.... The Rise of Guard Labor in the United States: Evidence from Local 
Labor Markets, Anastasia Wilson... [and] Luke Petacha€!

LINK: <https://www.southerneconomic.org/session-details/?conferenceld=7&eventld=3570>

Continuing the Child Tax Credit should, I think, be the highest social policy priority of the Biden 
administration. And I am reinforced in my belief along these lines by the fact that Austin Clemmons 
agrees:

Austin Clemens: 'The expanded CTC has to be made permanenta€!. [The] Financial Pulse Survey shows 
that the expanded CTC helped alleviate food insecurity and healthcare insecurity 
«https://t.co/C4cnskysXY»a€!
LINK:

Austin Clemens @AustinClemens2

The expanded CTC has to be made permanent. @finhealthnet's Financial Pulse Survey shows that the 
expanded CTC helped alleviate food insecurity and healthcare insecurity #finhealthpulse


finhealthnetwork.orgPulse Points Fall 2021: How Families Are Using Child Tax Credits a€” Financial 
Health NetworkNew Pulse transactional data suggests that child tax credit payments have had a 
positive financial impact on recipients, particularly those who experienced hardship
in the past.

8:13 PM r™ Dec 9,2021

2Likesl Re tweet
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

Trying to make sense in historical perspective of the extraordinarily uneven progress of feminism 
across the globe in the 20th century. My big regret is that it looks like Alice Evansa€~s big book 
on this is likely to be more than five years in the future. But who am I to talk?:

Alice Evans: Ten Thousand Years of Patriarchy. a€~What explains the Great Gender Divergence?a€!. 
Three kinds of agricultural societiesa€! patrilineal, bilateral and matrilineal. In Eurasia, 
patrilineal communities transmitted land and herds to sonsa€! tight
restrictions on womena€™ s sexuality and mobilitya€!. Horticultural societies in Southern Africa 
and Southeast Asia tended to be matrilinealaC! less concern for paternity, [so] women moved 
freelya€!. The Middle East and South Asia grew even more
endogamous (through cousin marriage and caste). Since rumours of female promiscuity would dishonour 
the entire lineage, women were increasingly cloistered, especially in socially diverse towns. 
Meanwhile in medieval Europe emerged several latent
advantages: nuclear families and participatory assembliesa€!. Patriarchal dominance was not 
geographically determined, but was also a product of cultural evolutiona€!. Patriarchy was cemented 
in Eurasia by the emergence over 2000 years ago of religions
with   Big Gods meting out supernatural punishmenta€!. Progress towards gender equality was 
contingent on strong growth, weak systems of kinship and democratisation. If prevailing wages are 
too low to compensate for the loss of honour, female seclusion
persists (as in much of India, Iran and Egypt). These effects are compounded by political 
trajectoriesa€!

LINK: <https://www.draliceevans.com/post/ten-thousand-vears-of-patriarchv-l>

The slaveholders of the revolutionary-war generation knew damn well what they were doing, and that 
they should not be doing it. It took two more generations, the cotton gin, and the extraordinary 
demand for cotton from the industrial revolution-era factories of new and old England
to put so much material wealth pressure on their greedy successors to make those greedy successors 
forget, or pretend to forget:

Robert Pleasants (1785): To George Washington: a€~Thy example & influence at this time, towards a 
general emancipation, would be as productive of real happiness to mankind, as thy Sword may have 
been: I can but wish therefore, that thou may not loose
the opertunity of Crowning the great Actions of thy Life, with the sattisfaction of, a€oedoing to 
Others as thou would (in the like Situation) be done by,a€D and finally transmit to future ages a 
Character, equally famous for thy Christian Virtues, as thy worldly
achievementsa€!. How inconsistant then will it appear to posterity, should it be recorded, that the 
Great General Washington, without fee or reward, had commanded the united forces of Americaa€! 
relieving those States from Tyranny & oppression: Yeta€!
keep      a number of People in absolute Slavery, who were by nature equally entitled to freedom as 
himselfa€!. a€oeGod will not be mocked,a€D and is still requiring from each of us, to, a€oedo 
justly, love mercy and walk humbly before hima€Da€!

LINK: <https://founders .archives .gov/documents/Washington/Q4-03-02-0384>

I remain absolutely flummoxed at this. So many people who I was sure would know better are viewing 
this economic recovery and its inflation through the template of the 1970s, rather than of the 
post-World War II demobilization or the Korean War-era mobilization for the Cold War.
Attempting to pull the economy in a very short time into a new structural configuration will, in a 
sticky-downward wage and price economy, get you inflation. But that inflation does not then as a 
rule become embedded in wage and price expectations. It does not lead to a stagflation
problem without special circumstances and bad luck. Those special circumstances and the bad luck 
are not even on the horizon. Here, however, we have Mike Hiltzik talking sense, and that somewhat 
reassures me:

Michael Hiltzik: Why Do We Fear Inflation?: a€~Therea€™ s a right way and a wrong way to think 
about inflation. Herea€™ s a right waya€!. There are no signs that the inflation surge showing up 
in the latest statistics is caused by sustained overheating of
the U.S. economy. The signs point to several short-term factors coming together all at oncea€!

LINK: <https://www.latimes .com/business/story/2021-11 
-26/right-way-and-wrong-way-to-think-about-inflation>

Jason Furman says a good deal of our current burst of inflation is transitory, and that it should 
not be useda€”as it is being useda€”to derail appropriate fiscal policy measures. It would have 
been nice to hear this from you at greater volume six months ago, Jason! One thing, however
puzzles me. I do not understand why Jason says the Fed should a€oecontinue to pivota€D. The Fed has 
not yet begun to pivot. The Fed is just preparing to pivot. And whether the Fed should start 
pivoting or not in any significant waya€”that is, or ought to be, data dependent:

Jason Furman: 'CPI up 0.8% in November, 6.8% for the last 12 months. A lot of that was volatile 
energy which is coming down. Core up 0.5%, or 4.9% for the last 12 months. What does this mean for 
workers? It hasn't been good so far. Real wage are

down about 1% since February 2020 and are 2.9% below trend.... Much better for lower-wage workers. 
POSITIVE PREDICTION: Monthly increases in CPI will come down a lot in the next few months. But core 
CPI will still be avg ~0.4/month for a

while. NORMATIVE: Monetary policy: Continue to pivot both because the large decline in 
unemployment/UI claims means we're closer to max employment & further from inflation goal. Fiscal 
policy needs to stay focused on our medium/long-term

problems, don't get distracted by this!a€!
LINK:

Jason Furman @jasonfurman

Using different time horizons can be useful. More recent data is both more up-to-date but also has 
more noise. Here are some horizons for core CPI at an annual rate: 1 month: 6.6% 3 months: 5.6% 6 
months: 5.5% 12 months: 5.0% 24 months: 3.3%

Core CPI Inflation

Percent Change. Annual Rate
12

Nov-21

10


8

6

4                              12-month

2

0

-2


-4 ■—

2010

11111                             

2012    2014    2016    2018    2020

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Macrobond; author's calculations.

1:51 PM a'™ Dec 10,2021

42Likes 17Retweets

I confess that I woulda€™ ve thought that by now the CDC woulda€™ ve implemented some of the 
lessons it ought to have learned from the past two years. But it really appears that it has not 
done so. This should be a very high priority for the Biden administration to fix, as rapidly
as possible:

Matthew Yglesias: The CDCa€™ s Vaccine Data Is All Wrong: a€~the answer to the riddle a€oeWhy is 
the CDCa€™ s vaccination count so bad?a€D turns out to be that actually nobody is countinga€l. You 
may be reported to them as two separate
individuals if you get different doses from different providersa€l. Not everyone has county of 
residence informational. In a methodological choice that I think was a mistake, they top code 
everything at 99.9%a€l. By doing so, they are obscuring the
underlying flaws in the dataa€l

LINK:


Slow Boring

The CPC's vaccine data is all wrong

As Florida experienced its very deadly Delta wave, the volume of deaths and hospitalizations there 
seemed inconsistent with the statea€™ s superficially average levels of vaccination. But as David 
Wallace-Wells pointed out, the official data actually a€oesuggested in some places
considerably more than 100 percent of local residents were vaccinated there, in some cases 200 
percent of local residents.a€D Smart people on the internet swiftly reached a consensus that this 
reflected the miscounting of seasonal residents or vaccine tourists. After all, before Ron
DeSantisa€™ political instincts led him to his current quasi-anti-vax posture, he was an early 
advocate of a more open, less bureaucratic approach to vaccine allocation. That meant a€oehead to 
Florida to get a shota€D seemed like a plausible option for a lot of affluent, vax-
enthusiastic peoplea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 103 likes A- 139 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

We have a small but pricey grocery store two blocks away. We have a big Safeway 10 blocks away from 
us. Minor trips thus do not require a car. Nor do trips to the coffee shop, or the cleaners. In a 
different America, it would be possible for this to be true of most of at least close-in
suburbia. But, regrettably, it is not:

Addison Del Mastro: Going Nowhere Fast'. a€~An intersection, and a Rorschach testa€!. What is going 
on here?a€! A land-use pattern that virtually requires car trips for nearly everythinga€!. What 
wea€™re seeing at this is really the opposite of
overcrowding. Ita€™ s a little like one of those noisemaker toys with a couple of marbles inside a 
sphere. If you shake it, the marbles are everywhere and it feels like ita€™ s full of them. But 
there are still just two. Theya€™re going nowhere fasta€!. Total
people  and total car trips are not directly related, and ita€™ s largely poor land use that makes 
them appear to bea€!

LINK:


Going Nowhere Fast

About 15 minutes from my home is a major intersection in Fairfax, Virginia. Therea€™ s a Korean 
supermarket on one corner, a bank and 7-11 on the other side, and another bank and a gas station on 
the other two corners. This is an intersection between U.S. 50, the original east-west
access route into Washington, D.C. and a major commercial strip in Fairfaxa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 2 comments A- Addison Del Mastro

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

