Subscribe now

CONDITION: Republican Idiocracy:

tl Alex Andreou Retweeted

Otto English 0

@Otto_English

Sean Spicer muddles D Day with the attack on Pearl
Harbor. And this guy wasn't even Trump's worst Press
Secretary.

Sean Spicer O

@seanspicer

Today is Dday. It only lives in infamy
if we remember and share the story


ot sacrifice with the next generation

#DDay

11:27 AM • 12/7/22 • Twitter for iPhone

11*99 AM . Dor 7 9099

Share

FOCUS: Aze Forlorn Hope Azt Was Vox.com:

"Advantage, blogosphere!" as Dan Dresner used to like to say. I order up a weblog post from Matt 
Yglesias, and he delivers, spectacularly! Read the whole thing! But here is a taste:

Matt Yglesias: What I learned co-founding Vox: a€~The current Vox management team or editorial 
staffa€! are doing a good job executing a reasonable strategya€”ita€™ s just not the strategy we 
set off witha€!. This post is my effort to unpack how we fell short of those aspirationsa€!. We 
wanted to cover a wide range of topics with more depth and more speed, taking advantage of digital 
tools but also the timelessness of the web....
We thought this was scalablea€!. This was basically wrong.  There were people ready and willing to 
do high-quality, fast-paced analytical journalism across a range of policy areas at the same level 
as the original group that came over from the Post, but it was a modest number, and many of them 
already had good jobs at other pubheations and were hard to poach. Training people who didna€™ t 
have the knack for it right off the bat was

just massively more difficulta€!. We didna€™ t have any a€oesecret saucea€D methodology we could 
reliably impart to new journalists to make them do work that was Ezra-esque....

There was and is an audience for the kind of broad explanatory journalism we wanted to do, there 
werena€™ t customers for it Voxa€™ s readers werena€™ t customers; Vox was an ad sales businessa€!. 
To get a really big web audience, you need broad distribution from Facebook and Google.  That 
meanta€! serv[ing] the needs of advertisersa€! the needs of the platformsa€! we just werena€™ t 
masters of our destinya€!. Most of

the media trends [people] deplore are direct consequences of Facebooka€™ s influence over 
journalism in the mid-2010s. Hard-core identity politics and simplistic socialism performed 
incredibly well on Facebook during this perioda€!.

The dream of executing a low-end disruption on the incumbent news media was also undermined by the 
fact that the New York Times just refused to be disrupteda€! Wea€! hoped that by not respecting the 
line between news and editorial, wea€™ d create a situation where our staff was considered 
unhireable by prestige news outletsa€!. [But] once Max and Amanda lefta€! it was cleara€! that 
a€oeget a good job offer from the New York
Timesa€D was a great capstone to a successful career at Voxa€!.

One of my most neoliberal shill beliefs is that journalists and academics and intellectuals tend to 
underestimate businesspeople because they underestimate how difficult this stuff all is. And I 
think that leads to errors of political judgmenta€!. Media enterprises are businesses, and they are 
subject to commercial forces and pressures. Thata€™ s not to excuse bad articles, which absolutely 
run, but it is to say that if your model of decision
making doesna€™t foreground the basic business model issues, youa€™re misjudging the situationa€!

As you all know perhaps too well, I am the audience for "explainer journalism": I want to buy the 
work of smart people who try to inform me about the worlda€”who will work for me, rather than for, 
in order, their sources, bosses, and advertisers.

Matta€™ s story is of a vox.com setting out to fight the good fight and tilt at the windmills, but 
winding up being ground very fine betwee n the millstones of the New York Times, Facebook, and 
Google. To these I would add a fourtha€”the tech funding structure, which requires that one aim for 
world domination rather than for filling onea€™ s niche and making a healthy profit.
The tech funding structure, first of all, means that you become subcontractors for Googlea€™ s and 
Facebooka€™ s ad businesses, because you are swinging for the fences rather than expanding 
explainer journalism at a sustainable rate while being profit-positive.

Becoming a Facebook subcontractor then meant, as Matt parodies the situation:

[Since] hard-core identity politics and simplistic socialism performed incredibly well on 
Facebooka€! people who had some authentic left-wing opinions found that writing on the subjects 
where they were the most left tended to generate the most traffica€!. So you ended up with this 
whole cohort of discourse structured around a€oels Bernie Sanders perfect in every way or is it 
problematic to vote for a white man?a€D as the only
possible lens for examining American politics and societya€!

That is greatly overstated. But not entirely ovestated. And that is not an explainer orientation to 
the world. So when Matt writes:

Therea€™ s another world in which Vox never launches, and Wonkblog at The Washington Post is built 
out into a somewhat more robust version of itself, a policy-oriented alternative to those kinds of 
politics-first D.C. publicationsa€!

I think: there is also a world in which Vox launches as a somewhat more robust version of Wonkblog, 
a policy-oriented alternative to politics-first D.C. publications, and is a smashing albeit niche 
successa€”go from the (old) New Republic to the (old) Washington Monthly, and then go twice as far 
in the same direction. Then I think that Vox threat would have had a significant impact on how the 
political-games-horserace publications did business, and we would
be in a better world.

Now dona€™ t get me wronga€”the current Vox.com is first-class, best-of-breeda€”but it is not the 
flourishing of explainer journalism that I would have wished to see. To say that its dominant mode 
is a€oeis Bernie Sanders perfect in every way or is it problematic to vote for a white man?a€D is 
far too extreme, but that resonant mode does make it difficult for it to fulfill what I see as its 
primary mission.
The thing that surprised me most was the roll of the New York Times as millstone, griding vox.com 
into dust.

That the New York Times did not want to be disrupted is no surprise.
That it succeeded in avoiding disruption still puzzles me.

For one thing, it is really surprising to me that it was able to hire talent away from vox.com.

When I think of the New York Times, I think of a€oeemails!a€n and a€oebut Jared and Ivanka are 
horrified and are working diligently to save us alla€D. I think of its coverage of issues I know 
well that almost invariably makes me wince. I think of things like:

David Yaffe-Bellany: How Sam Bankman-Frieda€™ s Crypto Empire Collapsed: Mr. Bankman-Fried said in 
an interview that he had expanded too fast and failed to see warning signs. But he shared few 
details about his handling ofFTX customersa€™ funds'. a€~In less than a week, the cryptocurrency 
billionaire Sam Bankman-Fried went from industry leader to industry villain, lost most of his 
fortune, saw his $32 billion company
plunge into bankruptcy and became the target of investigations by the Securities and Exchange 
Commission and the Justice Department. But in a wide-ranging interview on Sunday that stretched 
past midnight, he sounded surprisingly calm. a€oeYou woulda€™ ve thought that Ia€™ d be getting no 
sleep right now, and instead Ia€™ m getting some,a€D he said. a€oelt could be worse.a€D


The empire built by Mr. Bankman-Fried, who was once compared to titans of finance like John 
Pierpont Morgan and Warren Buffett, collapsed last week after a run on deposits left his crypto 
exchange, FTX, with an $8 billion shortfall, forcing the firm to file for bankruptcy. The damage 
has rippled across the industry, destabilizing other crypto companies and sowing widespread 
distrust of the technology. Besides some Twitter posts,
messages to employees and occasional texts to reporters, Mr. Bankman-Fried, 30, has said little 
publicly over the last week. In the interview on Sunday, he voiced numerous regrets over the 
collapse of FTX. But he would offer only limited details about the central questions swirling 
around him: whether FTX improperly used billions of dollars of customer funds to prop up a trading 
firm that he also founded, Alameda Researcha€!

That is not what the lead of that story should have been. The lead should have been something like 
this: Sam Bankman-Frieda€™s FTX collapsed because Changpeng Zhao decided he was no longer 
interested in supporting FTXa€™s FTT token, and cashed in Binancea€™s $500 million. And it turned 
out that $8 billion of customersa€™ money that FTX had no legal right to touch had been stolen and 
remains missing.

That is a very different lead from what we get, which is:

1. Crypto financial empire collapses

2. Sam Bankman-Fried says he expanded too fast and failed to see warning signs

3. Few details about the a€oehandling of customer fundsa€D revealed [NOTE: d€oehandlinga€^, not 
a€oedisappearance of $8 billion]

4. In less than a weak SBF does a heel turn

5. FTX bankruptcy

6. SEC and Justice investigations

7. SBF sounded calm, getting some sleep

8. SBF once compared to titans of finance

9. An $8 billion a€oeshortfalla€n

10. Other crypto exchanges destabilized

11. SBF has said little

12. SBF in an interview voiced numerous regrets

And then, finally, in paragraph 5: a€ce whether FTX improperly used billions of dollars of customer 
fundsaCd. But there should not be a a€cewhethera€D. The word should be a€cehowa€O or a€oewhya€C.

Things like this make me, frankly, embarrassed for those who work for the New York Timesa€’’having 
working for your sources first at the core of the institutional culture, with a€oepuff piecesa€d 
and a€cebeat sweetenersa€d as a major genre of your organization^™ s work. I do have a very strong 
sense that those who moved from vox.com to the New York Times will in the future look back on how 
they did their best work at vox.com, and wonder why they
jumped.

There is a sense in whicha€! how do I put thisa€! The New York Times is where intellect goes to 
die. I have said that when Jackie Calmes moved from the Wall Street Journal to the New York Times 
she rapidly went from one of my must-reads to a rarely-read. My friend Dan Froomkin interviewed 
her, and she explained why:

• aCcePart of is the fault of beat reportingaCI the pressures youa€™ re under to maintain 
sourcesa€Da€!

•  a€oel felt more pressure of the bothsidesism sort coming from the New York Timesthwa I did from 
the Wall Street Journala€\. The New York Timesa€\ bends over backwards to give both sides their 
duea€!. If youa€™re saying Republicans do something wrong you have to indicate that Democrats bear 
some blame tooa€da€!

It seems to me that it would be much more fun to write explainers than clickbait or beat 
sweeteners, and find yourself working for your sources first, your bosses second, the advertisers 
third, and the reader not at all. And yet I have no reason to disbelieve Matta€™ s observation that 
vox.com could not hold onto reporters by promising them a better-suited if worse-paid place to be 
their best selves.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: Republicans: Base & Superstructure:

I think the answer is that the supply of intellectuals has a very wide spectrum and a very deep 
bench. For any politician who can mobilize enough voters with button, pushing brother, to win an 
election, there will be an ample supply of intellectuals willing to dress the hippopotamus up in a 
tutu. Or maybe I should say: an ample supply of pundits. I dona€™ t think Hazony, Vermeule, or 
Ahmari are intellectuals because I have no evidence that any of them has ever
been moved by argument:

Damon Linker: All About That Republican Base: a€~How long will conservative intellectuals abide its 
illiberal and anti-democratic tendencies?a€! What is the opposite of the base? Party a€oeelitesa€d? 
Maybe. But we need to distinguish among different groups of elites: funders/donors (Peter Thiel; 
Charles Koch; Paul Singer); a€oeentertainersa€n (Sean Hannity, Tucker Carlson, Laura Ingraham, Ben 
Shapiro); and
intellectuals/pundits (Yoram Hazony, Adrian Vermeule, Sohrab Ahmari). Note that in listing 
intellectuals/pundits, I didna€™ t mention Jonah Goldberg, Bill Kristol, or David Brooksa€!. They 
have fallen far enough out of step with the Republican basea€!. I was never as prominent a writer 
as Goldberg, Kristol, or Brooks, but they were in some sense my models.a€!

I set out to write a column titled a€oeFatherhood 2002,a€D about how my wife and I aspired to have 
an egalitarian family in which each of us equally immersed ourselves in the joys and tribulations 
of caring for a newborn babya€!. Almost immediately, angry letters began streaming into the 
magazinea€™ s officesa€!. We published eight of thema€! not really representative of the responses 
we receiveda€!. The many letters we
didna€™ t publish werea€! the insult-laden polemics that would appear at the time in online comment 
threads and today in right-wing swarms on Twitter and other social-media platformsa€!.

Reading all of those angry, sometimes vulgar, letters from First Things readers attacking me and 
the magazine, accusing us of abandoning the properly gendered outlook on the family, supposedly 
rooted in ScriptureaCI left me feeling deeply alienated from the place I workeda€! in terms of the 
workplacea€™ s telosa€”its end or goal. I was an editor for an opinion magazine. But who were its 
readers? What did its a€cebasea€D believe
about the world? How did I feel about devoting myself and my talents to serving this group of 
people and its prejudices, which I now began to wonder if I shared?a€!

Well, one of you of the role of the editor of an opinion magazine is that one is an apostle to the 
gentiles after alla€”until the gentiles stone you, and Richard John Neuhaus demands that you leave. 
But that requires a very very solid rock of selfhood to anchor yourself. That rock tends not to be 
found in the Catholic, but in the Protestant tradition: Hier stehe, ich kann nicht anders.

Leave a comment

IMAGES: Lensa: Thoughtful:


How anyone can make this scene work is beyond me!
Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:


•  Colby Smith & Caitlin Gilbert: US unemployment rate set to surpass 5.5%, economists predict: 
a€~FT/IGM poll suggests waning optimism the Fed can tame inflation without causing material job 
losses Of the 45 economists surveyed, 85% project that the National Bureau of Economic Research a€” 
the arbiter of when recessions begin and end a€” will declare one by next yeara€!

•  Jonathan Gitlin: New cars too expensive? This solar-powered EV will cost $6,250: a€~Squad says 
in sunny climes like Las Vegas you may never need to charge ita€!

•  Dan Vergano: Chinaa€™ s zero-covid policy wona€™ t work forever. But therea€™ s no easy way out 
of it: a€~The government is hinting it will loosen restrictions, but low immunity levels in the 
population and a lack of hospital capacity are major   liabilitiesa€!

• Ben Thompson & Ben Gilbert & David Rosenthal: Stratecherya€!

•  Kui Mwai: Former Governor Nikki Haley Says Georgia-Born Senator Raphael Warnock Should Be 
Deported: a€~Haley joined Republican candidate Herschel Walker's bus tour of Georgia this past 
Sunday to support his campaign andbash Democrat incumbent Sen. Raphael Warnock.

•  Jonathan Bernstein: Republicans Havena€™t Solved Their Herschel Walker: a€~The partya€™ s 
obsession with phony scandals deters strong candidates from running and undermines lawmakers with 
serious policy goalsa€!

•  Joan Walsh: Warnock Wins, But Jim Crow and Liberal Self-Sabotage Are Still Alive in Georgia: 
a€~And the coalition that helped defeat the GOP is fractured and needs attentiona€!

• Steve M.: In a Sane America, the Georgia Senate Race Would Have Been a Rout: a€~Tm happya€! but 
it shouldn't have been closea€!. Herschel Walkera€! won 48.5% of the vote in November and 48.6% in 
the runoffa€!. Grievances still motivate Republican votersa€!. Imagine this race plus a GOP that 
didn't disdain early votinga€! a Walker endorsement from Saint Ron DeSantis. He could have wona€!
Donate Subscriptions

AJs

In the long 20th century, the great social disruptions produced by Schumpeterian creative 
destruction were largely counterbalanced in their effects by extraordinary increases in wealth. Now 
Kevin Daly and Tadas Gedminas of Goldman Sachs tells us in which social disruptions 
continuea€’’fueled by global warming as well as technological changea€”but income growth and thus 
economic opportunity rapidly slows. A wolf-fanged century, perhaps?:

Chris Anstey: Ditch the Sunglasses: a€~Looking out to 2075, Kevin Daly and Tadas Gedminas caution 
that world growth, which has already dimmed over the decades, is heading further south. Much of the 
slowdown is thanks to a deceleration in population gainsa€!. The duo highlights that a slowdown in 
productivity has been seen over the past several years in both emerging markets a€” which are 
further away from the frontiers of
technology and so have more catching-up potential a€” as well as developed economies. That suggests 
that the culprit is a weakening in the globalization of trade, they wrote. This is something that 
goes beyond just shipments of goods, they added a€” a€oeit encapsulates the growth in the 
cross-border movement of goods, capital, people, technologies, data, and ideas.a€D a€oelt seems 
unlikely that the global economy will regain the
rates of productivity growth achieved during the 2000-2010 decade,a€D Daly and Gedminas said. 
a€oeMoreover, the possibility of an outright reversal is a key risk to the global outlook.a€Da€! As 
for economic rankings by size, the top three in 2075 are projected to be China, India and the US, 
having just been overtaken by the South Asian gianta€!

Another convert to Pikettya€™ s theory of a a€oeBrahmin Lefta€d:

Ed Luce: Americaa€™ s shipwrecked working class: d€~Union Joea€™ Biden is not quite the deliverer 
he vowed to be: a€~Laboura€™ s share of US national income steadily droppeda€L The shrinking 
corners of America that are still unionised are mostly in jobs where they are least needed, such as 
the police and prisonsa€!. This trend is deeper than whether Trump or Biden is on the ballot in 
2024a€L Democrats are the party of the
campus with a cultural agenda that alienates a rising share of uneducated whites and non-whites, 
and Republicans who are skilled at harvesting blue-collar resentment of elites who pay little more 
than lip service to their needsa€!

I am very glad to see somebody saying it. I was starting to think I might be crazy:

Aaron Rupar & Noah Berlatsky: Ron DeSantis is not moderate: a€~Don't be fooled by Elon Musk and 
National Reviewa€!. DeSantis doesna€™ t paint himself orange and is a professional politician 
rather than a reality TV star. That much is true. But in historical terms, and in relationship to 
the values and policy preferences of the American electorate, he is not normal or moderatea€!. That 
DeSantis may run against Trump
shouldna€™ t distract us from the fact that he is consciously dedicated to imitating and extending 
Trumpism. The people pushing DeSantis as normal dona€™ t oppose Trump because they dislike his 
policies or his methods. They oppose Trump because he didna€™t impose those policies and methods 
forcefully and successfully enougha€!. The right doesna€™t want a€cemoderatea€D or a€oenormal.a€n 
The base a€” and not just
the   base a€” likes the Trumpian style of rage and hate all the time. They like the idea of 
disenfranchising everyone who might oppose thema€!. From the perspective of the National Review, 
the big problem with Trump isna€™ t that hea€™ s a bigot; theya€™re bigots too. It isna€™ t that 
hea€™ s a fascist; they think fascism is fine. The problem is that he keeps losinga€!

Yes, the media-industrial-advertising complex continues to be a major threat to America and it's 
prosperity. Any more questions.?:

Heather Cox Richardson: December 6,2022: a€~Biden... undercuts]] the radical right by ignoring its 
demands and demonstrating an America in which everyone works together to solve our biggest 
problems. His trip to Arizona... about a€oethe American manufacturing boom.... But reporters 
immediately asked if President Biden would visit the border in Arizona, bowing to a right-wing 
talking point.  The news from the right-wing

faction in the nation often seems to steal the oxygen from the sober, stable politicians trying to 
address real issues...


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

