Condition: FREEZING

A hard freeze in Berkeley is NOT what I signed up for. I hope we brought the banana tree inside in 
timea€!

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

First: Economic Creative Destruction in Los Angeles, 1989-1993

The stand-down from the Cold War was the first business cycle since the Great Depression to have 
even a semi-severe effect on Greater Los Angeles: IIRC, the regional unemployment rate rose by 
4%-points. IIRC, half of the elevation was eliminated by, eventually, new industries other than 
aerospace moving in; and half by people moving out.

FRED    Unemployment Rate in Orange County, CA


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Picture:

Hnw II-  £ niitrnmPQ rnmnarp tn la^t winter


■ Cases Hospitalizations ■ Deaths


July 1, 2021             Oct. 1                 Dec. 29

Source: New York Times database

Source: David Leonhardt

Very Briefly Noted:

• Wikipedia: Parasocial Interaction: a€~A parasocial interactional becomes a parasocial 
relationship after repeated exposure to the media persona causes the media user to develop 
illusions of intimacy, friendship, and identification^!. Social media introduces additional 
opportunities for parasocial relationships to intensify because it provides more opportunities for 
intimate,
reciprocal, and frequent interactions between the user and persona€! 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parasocial interaction>

• Alan Cole: Winnie the Pooh Should Have Been Free Decades Ago: a€~Copyright doesna€™ t need 95 
years to get the job donea€! 
<https://fullstackeconomics.com/winnie-the-pooh-should-have-been-free-decades-ago/>

•  Mark D. Levine: a€™ "Who is filling up the hospitals^} as omicron surges? Answer: ita€™ s still 
the unvaccinateda€! 32 times more likely to land in the hospital vs. vaccinated. You dona€™ t want 
those odds. Get vaxa€™ d now:

Mark D. Levine @MarkLevineNYC

Who is filling up the hospitals in NYC as omicron surges? Answer: it's still the unvaccinated. They 
are now *32* times more likely to land in the hospital vs. vaccinated. You don't want those odds. 
Get vax'd now, vax4nvc.nyc.gov

Ho$ptah2at>on$ per 100.000 people (age adjusted. for week ending on listed date)           Recent 
data may be incomplete

12:17 AM r™ Dec 31,2021

7,721Likes3,051Retweets

Paragraphs:

Harold James: The Clash of Cultures: a€~Before the COVIDa€“19 pandemic, the terms of every 
political debate were set by four binary choices: globalization versus the nation-state; capitalism 
versus socialism; technocracy versus populism; and multilateralism versus geopolitics. These 
debates are now outdated. In each case, there is a glaring need for different optionsa€!. We need an
intellectual declutteringa€!. In place of an attic cleanup would be a debate to identify defunct 
conceptsa€!. Culture wars feed on old, empty nostrums. To stop the useless fighting, we need to 
discard anything that does not spark creativitya€!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/clash-of-cultures-fueling-political-dysfunction-by-har
old-james-2022-01>


Jens van a€™t Klooster: Technocratic Keynesianism: A Paradigm Shift without Legislative Change: 
a€~A move away from the market liberal paradigm that informed the 1992 European Economic and 
Monetary Union (EMU). The 1992 EMU combines a highly restrictive attitude to public money creation 
with a permissive laissez-faire attitude to private credit moneya€!. EU technocrats have
abandoned key tenetsa€!. The European Central Bank provides targeted and large-scale support for 
pandemic-related fiscal expenditures. Banking regulators and supervisors actively guide the 
allocation of credit with an eye to its economic and environmental impact. However, constitutional 
structures lag ideational shifts and the new technocracy is haunted by issues of legality and

legitimacya€!. Policymakers engage in strategic ambiguity: the policies are justified in terms of 
both new economic policy priorities, as well as by reference to the instruments and goals of the 
earlier market liberal paradigma€!
LINK: <https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/13563467.2021.2Q13791>

Nate Silver: a€™ Only in the 13th paragraph do you learn that only about 300 people are 
hospitalized with COVID on an island of 3 million, which is exceptionally good news and testament 
to the power of the vaccinesa€!. Frances Robles: Puerto Rico Faces Staggering Covid Case Explosion: 
a€~The island had a 4,600 percent increase in cases in recent weeks after mounting one of the
nationa€™ s most successful vaccination campaignsa€!. Daily case count had surpassed ll,000a€!. 
Armed with her vaccine passport and a giddy urge to celebrate the holiday seasona€!. Three days 
later, she was sick with Covida€‘T9, one of about 2,000 people who fell ill as a result of the 
two-day event. a€oeWe did so well; we followed the rules ,a€D said Ms. Delgado, a 53-year-old 
interior
designer. a€oeWe followed the mask mandate. Our vaccination rate was so high that we let our guard 
down. The second Christmas came, we were like, a€~Wea€™re going to party !a€™ a€D The superspreader 
concert helped usher in an explosion of Covida€“19 cases in Puerto Rico, which until then had been 
celebrating one of the most successful vaccination campaigns in the United
Statesa€!.. While the Omicron variant has besieged the entire country, it is especially worrisome 
in Puerto Ricoa€!. Rafael Irizarry, a Harvard University statistician who keeps a dashboard of 
Puerto Rico Covida€“19 data, tweeted the daunting facts: A third of all coronavirus cases the 
island has recorded since the start of the pandemic occurred in the past month. The number of cases 
per
100,000 residents jumped to 225, from three, in three weeks. In December, the number of 
hospitalizations doubleda€”twicea€!

LINK: <https ://www.nytimes .com/2022/01/02/us/coronavirus-puerto-rico .html>

David French: The Places Where Truth Goes To Die: a€~How do I make my point in a way that skeptical 
and hostile readers will hear it and consider it, rather than simply dismissing it out of hand as 
the bigoted rantings of a hateful Evangelical? After all, I dona€™ t just want to be heard. I want 
to persuade. I believe what Ia€™ m saying is true, and I want readers to at least consider my
wordsa€!

LINK:

The Places Where Truth Goes To Die

Late last week I had an experience thata€™ s both completely normal and fundamentally absurd. It 
was thisa€“I spent a ridiculous amount of time agonizing over the wording of a simple Twitter 
thread. I struggled to use exactly the right words to express what should be a completely normal 
and reasonable pointa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 262 likes A- 657 comments A- David French


Leave a comment

Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support 
my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below

Somewhat bizarrely, people on Twitter are making me think that there are, actually, people out 
there who think the defense of slavery was THE principal cause of the American Revolution, rather 
than just A principal cause. I had thought that the historical process had produced enough 
whitewashing that it was important to put a stake in the ground for the a€ceAa€D; I had not thought 
it was
important to put a stake in the ground against the a€oeTHEa€n.

After all, the conventional story of the American Founding is that it has two moments: July 4,1776; 
and July 3,1863a€”with the second and its attendant Blood Sacrifice of 400,000 young men to repair 
the flaws and errors of the first as what made us who we are today, and made us not completely 
unworthy to stand in the sight of the LORD, that it may go well with us. The glory and triumph of
Nikole Hannah-Jones and company is their rightful and just adding of a€oeAugust 25,1619a€D to the 
1776 and 1863 dates:

American Nationalisms & the American Revolution

There were three flashpoints for the American Revolution: Virginia, Philadelphia, and Boston, of 
which Boston was the hottest.

1.Virginia was the seat of the slaveholders, exercising dominion, and their dominion made them 
terrified both that Westminster might reduce them to the status of slaves, and also that 
Westminstera€’’composed entirely of people whose benefits from slavery were indirecta€’’might in a 
fit of morality take their slaves away from them. Cf. Edmund S. Morgan: American Slavery, American
Freedom

2. Philadelphia was the seat of powerful mercantile fears that Britain's long-run object was to 
treat the colonies, well, like coloniesa€”to extract as much as possible from them, and keep them 
poor as sources of imperial wealth.

3. Boston was the seat both of mercantile fears, and also of a very strong anti-aristocratic 
pro-congregationalist utopian quasi- and actually religious current: that America was tasked by the 
LORD to be a Godly utopia, but that British rule was turning New England into, well, a New 
Englanda€”with near-serfs on the one hand and aristocrats on the other, the latter of whose power 
and wealth
would come from their connections to the corrupt Court and Parliament.

Boston's attitude toward Virginia was one of suspicion. I keep coming back to Abigail Smith Adams 
writing to her husband John Adams in the early spring of 1776:

Abigail Smith Adams: "Virginia.... Are not the Gentery Lords and the common people vassals, are 
they not like the uncivilized Natives Brittain represents us to be? I hope their Riffel Men who 
have shewen themselves very savage and even Blood thirsty; are not a specimen of the Generality of 
the people.  I have sometimes been ready to think that the passion for

Liberty cannot be Eaquelly Strong in the Breasts of those who have been accustomed to deprive their 
fellow Creatures of theirs. Of this I am certain: that it is not founded upon that generous and 
Christian principal of doing to others as we would that others should do unto us."
Abigail Smith Adams is not sure whether or not a Boston yoked as a junior partner to Virginia might 
not be in a worse pickle than a Boston under the thumb of Westminster. She, at least, is not going 
to war for the sake of protecting slavery.

LINK:


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

American Nationalisms & the American Revolution

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”I really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhilea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 comment A- Brad DeLong

LINK:


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

American Nationalisms & the American Revolution

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publicationa€”I really would like to collect enough from it to 
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhilea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 comment A- Brad DeLong
LINK:

@NGruenl @M Gauche I think he is just confused and, well, ignorant. There were three flashpoints 
for the revolution: Virginia, Philadelphia, and Boston, of which Boston was the hottest. Virginia 
was the seat of the slaveholders, exercising dominion, and their dominion made them terrified... 1/
2:29 PM r™ Jan 1,2022

1 Like 1 Retweet

