Subscribe now

FIRST: Yet Another Attempt at a Better a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D Elevator Pitcha€!

Before our modern age, human technological knowledge crept forward at only the pace of a glacier. A 
typical century would see technology advance by little. Perhaps the population at the end of the 
century could have lived 5% better than those at the starta€”if the population had stayed the same.
Preorder "Slouching Towards Utopia"

In this environment, Malthusian forces were dominant. The only way for women to have durable social 
power was to be the mothers of surviving sons, and even with high fertility more than a quarter saw 
all their sons die, so better nutrition would lead them to try harder. Thus the population grew by 
10% in an average century, and so smaller farm sizes offset better technology and kept the real 
income of the typical human much the same.
And so human psychology, human sociology, and human polities stayed much the same, with substantial 
changes visible only if one took the long-duration viewpoint of millennia.

This frozen glacial creep of economic history came to an end in 1870. The ice had been cracking 
beforehand, over 1500 to 1870. But after 1870 saw the roaring of the cataract. In every single 
generation after 1870 technological change was so fast and the seizing of opportunities by the 
market economy so rapid that the economy revolutionized itself in a generation, and then did so 
again, every single generation. This was the story at least until 2010. (After which,
a new story may have begun.)

The repeated, sequential, Schumpeterian creative-destruction economic revolutions meant that all 
was solid melted into aira€”all established patterns and orders were steamed awaya€”and while men 
(and women) were not compelled to face with sober senses their real conditions of life and 
relations with one another, they did have to try to build new institutions to manage the problems 
and opportunities of production, distribution, and utilization that the
onrushing technological cornucopia brought.

PriAdrinh vnn MavAV caid that fbiA marlrAt pprinnmu nnnld nrndnnA nnAmial nrncrmritv hut nnthincr 
mnrp' twintT tn charm and manacrA it tn nrndnnA cnnial inctinA ac WAII wnnld fail dActrnv 
nrnenAritv and nut nc nn thA mad tn WAII CArfdnnr and cn thA watnhnznrd had tn KA a^npfhA marLd 
crivAth thn mar IZA! talzAfh UWQV hlAtcnrl HA th A numA nf thA rnarVAf                              
                          II-1


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

267 America’s Peacetime Inflation: The 1970s

12% T


Fig. 6.9 Actual GDP deflator inflation, and previous year's forecast

Very Briefly Noted:

• Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels (1848): Manifest der Kommunistischen Partei <https://oil 
.libertyfund,org/page/marx-manifest#bourgeois>

• Mindy Carlson: Her Dying Day <https ://mindycarlson.com/her-dying-day/>

•  Vanessa Lobue: Why Cana€™ t We Remember Being Born or Our First Words?'. a€~First memoriesa€! 
are all autobiographicala€! and they typically didna€™ t happen before the age of 2 or 3a€! 
infantile amnesia. But why cana€™ t we remember the things that happened to us when we were 
infants?a€! 
<https://arstechnica.com/science/2022/06/why-cant-we-remember-being-born-or-our-first-words/>

• Sylvia Varnham Oa€™ Regan: Meta Scales Back AR Glasses Plan Amid Reality Labs Shakeup 
<https://www.theinformation.com/articles/meta-scales-back-ar-glasses-plan-amid-reality-labs-shakeup?
rc=b4kz7m>

•  Robby Porter: : We Need PEPS More than STEM'. a€~Forget about STEM for a minute, what we need is 
PEPS a€’’philosophy, economics, and political sciencea€’’humanity is desperate for new inventions 
from these fieldsa€! <https://vtdigger.org/2018/05/06/robby-porter-need-peps-stem/>

• John Quiggin: The Three-Party System in France & Australia: a€~The breakdown of a two (dominant) 
party system in which power alternated between hard (Thatcher) and soft (Clinton) versions of 
neoliberalisma€!. Therea€™ s no longer enough support to maintain two neoliberal parties, so the 
natural outcome is a three-party system, with Trumpists, neoliberals and a left coalitiona€!. In 
political systems set up for two parties, this creates a lot of
instabilitya€! 
<https://crookedtimber.org/2022/06/06/the-three-party-system-in-france-and-australia/>


•  Martin Sandbu: Economic Thinking Is at a Crucial Inflection Poinf. a€~The market-friendly 
governing philosophy that triumphed in the 1980s is on the defensivea€!. When things feel 
intolerable, people blame the status quo and demand change. In the 1970s that meant deregulating a 
rigid economy. Today it may mean re-regulating an unchained onea€L The current inflationary surge 
overshadows the triumph of a labour market that makes it easy
to find better jobsa€! <https://www.ft.com/content/4575b986-ef 1 !-478d-a7e2-045 lae7lbOel>

• Paul Krugman: Elon Musk, Mars & the Modern Economy 
<https7/me^ging2Customznewslettei^Ytinies₂com/t^plate/oakv2?CCP/yDj^^

• David Singh Grewal: The Breakdown of Neoliberalism as Foreign Policy Agenda <https://email 
.hewlett.Org/t/ViewEmail/t/707246A252454B 182540EF23F30FEDED/3C79567D312FB707D08BC3D516C A522B 
?alternativeLink=False>

• Chad Orzel: Many Worlds, but too Much Metaphor <https://www.forbes 
.com/sites/chadorzel/2019/09/17/many-worlds-but-too-much-metaphor/?sh=7e428b4e625d>

• Ross Douthat: We Cana€™ t Be Ukraine Hawks Forever 
<https://www.nytimes.eom/2022/06/04/opinion/ukraine-russia-putin-war.html?referringSource=articleSha
re>

•  Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution'. a€~One goal 
of my book is to resurrect the term a€oeSecond Worlda€D and to apply it to Europea€™ s periphery 
before 1914a€ 1 <https ://archive.org/details/endoftsaristruss00001iev>

• Isaac Chotiner & John Mearsheimer: Why John Mearsheimer Blames the U.S. for the Crisis in Ukraine 
<https://www.newyorker.com/news/q-and-a/why-john-mearsheimer-blames-the-us-for-the-crisis-in-ukraine
>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Laurie Penny: Ship of Fools'. a€~What follows is one of the strangest pieces of journalism I 
have ever donea€! a four-day Mediterranean cruise with hundreds of crypto-crazed investors and 
evangelistsa€!


Penny Red

Ship of Fools

What follows is one of the strangest pieces of journalism I have ever done. It was originally 
published at Breaker magazine, a crypto-focused outlet which has since folded, taking the archive 
with it. People keep asking me what happened to it. Here it is. As ever, most of the content on 
this substack is free- but if my writing is worth something to you, and you have the means to 
become a paid subscriber, Ia€~d really appreciate it. Despite my best efforts to self­
optimise I still live in a body that needs to be housed and feda€!

Read more

8 months ago A- 21 likes A- 5 comments A- Laurie Penny

• Adam Tooze: Mission Command


Chartbook

Chartbook #128: Mission command - NATO's Strangelove vision of freedom enacted on the Ukraine 
battlefield

Russian forces attempted to cross the Siverskyi Donets river in eastern Ukraine this month using a 
pontoon bridge, but their tanks and armoured vehicles were picked off by Ukrainian artillery. So 
they tried it again. And again. And again. The Russian army made nine attempts to cross the river 
in the second week of May, according to Ukrainian defence chia€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 60 likes A- 36 comments A- Adam Tooze

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the ano


Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

I had always thought that AuftrA^gstaktik was much older than Helmuth von Moltke and the 
1860sa€”that it was already well developed in the mid-1700s, with General Friedrich von Seydlitz 
telling King Friedrich II Hohenzollern that after the battle the king could cut off his head if he 
wished, but that during the battle he wished to keep it on and use it in His Majestya€™ s 
servicea€”i.e., disobey tactical orders he thought were stupid ones. And
AuftrA^gstaktik only worked not when individual subcommanders carried out the mission in the way 
they thought best, but when individual subcommanders carried out the mission in the way that made 
sense given training that had strongly inculcated in them the traditions of that army^'m the 
Prussian army, move quickly, find what you think is a flank, and attack it immediately and 
mercilessly; in the British army, take cover and wait for the moment you
can    stand up and exert maximum firepower; in the Russian army, bring up your artillery and pound 
and pound and pound.

But a very nice piece. Now I have to decide whether this evening I am going to do my day job, or 
reread Robert Citino: The German Way of War:

Adam Tooze: Mission Command: a€~Amongst NATO forces the first to adopt the term a€oemission 
commandaCD or a€oemission tacticsa€D were American marines and then the American Army in the 1980s 
editions of the basic field manual, FM 100a€“5. As was acknowledged at the time, the phrase is not 
originally English. a€oeMission commandaCD is a loose translation of the German concept of 
Auftragstaktik. Its introduction
to US and NATO doctrine was the fruit of the intensified interaction in the 1970s and 1980s between 
the US Army and the Bundeswehr in West Germanya€!. AuftrA^gstaktik was not invented by Hitlera€™ s 
Wehrmachta€!. Helmuth Moltke and his emphasis on the need to adjust war planning to particular 
circumstances and contingencies. A specifically tactical meaning of the term began to take shape in 
the later stages of WWI in the
a€oeSturma€n tacticsa€!. Figures like Ernst JAUnger or Erwin Rommel exemplified the new model of 
highly motivated, intelligent and independent battlefield leadership^!. This convergence between US 
Army and Bundeswehr thinking was encouraged by Chief of Staff General Abrams, and was eagerly taken 
up by TRADOC commander and World War II veteran General William DePuya€!. He was followed by 
General Don Starry
commander                                                                                           
                                                                                                 of 
V Corps in West Germany and later head of TRADOCa€!

LINK:

Chartbook

Chartbook #128: Mission command - NATO's Strangelove vision of freedom enacted on the Ukraine 
battlefield

Russian forces attempted to cross the Siverskyi Donets river in eastern Ukraine this month using a 
pontoon bridge, but their tanks and armoured vehicles were picked off by Ukrainian artillery. So 
they tried it again. And again. And again. The Russian army made nine attempts to cross the river 
in the second week of May, according to Ukrainian defence chia€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 60 likes A- 36 comments A- Adam Tooze

Very important and very true. Go to Kansas City, and see the Steamboat Arabia Museum, and marvel at 
the huge amounts of stuff manufactured elsewhere that needed to be brought from the factories of 
the east around Florida and up the Mississippi-Missouri in order to support the farm-settler 
fringe:

Paul Krugman: Elon Musk, Mars & the Modern Economy: a€~One million [for a Mars colony] is actually 
an absurdly low number of peoplea€”far too few to support a modern economya€!. Charlie Strossa€!. 
a€oeColonizing Mars might well be practical, but only if we can start out by plonking a hundred 
million people down there.a€D I agreeaC!. The realities of transportation costs mean that Muska€™ s 
hypothetical Mars colony
would have to be largely self-sufficient, cut off from the rest of the solar system economy. And it 
wouldna€™t have enough people to pull that off with anything like a modern standard of livinga€!. 
You really, really wouldna€™t want to live on another planet, cut off from the globalization wea€™ 
ve created on this onea€!

LINK: 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nytimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit_pk_2022060
7&instance 
id=63417&nl=paul-krugman&productCode=PK&regi_id=64675225&segment_id=94458&te=l&uri=nvt%3A%2F%2Fnewsl
etter%2F04008f43-2873-528d-8b0e-laf0e6ald404&user_id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

I agree that the middle classes of India, Brazil, South Africa, Indonesia, Nigeria, Turkey, and 
others are worse off because China took what would otherwise have been their slot in the neoliberal 
global division of labor. But they are, I think, still better off than had the world retreated into 
autarchy and managed trade starting in the 1980s:


David Singh Grewal: The Breakdown of Neo liberalism as Foreign Policy Agenda: afe™ The geopolitics 
ot neoliberalism proposesafe; a market-led order afe! m setting the terms ot international 
relations, and that states deter to and entorce this private cross-border ordering. It proposes 
this, in part, as a humanitarian objective, based on the long-standing view that the globalization 
ot capitalism is a great way ot lilting people out ot

povertyafe!. he geopolitics of neoliberalism tends toward a depoliticization of policy-making 
within and between countries: a suppression of collective decision-making to the extent that it 
deviates from what the private market-ordering would entailafe!. The focus on the market as the 
mechanism of international cooperation (rather than the state and its external diplomacy) has 
proven damaging to the developing world, especially in
regions of weak or afeoefailedafeD statesafe!. The position of the large developing-world 
democraciesafe’Tndia, Brazil, South Africa, Indonesia, Nigeria, Turkey, to name a fewa€”have all 
declined in salient respects as economic globalization has put their nascent middle classes into 
competition with the rising Chinese middle classafe!. Finallyafe! the greatest gamble of the 
geopolitics of neoliberalism was its assumption that international
rivalry among great powers could be overcome through economic integrationafe!. Alas, this hope has 
so far proven vainafe!

LINK: 
<https://email.hewlett.org/t/ViewEmail/t/707246A252454B182540EF23F30FEDED/3C79567D312FB707D08BC3D516
CA522B?alternativeLink=False>

I think I understand this, and I think it is very good and right. There are no afeoemany 
worldsafeD. There is only one quantum wave-function world, in which everything happensa€”everything 
has a (complex number) amplitudea€”but we have conceptual access to only a trivial fraction of the 
wave function that is the universe, just as a radio has at any one minute access to only a trivial 
fraction of the messages being sent out vis electromagnetic waves:

Chad Orzel: Many Worlds, but too Much Metaphor: a€~The afeoeAustere Quantum MechanicsafeD 
approachafe!. A collection of quantum thingsafe! described by a wavefunctionafe! evolve according 
to the SchrA^dinger equationafe! end up in complicated superpositions of multiple states, 
superpositions that are entangled with each otherafe! Being lazy humans, we often want to write 
down descriptions of things, and so we use a
bookkeeping trick: we choose to pull out pieces of that one giant wavefunction and treat them as if 
they exist in isolationafe!. We bracket everything else off as afeoethe environmentafeD which is a 
black box in the same way that afeoeSeventh National BankaCD is in financeafe!. When we select out 
a tiny piece of it as our system of interest, we often see that system only in single states, not a 
superpositionafe!. If the interaction with the
environment is strong and poorly controlled, though, the conditions of your measurement change 
enough from one repetition to the next that youa€™re not really doing the same measurement multiple 
timesafe!. You wona€™t see a clear dependence on the different evolution of the different states in 
the superposition, because itafe™ s swamped by the unknown effect of the environment. If you 
cana€™t see the interference effect, that
system afeoelooks classical,a€D and you can treat it as having a definite state. That process of 
interaction with the changing state of an unknown environment gets the name a€cedecoherence,afen 
and itafe™ s what enables the bookkeeping trick that lets us split off pieces of the wavefunction 
and consider them in isolation. If the piece youa€™re interested in is big enough and interacts 
with the environment strongly enough, thereafe™ s
no hope of doing the interference measurement that would show itafe™ s in a superposition 
stateafe!. This is just bookkeeping, not a real separationafe!. Thinking about MWI in this waya€“as 
a bookkeeping trick to simplify an otherwise incomprehensibly vast wavefunctiona€“clears up most of 
the typical objections that arise from taking the afeoeseparate worldsafeD metaphor too 
literallyafe!. So, thatafe™ s my argument for why the
way we talk about the Everettian interpretation of quantum mechanics sucks, and should be 
revisitedafe!

LINK: chttps ://www.forbes 
.com/sites/chadorzel/2019/09/17/many-worlds-but-too-much-metaphor/?sh=7e428b4e625d>

This, by constrast, I do not understand.

Had NATO and the EU washed their hands of Ukraine, Putin would now be launching his troops into 
Moldava, the Baltics, and (perhaps) Poland and Finland.

Yes. we should be willing to contribute huge amounts of resources to try to create a bargaining 
range so that Ukraine and Muscovy can end the warafe’’carrots. No, we should not use sticks: we 
should not tell Ukraine we will cut off aid unless they cede Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, 
Zaporizhzhia, and Crimea to Muscovy:

Ross Douthat: We Cana€™ t Be Ukraine Hawks Forever: a€~I felt the United States had overextended 
itself with its half-open door to NATO membership, and that eastern Ukraine, at least, wasnafe™ t 
defensible against Russian aggression without a full-scale American military commitmentafe!. Our 
plan cannot be to keep writing countless checks while tiptoeing modestly around the Ukrainians and 
letting them dictate the ends to
which our guns and weaponry are used. The United States is an embattled global hegemon facing 
threats more significant than Russia. We are also an internally divided country led by an unpopular 
president whose majorities may be poised for political collapse. So if Kyiv and Moscow are headed 
for a multiyear or even multidecade frozen conflict, we will need to push Ukraine toward its most 
realistic rather than its most ambitious
military strategy. And just as urgently, we will need to shift some of the burden of supporting 
Kyiv from our own budget to our European alliesafe!

LINK: 
<https://www.nytimes.eom/2022/06/04/opinion/ukraine-russia-putin-war,html?referringSource=articleSha
re>

Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution: afe'One goal of 
my book is to resurrect the term afeoeSecond WorldafeD and to apply it to Europeafe™ s periphery 
before 1914. This Second World stretched from Ireland and Iberia in the west to Italy and the 
Balkans in the south and the Russian Empire in the east. Although very diverse, these countries 
shared certain problems as they confronted the era of mass politics that
was just emerging for all of them by 1900. Russiaafe™ s problems are sometimes clarified by 
comparisons with those of its Second World peers, as I hope to show in this bookafe!

LINK: <https://archive.org/details/endoftsaristruss00001iev>

Here I think Mearsheimer has simply lost it: Putin does not understand that he cannot conquer 
Ukraine and integrate it into a greater Russia. That is precisely what Putin wants to do and thinks 
he can do. afeoeRealistsafeD are most profoundly unrealistic when they assume with certainty that 
the others think like they themselves think that the others ought to think. For the others 
generally do not:

Isaac Chotiner & John Mearsheimer: Why John Mearsheimer Blames the U.S. for the Crisis in Ukraine: 
a€~I was reading an old article where you wrote, afeoeAccording to the prevailing wisdom in the 
West, the Ukraine Crisis can be blamed almost entirely on Russian aggression. Russian president 
Vladimir Putin, the argument goes, annexed Crimea out of a longstanding desire to resuscitate the 
Soviet Empire, and he may eventually

go after the rest of Ukraine as well as other countries in Eastern Europe.a€D And then you say, 
afeoeBut this account is wrong.a€D Does anything thatafe™ s happened in the last couple weeks make 
you think that account was closer to the truth than you might have thought? Oh, I think I was 
right. I think the evidence is clear that we did not think he was an aggressor before February 
22,2014. This is a story that we invented so

that we could blame him. My argument is that the West, especially the United States, is principally 
responsible for this disasterafei. He understands that he cannot conquer Ukraine and integrate it 
into a greater Russia or into a reincarnation of the former Soviet Union. He cana€™t do thatafe!. 
Hea€™s going to take some territory away from Ukraine, in addition to what happened with Crimea, in 
2014.
Furthermore, he is definitely interested in regime change. Beyond that, ita€™s hard to say exactly 
what this will all lead to, except for the fact that he is not going to conquer all of Ukraineafe!. 
We invented this story that Putin is highly aggressive and hea€™s principally responsible for this 
crisis in Ukraineafe!. Hea€™s not going to turn to the Baltic states. First of all, the Baltic 
states are members of NATO
andafe”   Is that a good thing? No. Youa€™re saying that heafe™ s not going to invade them in part 
because theya€™re part of NATO, but they shouldnafe™ t be part of NATO. Yes, but those are two very 
different issues. Ia€™m not sure why youa€™re connecting them. Whether I think they should be part 
of NATO is independent of whether they are part of NATOafel. We should be pivoting out of Europe to 
deal with
China   in a laser-like fashion, number one. And, number two, we should be working overtime to 
create friendly relations with the Russians. The Russians are part of our balancing coalition 
against China. If you live in a world where there are three great powersafe’’China, Russia, and the 
United Statesa€”and one of those great powers, China, is a peer competitor, what you want to do if 
youa€™re the United
States is have Russia on your side of the ledgerafe!

LINK: 
<https://www.newyorker.com/news/q-and-a/why-john-mearsheimer-blames-the-us-for-the-crisis-in-ukraine
>

SUBJECT: Chinaa€™s A%clite Politics since 1956 According to Victor Shih

Larger version of spreadsheet:

Cep Psc

694KB a"™ PDF File
Download

Download

Politburo Standing Committees of the People’s Republic of China since 1956

CccvnflM    8th         tub         an        9th         10th         10th         10th         
11th         iHh         12th         i2et         12th         13th         iMh         14th       
  ise>         ieth         17th         18th         19th
Date         09                 19W 06                 1973 06                 197*04       1977 08 
      190002       1982 09       198509       1987’01       1987-11       1»9«X        1992’10      
 «99TO9       200210       2007-10       2012-11       2017.10

PSC      U»Ze<kr>g W    MeoZrtong     Meo Zedong     M*o Zedong     Meo Zedong     Mao Zedong     
M*o Zedong     KaGuoteng     HuaGuoteng     Hj         Mu Aobeng               ZhaoZiyng      
JengZenwtOJ    Jong Zemn     JangZemn      Hu Jntao      ite Jrftao                X Jnpoj
IXiSheoQSS     buShaoQ      bn Boo       Ln &4O       2>ou Eriei      Mu* Oudteng 54   H^>Guc4eng   
 Ye Jaryng      WJbtnytng     Ye Jaryng      Deng Xwopng    ZheoZyang     U Perg 50      bPeng      
 UPerg        UPeng       Wu Bangguo    ‘•S*u Banggua 6ft  b Keoang      UKequrg
ZN>J         Eri* M     ZhouErtei      ZhOuEftei      Zhou Ema      Weng Hangmen 38  Zhou Ema»     
WengHongwen   Deng Xiaoping   Deng Xaopng    Deng Xiaoc*>g   Zhao Zbfing     UK^vten      QaoShiW   
   (XeoSh.       QajS*        OaoSht       Wen jabao     VMmJ«abao65    Zh*nj De;a'g 66   
UZhanshu67

2huDe 70                Chen Bute ft?    Chen Bod*      Kang Sheng     •   r।       Kang Sheng     
»Va-g Oorgcrxj   Own An                 UXtenrun      Chen Yun      Ite Oa M       Yao Yfln       U 
Auhuan      Zhu         JhaOgftn      JwQrgaiftr      Yu Zhengaheng ft?  kVa-g Yang ft?
Chen Art 61     OenYUn       Deng Xaoprtg              Ye Jaryng 76              W Janying      
UXJamrtn      HuYaohang     UXaennten     Chen Art                Yao Yin 70      S«yg Pr>g72     
Zhu Rong?64    URurtuan      ZengOnghong    U Owngchun 61   bu YkrtihanSS    Wa'g ► hnng 62
LrtOooO      UniMo        Kang$heng<9              UOeehengftZ              UDeireng      Chen An   
   Zh*o Z>f*ng ft 1   Chen Yun                                    UlWttemSO     Uulteagng 7ft    Mu 
Jrteo      Huang JU                WangQmhanOi   Zhao L0 00
Deng      XieeprtQ    DengXidrtprtg    UjStooo                 ^uDe        UDeeheng      Zhu De     
  HJ Vaob*rQ62                                                                HJ Jnteo 50     VMa 
Jaruurg 66             UKeg^g&?     Zli**g Gac* 66    Han Znang 63

Zhu De                 Zhong Crwqteo 56  Zhu De       Zheng C7KTK>*0                                
                                                   ULarw>ng65     U Changchun    MeGuooangM

U Fuchurt                Dong Bfwu     2h*ng OrKrtQao   Dcog B<wu                                   
                                                             Luo Gan      Zhou YargMng65

Chen Art                          Dong Bwu      DengXaoprtg

1*0 Zhu M                         DengXAeoprtg

Other PcftttxxQ trtlloqu TO      KeOr^eh      KeWngyN      WAenymg      AteGuoqng       Guoqog     
W Guocyrig       GuoQng     WGuoqng      WanU        Wan u       Wmb        Wanu        AlnL        
DrgGuangen    Ong Guar gen    Wu Yt        »Va-g Gang     M*kK»       Drg Xueuang
DoXlBw’j ?0     b          U JrtQQurt     veO-n        buBocheng               buBocheng            
   LuBocheng     X. 2Nxig*un     KZbongxirt     X» Z*wXwgjurt    Ton Jyirt      Twn Jyrt      Tien 
Jym      Tan Jyui                Wa-gLequa^     WingHurtng     Wa*gCh^


Peng^enM

Luo Rox/XAen M

Tm Zhenin

bn Boo J

lanZhtran

DtxnB^

Jang Ong

Zhu De

AengOng

XuShvou

Jang Ong

XuSvrou

AenjQnj

Xu Shvou

tie Rongzhen

Xu Shfrou

Ne Rzoyhen

XuShhou

WeGjOQrg

LUnru

FengYl

Yana Sh*n>un

FangYi      JwngZa^n

UTevna

bTteyvg

UXmnn

Biao Shi

ULrtom

U Changchun

Cr» MaotWn

Wj 2FaDQJO

HJ* banoM^

WargZhaoguo

WaxiOiran

Uu Ykndong

Lu QDao

buHe


CMnVIW      DonQlPwu     LuoRooyuen    XuSNyou      H/aGuoleng                         JlDerg^A     
 O-ten Yongg>    FangY.       vingDee*      Y^gDeni      URubuan      Yanj RxU      U Wng       
UT<y*ng      Uu Yunshan     KA Uangyu     XuQM-g       SunClKWan
PwngOTvaW              Chen VI       CMnXteen                WiOe        WJO        WUOe        
UDeeheng      Deng Yrgchao    YU OMI       woa         U Xmng       Wang Shangkun   YanglMwg     Wi 
Guaruheng    UuO          Yimhan     SunCKnlan     U»
UiOccfwngM    Luo                   UXOTTWO       WuDe        Weng Dongcog   Wang Dongung   Ocn 
Yang^j     YJO**        UDeeheng     MuQteomu     ILOaorrq      YangRuOa     WuXueoan     WJ 
(iangguo     Wu&anggjq     Zhang Oetong    UuO        SunZhargcai    UOang

He Leng      UZuOpeng     LVang Dong&ng   Chen Yonggu    O«n Yonggua    UDeeheng     LMnhu       
Yang fhang^uo   MZhrfj                 Wa-g f^ang^ur   On Jiwei      Zou Jkahua     Ch Haotan     
Zhang Uchang   UuYarOong     b langue      U Hongkong
UuBochOT)     UXiteVteen               Chen Vonogu    UXtefVMn      UXtevite)      YUQM       
FangYi       YteXlOfN      Re'-jZran      Peng Zhen     WiXueoan               ChanXhong     Zhang 
WanMn   ChenUangyu    U Yuancto      UYjanchao     K/Ch/ru

U Fuchun 56     HtUXM)                 Zhirtj Churx>>>             YboWenyuen    VtoWyvr      LUrhu 
                 YiOUb       L*aoO<ngzr<    LiaoChengxh    Song Png                AargChunykn    
Luo Gan       Zhou Vtngkang   Wang Ymg     Wing Yarg      Yang JocN

UKwian                 QuHUeuo      Yeo Wryjan                         FtengYl       Geng Rao      
Song Ranging    nanjkym       Far         HJ Yaobanj               QanOchen      JangOunyxi     
WZhengywng    Zhang Gao*     Zhang        Yang Kaodi
b          Ye         Yao Wwryuan                                  SuZherbute               Zhang 
Tngh     OaoSN       QaoSH       On Jrwai                 WaMnung      JaOngkn      He Oxxgang     
Zhang Deyang    FanChangtong   Zhang Ysuea
PtnQ     Debate               Huteog Yang****)                                 Zheng Tr»ya     Xu 
Xianggten    HuQaomj      UPeng       UPeng                            Ke Fa        Oan<><^ten     
JkaOnyn      Yu Zhengaheng   Meng Jtanhu    CbenXj

Shueheng                                CbenXMe^     Pang Chong     M* Roshan     'A\j Vuegar*      
                             TanShaoaren       Ju      Guo        HeGuOQteng    Zhao Lea      Chen 
Quanguo
OongUfwu                                   Geng (Mo                MZMU       HU QB       HuO       
                     Kiang JU      VW4 Joong     H>ang Ju      MOngkn      HuCtwhua      Chen Mner

41A                             Xtefu^a                                     MZNfu                  
XuXanggan       Van       Yao Van                                     Wen Jtebao     Gao Ghangcbuan 
 XuCatiou      UZhanehu      GuoSbeng^un

Screen                                                                 JOuXongpan              
f‘•ng Zhan                HuYaofewng                                  JOefa        Zang Onghcng   
Guo Booueng    Guo JvYong     Kiang Kirvnng
Peng Cheng               UaoCherg^t                                                                 
Zang Peryuan    Bo Kite       Han Zheng     CwG

War* Zhen


Rocont Puryo

Purged  Rocontry Purged                      Recently Purged   Recently Purged                      
 Recently Purged             Recently Purged                                           Recently 
Purged
Deng Xaopng    Un Deo                           Weng Hongwen   WangDongong                         
Yaobang               ZheoZ)yang                                             Zhou Y^ngkang

Chen Oode                         Kang Sheng

Zhang

<h1tpsJ/wwwjckxjd.com/numt»rs/OtogaHU<XjP5Kk9opVSHd2LHw#CCP-PSC>

I am not the only person who does not understand Chinaa€™ s A©lite politics under the reign of the 
Chinese Communist Party. My big problem, I think, is that I do not understand 
network-and-connections politics. I understand, I think, feudal politicsa€’’patrons and clients, 
and the exchange of resources for support. I understand, I think, electoral politicsa€’’factions 
and votes, and then the losers submit to the winners and become the a€oeloyal oppositiona€n
because there will be another election in which they can try to persuade the (s)electorate, 
especially because there is broad agreement that what divides us is less than what unites us.

But network-and-connections politics? There is, on the surface, a fiction that the Party is united 
in agreement and obedience to the a€oecorrect linea€D of analysis anda€”a a€ceRousseauista€D 
fiction that there is a general will that has been ascertained and that all are happy with. And 
there is a fiction that this general will is incarnate in the paramount leader, whom all hasten to 
obey. But the paramount leader fears that if he moves too fast or in the wrong
direction, he will wind up Khrushcheved. There is some sort of balancing-of-factions. And, among 
the factions, there is some kind of struggle for position-and-power. What divergences of opinion on 
policy there are a€oeamong the peoplea€D can very easily and suddenly change as formerly high 
cadres now become wreckersa€”a€oethe #1 and #2 persons in authority taking the capitalist roada€D. 
Plus, often, a€oethe mountains are high, and the emperor is
fara€D.

How legitimate authority is gained and held in such a a€ceRousseauista€D bureaucratic system 
overlaid with patron-client, common-patron, and peer-solidarity bonds is beyond me. What role is 
played by the 8341 regiment of the Peoplea€™ s Liberation Army is not clear. How the rest of the 
PLA weighs in, and how much decisions of personnel and policy are shaped by a need or a desire to 
please the Old Hundred Names is also something I do not understand.
But Victor Shih has written a very good book!

It is: Victor Shih (2022): Coalitions of the Weak: A%olite Politics in China from Maoa€™ s 
Strategem to the Rise of Xi (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 978-1316516959) chttps: //w w 
w.amazon .com/dp/1316516954>.

Up above is a spreadsheet of the members of the Political Bureaua€”the Politburoa€”of the Chinese 
Communist Party from 1956-2017, and of its all-important Standing Committee, where members are 
ranked in order of importance. (Note that Zhou Enlai is never number two, having noted, as his 
sometime friend CIA analyst Walter Southard, my friend Jon Southarda€™ s father, put it, that the 
number twos kept getting killed off.) I have added some color
coding. Grey are a€oescribblersa€Ela€”people who can do work, persuade with arguments, and follow a 
line laid down by their patron, but who do not have a dense social network of friends or allies, 
hence nobody who counts would mind if someday they simply disappeared. Pink are 
a€ceprincelingsa€Ua€’’children of high cadres who thus have available to them not only their own 
social network of connections who care about their well-being and promotion,
but can draw on their fathersa€™ networks as well.

And yellow are soldiers who belonged to the Fourth Front Army during the Long March and post-Long 
March era. Here is Victor Shiha€™ s most major new insighta€’’certainly I had never heard it 
before. These soldiers were semi-purged as counterrevolutionaries, demoted in rank, and assigned to 
the 129th Division where the political commissar was Deng Xiaoping. Their purging made them 
friendless and networkless (outside of their own circles of 4FA
veterans). Deng Xiaopinga€™ s prevention of any further purging and working over the years to 
rehabilitate them meant that they all became incredibly loyal to him.

What is the story behind this spreadsheet? In 1965 Mao Zedong had a problem. Chen Yun ran finance. 
Zhou Enlai ran foreign policy. Zhu De and Lin Biao ran the army. Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping ran 
the party, and made sure that while Mao was respected and honored, he was not greatly listened to 
when his ideas differed from those of the people on the ground. The disasters of the Great Leap 
Forward and the Great Famine that had followed kept most
people in authority from wanting Maoa€™ s hands actually on the tiller. Mao wanted to be boss, not 
a senile and flattered elder.

Mao still had his Cult of Personality: his ability to mobilize hundreds of thousands to "bombard 
the headquarters", and also to take 3/4 of some layers of the bureaucracy in ministries and send 
them out to the countryside to learn from the workers and peasants, with very few taking the road 
of Xu Shiyou of heading off to Mount Tianzhu and preparing to defend themselves with force, if 
necessary. So Mao could and did launch the Cultural Revolution. On the
ideological level, he called for the demolition of the CCP of bureaucratic careerists and its 
replacement by a CCP of a€ceRedsa€D. On the political level, he brought in Chen Boda, secret 
policeman Kang Sheng, Long-March veteran (and thus Mao supporter) Li Fuchun, and Long-March veteran 
and Red-Guard leader Tao Zhu into an expanded Politburo Standing Committee, and added two more 4FA 
veterans to the overall Politburo.

Mao then, strengthened, attacked and purged Liu Shaoqi and Deng Xiaoping (and demoted the 
newly-promoted Li Fuchun and Tao Zhu when they resisted the a€oebombard the headquartersa€D 
policy), and once again took his place at the head of the government, such as it was. As of 1969 
the Politburo Standing Committee consisted of loyal secret policeman Kang Sheng, scribbler Chen 
Boda, Zhou Enlai, and as number #2 Maoa€™ s designated successor
and closest comrade-in-arms, Marshall Lin Biao. And a further three 4FA veterans were brought into 
the expanded Politburo.

Mao is thus back in command, Kang Sheng and Regiment 8341 back him. The 4FA faction now in command 
of the army has no alternative but to back him, regardeda€’’still, after so longa€”as unsound 
potential counterrevolutionaries as they are. The obsequious and loyal Zhou Enlai backs him. Chen 
Boda and the other scribblers back hima€”again, they have no alternative, as their power rests on 
his approval. But the rest of the government? He is now not
just responsible for the disasters of the Great Leap Forward and the Great Famine that followed, 
but now of those of the Cultural Revolution. Any half credible administrator-communist with the 
backings of a major network would be preferable, in the eyes of the Old Hundred Name Cadres. And 
there is such a person: Lin Biao.

And so Mao then purged Lin Biao.

But great mysteries remain:

What, exactly, happened to all the friends and clients and allies of the purged high cadres, to all 
those lower down? A great many cadres and students were sent out to the countryside for years, and 
a great deal of property and artifacts smashed, and the military took over the running of things 
(to the extent that things were run, rather than have commune bosses as unsupervised feudal lords), 
and then as the party structure was rebuilt the military and the party "ran
things".

How things actually ran between 1968 and 1974 is not really clear to me. Did people just get up in 
the morning, and do what they had done yesterday? And occasionally some PLA or Party representative 
had showed up at random and said "do this instead"? And how were the more-than-one-million 
displaced by the Cultural Revolution kept in the rustication places they were put? There weren't 
that many jails or concentration campsa€’’certainly not on the
GULAG scalea€”were there?

Usually during such authoritarian elite-replacement episodesa€”even Stalin'sa€’’the purges hit the 
high officials and all those one and two levels down whom the center suspects, but the bulk of the 
actual apparatus of governmental officials and economic bosses remains in place, with disorder at 
the center affecting them only in that they keep their heads down as their patrons fall, and then 
some of them get promoted. But precisely because of "Bombard the
Headquarters", the Cultura Revolution was a different kind of thing, and I still do not understand 
what kind of thing it was.

And what happened, exactly, after Lin Biao was gone, and his first- and second-rank network 
loyalists had all been sent to the countryside to learn from the peasants and the workers? Yes, all 
of the now-ruling members of the coalition under Mao are a€ceweaka€D, without thick network support 
of their own, and Mao wants to keep them that way. The 4FA faction is brought into the PSC bigtime, 
with Ye Jianying and Li Desheng. The 87-year-old Long-Marech
veteran Dong Biwu joins the PSC. Scribbler Zhang Chunqiao replaces purged scribbler Chen Boda. Zhu 
De is brought back into the PSC. And Wang Hongwen is promoted from many levels down to be #3 in the 
hierarchy, behind Zhou Enlai, who finally receives the promotion to #2 he had spent his life trying 
to avoid.


What, exactly, happened to all the friends and clients and allies of the purged high cadres, to all 
those lower down? A great many cadres and students were sent out to the countryside for years, and 
a great deal of property and artifacts smashed, and the military took over the running of things 
(to the extent that things were run, rather than have commune bosses as unsupervised feudal lords), 
and then as the party structure was rebuilt the military and the party "ran
things".

How things actually ran between 1968 and 1974 is not really clear to me. Did people just get up in 
the morning, and do what they had done yesterday? And occasionally some PLA or Party representative 
had showed up at random and said "do this instead"? And how were the more-than-one-million 
displaced by the Cultural Revolution kept in the rustication places they were put? There weren't 
that many jails or concentration campsa€’’certainly not on the
GULAG scalea€”were there?

Usually during such authoritarian elite-replacement episodesa€”even Stalin'sa€’’the purges hit the 
high officials and all those one and two levels down whom the center suspects, but the bulk of the 
actual apparatus of governmental officials and economic bosses remains in place, with disorder at 
the center affecting them only in that they keep their heads down as their patrons fall, and then 
some of them get promoted. But precisely because of "Bombard the
Headquarters", the Cultura Revolution was a different kind of thing, and I still do not understand 
what kind of thing it was.

And what happened, exactly, after Lin Biao was gone, and his first- and second-rank network 
loyalists had all been sent to the countryside to learn from the peasants and the workers? Yes, all 
of the now-ruling members of the coalition under Mao are a€ceweaka€D, without thick network support 
of their own, and Mao wants to keep them that way. The 4FA faction is brought into the PSC bigtime, 
with Ye Jianying and Li Desheng. The 87-year-old Long-Marech
veteran Dong Biwu joins the PSC. Scribbler Zhang Chunqiao replaces purged scribbler Chen Boda. Zhu 
De is brought back into the PSC. And Wang Hongwen is promoted from many levels down to be #3 in the 
hierarchy, behind Zhou Enlai, who finally receives the promotion to #2 he had spent his life trying 
to avoid.

But how does such a weak PSCa€”without individuals with strong networksa€’’govern the country? And 
even though they are all weak, and none of them (except Zhou Enlai, a puzzle) could have threatened 
to send Mao back into semi-retirement, surely a skillful and ambitious politician could have used a 
seat on the PSC to rapidly gain strength. 1975 sees Hua Guofeng also promoted from many layers 
down, and promoted to #2 as Zhou Enlai approaches the
grave.

And it is at this point that Mao brings back Deng Xiaopinga€”and then purges him again, when it 
becomes clear that he (or, rather, him and the memory of Zhou Enlai) has a supernetwork, not just 
within but without the party, can bring the massesa€”Old Hundred Namesa€”back onto the stage of 
history and into Tienanmen for the Qingming Festival. That is too great a power for Mao to tolerate 
on the PSC. That neither Wong Hongwen nor Hua Guofeng show
any signs of being able to bring the masses into Tienanmen for Qingming preserves them. But they 
then have neither within-party network nor Cult of Personality power.

Mao then balances his PSC factions against the Gang of Four. And Mao then dies.

So what is left? And at the decisive moment, what you really need is to have Marshall G.K. 
Zhukova€”or, rather, 4FA Marshals Ye Jianying and Li Xiannian on your side, plus Wang Dongxing, 
head of the 9th Bureau and thus commander of the 8341 Regiment.

And then they have to reknit the government so that it can actually, you know, govern. I think I 
pick up the threads. Chinese A©lite politics after Maoa€™ s death is driven by the facts that (1) 
the 4FA veterans have command of the army, (2) scribblers and young technocrats have no deep 
networks of support, (3) the Gang of Four has no thick network of party supporters (4) 4FA veterans 
had to have been very loyal to Maoa€”they had, after all, no place else to
goa€”but they choose because of their history to be loyal to Deng, and (5) princelings (with the 
important exceptions of Li Peng, Xi Jinping, Liu Yandong, Li Yuanchao, Yu Zhengsheng, and Bo Xilai) 
are kept from promotion to the high leadership, out of the fear that their network connection webs 
will then make them a€oeovermighty subjectsa€D.

Those facts promote Deng. Those facts then allow Deng to maneuver, with his lieutenantsaC’’three in 
particular: Xi Zhongxun to figure out how to lead opening-up to the world, Zhao Ziyang to figure 
out agricultural reform, and Hu Yaobang to modernize the CCP and so allow China to stand upa€”to 
guide China. Those facts thena€”when Hu and Zhao are purged for not being solid enough on the power 
monopoly of the CCPa€”create the space for the
promotion of the a€oealways nicea€D Jiang Zemin and Li Peng, and then of Hu Jintao and Wu Bangguo.

Highly recommended. It makes a lot clear that had been cloudy to me. Not, mind you, that I feel I 
understand it wella€!
Subscribe now


What, exactly, happened to all the friends and clients and allies of the purged high cadres, to all 
those lower down? A great many cadres and students were sent out to the countryside for years, and 
a great deal of property and artifacts smashed, and the military took over the running of things 
(to the extent that things were run, rather than have commune bosses as unsupervised feudal lords), 
and then as the party structure was rebuilt the military and the party "ran
things".

How things actually ran between 1968 and 1974 is not really clear to me. Did people just get up in 
the morning, and do what they had done yesterday? And occasionally some PLA or Party representative 
had showed up at random and said "do this instead"? And how were the more-than-one-million 
displaced by the Cultural Revolution kept in the rustication places they were put? There weren't 
that many jails or concentration campsa€’’certainly not on the
GULAG scalea€”were there?

Usually during such authoritarian elite-replacement episodesa€”even Stalin'sa€’’the purges hit the 
high officials and all those one and two levels down whom the center suspects, but the bulk of the 
actual apparatus of governmental officials and economic bosses remains in place, with disorder at 
the center affecting them only in that they keep their heads down as their patrons fall, and then 
some of them get promoted. But precisely because of "Bombard the
Headquarters", the Cultura Revolution was a different kind of thing, and I still do not understand 
what kind of thing it was.

And what happened, exactly, after Lin Biao was gone, and his first- and second-rank network 
loyalists had all been sent to the countryside to learn from the peasants and the workers? Yes, all 
of the now-ruling members of the coalition under Mao are a€ceweaka€D, without thick network support 
of their own, and Mao wants to keep them that way. The 4FA faction is brought into the PSC bigtime, 
with Ye Jianying and Li Desheng. The 87-year-old Long-Marech
veteran Dong Biwu joins the PSC. Scribbler Zhang Chunqiao replaces purged scribbler Chen Boda. Zhu 
De is brought back into the PSC. And Wang Hongwen is promoted from many levels down to be #3 in the 
hierarchy, behind Zhou Enlai, who finally receives the promotion to #2 he had spent his life trying 
to avoid.

But how does such a weak PSCa€”without individuals with strong networksa€’’govern the country? And 
even though they are all weak, and none of them (except Zhou Enlai, a puzzle) could have threatened 
to send Mao back into semi-retirement, surely a skillful and ambitious politician could have used a 
seat on the PSC to rapidly gain strength. 1975 sees Hua Guofeng also promoted from many layers 
down, and promoted to #2 as Zhou Enlai approaches the
grave.

And it is at this point that Mao brings back Deng Xiaopinga€”and then purges him again, when it 
becomes clear that he (or, rather, him and the memory of Zhou Enlai) has a supernetwork, not just 
within but without the party, can bring the massesa€”Old Hundred Namesa€”back onto the stage of 
history and into Tienanmen for the Qingming Festival. That is too great a power for Mao to tolerate 
on the PSC. That neither Wong Hongwen nor Hua Guofeng show
any signs of being able to bring the masses into Tienanmen for Qingming preserves them. But they 
then have neither within-party network nor Cult of Personality power.

Mao then balances his PSC factions against the Gang of Four. And Mao then dies.

So what is left? And at the decisive moment, what you really need is to have Marshall G.K. 
Zhukova€”or, rather, 4FA Marshals Ye Jianying and Li Xiannian on your side, plus Wang Dongxing, 
head of the 9th Bureau and thus commander of the 8341 Regiment.

And then they have to reknit the government so that it can actually, you know, govern. I think I 
pick up the threads. Chinese A©lite politics after Maoa€™ s death is driven by the facts that (1) 
the 4FA veterans have command of the army, (2) scribblers and young technocrats have no deep 
networks of support, (3) the Gang of Four has no thick network of party supporters (4) 4FA veterans 
had to have been very loyal to Maoa€”they had, after all, no place else to
goa€”but they choose because of their history to be loyal to Deng, and (5) princelings (with the 
important exceptions of Li Peng, Xi Jinping, Liu Yandong, Li Yuanchao, Yu Zhengsheng, and Bo Xilai) 
are kept from promotion to the high leadership, out of the fear that their network connection webs 
will then make them a€oeovermighty subjectsa€D.

Those facts promote Deng. Those facts then allow Deng to maneuver, with his lieutenantsaC’’three in 
particular: Xi Zhongxun to figure out how to lead opening-up to the world, Zhao Ziyang to figure 
out agricultural reform, and Hu Yaobang to modernize the CCP and so allow China to stand upa€”to 
guide China. Those facts thena€”when Hu and Zhao are purged for not being solid enough on the power 
monopoly of the CCPa€”create the space for the
promotion of the a€oealways nicea€D Jiang Zemin and Li Peng, and then of Hu Jintao and Wu Bangguo.

Highly recommended. It makes a lot clear that had been cloudy to me. Not, mind you, that I feel I 
understand it wella€!
Subscribe now


Mao then balances his PSC factions against the Gang of Four. And Mao then dies.

So what is left? And at the decisive moment, what you really need is to have Marshall G.K. 
Zhukova€”or, rather, 4FA Marshals Ye Jianying and Li Xiannian on your side, plus Wang Dongxing, 
head of the 9th Bureau and thus commander of the 8341 Regiment.

And then they have to reknit the government so that it can actually, you know, govern. I think I 
pick up the threads. Chinese A©lite politics after Maoa€™ s death is driven by the facts that (1) 
the 4FA veterans have command of the army, (2) scribblers and young technocrats have no deep 
networks of support, (3) the Gang of Four has no thick network of party supporters (4) 4FA veterans 
had to have been very loyal to Maoa€”they had, after all, no place else to
goa€”but they choose because of their history to be loyal to Deng, and (5) princelings (with the 
important exceptions of Li Peng, Xi Jinping, Liu Yandong, Li Yuanchao, Yu Zhengsheng, and Bo Xilai) 
are kept from promotion to the high leadership, out of the fear that their network connection webs 
will then make them a€ceovermighty subjectsa€d.

Those facts promote Deng. Those facts then allow Deng to maneuver, with his lieutenantsa€’’three in 
particular: Xi Zhongxun to figure out how to lead opening-up to the world, Zhao Ziyang to figure 
out agricultural reform, and Hu Yaobang to modernize the CCP and so allow China to stand upa€”to 
guide China. Those facts thena€”when Hu and Zhao are purged for not being solid enough on the power 
monopoly of the CCPa€”create the space for the
promotion of the a€oealways nicea€D Jiang Zemin and Li Peng, and then of Hu Jintao and Wu Bangguo.

Highly recommended. It makes a lot clear that had been cloudy to me. Not, mind you, that I feel I 
understand it wella€!
Subscribe now

