Subscribe now

Timothy Noah

FLOPERA

Why Isna€™t Everybody Rich Yet?

The twentieth century promised prosperity and leisure for all. What went wrong?

chttps ://newrepublic .com/ article/167610/20th-century-economic-inequality-piketty>

In 1930, John Maynard Keynes predicted that a hundred years hencea€”which is to say, right about 
nowa€”a€oethe economic problem may be solved, or be at least within sight of
solution.a€D People would work perhaps three hours a day. a€oeFor the first time since his 
creation,a€D Keynes wrote, a€oeman will be faced with his real, his permanent
problema€”how to use his freedom from pressing economic cares, how to occupy the leisure, which 
science and compound interest will have won for him, to live wisely and
agreeably and well.a€D

If only! Ita€™ s 2022, and most of us are still on the clock. Oddly, though, much of Keynesa€™ s 
reasoning was correct. He estimated that, over the next century, annual economic
growth would average, globally, 2 percent. That must have seemed insanely optimistic at the start 
of the Great Depression. But it was too low. The Yale economist Fabrizio Zilibotti
has calculated that since 1930, annual growth has averaged, over the long term, closer to 3 
percent. Keynes predicted the standard of living within the more advanced economies
would increase by a factor of eight. In fact, according to Zilibotti, it increased by a factor of 
17. Keynes was even right, up to a point, that the number of hours worked would fall,
and that people would find other things to do. Observing this phenomenon in vthe 1960s, the 
journalist Tom Wolfe made his name chronicling a proliferation of leisure activitiesa€”
surfing, stock-car racing, dropping acida€”well beyond the imagining of Keynes and his Bloomsbury 
set. Wolfe called it a a€oeHappiness Explosion.a€D

Slouching Towards Utopia: by J. Bradford DeLong :: Basic Books, 624 pp., $35.00

What Keynes did not consider was how unevenly this Happiness Explosion would be distributed across 
nations and within them. Even in the United States, the richest nation on
Earth, you can still find people who lack those two ancient basics, food and shelter. Keynes was 
right that the economic problem ought by now to be solved, or within sight of being
solved. But it is not, and probably wona€™ t be even a century from today.

A Brief History of Equality: by Thomas Piketty :: Harvard University Press, 288 pp., $27.95

Keynesa€™ s optimism was driven by the advent of what J. Bradford DeLong, in his new economic 
history, Slouching Towards Utopia, calls a€oethe long twentieth century,a€D
whose start DeLong sets at 1870. This was the period, DeLong writes, during which the maturing 
Industrial Revolution, combined with various social changes such as the advent of
the modern corporation and the industrial research laboratory, a€oeunlocked the gate that had 
previously kept humanity in dire poverty.a€D Those who lived through this period
saw an unprecedented explosion of productivity and prosperity. They well understood this at the 
time. Keynes called it an a€oeeconomic El Dorado ,a€C

To understand why all this wealth wasna€™t more broadly shared, DeLong looks beyond growth alone. 
How the economic cares of humankind were met, and not met, by the
prosperity explosion that followed the Industrial Revolution depended, he shows, on noneconomic 
developments, including two world wars; on warring notions about what markets
alone could achieve; on colonial legacies; and on the varying competence of governments to manage 
economies wisely. DeLonga€™ s grasp of these individual subjects is
extremely sophisticated, but ita€™ s a lot to integrate into what he self-consciously calls a 
a€oegrand narrative,a€D stretching from 1870 to 2010. If the story seems unwieldy by
the   end of his account, that may be because he piles onto his plate much more history occurring 
in many more places than one may easily digest.

It is easier to pinpoint when the story of this great change begins than when it ends. If your 
interest is in traditional manufacturing or in organized labor, it ends, in Europe and the
United States, in the 1970s. If your interest is in the computer revolution, it ends around 2000. 
If your interest is in the rise of China, India, and the a€oetiger economiesa€D of
Southeast Asia, the story doesna€™ t begin until the 1970s and 1980s and has no end in sight. If 
your interest is in the economic awakening of the Southern Hemisphere, that story
has scarcely begun.

Ita€™ s not hard to see why Keynes was so optimistic in 1930. A mere 60 years earlier, the global 
economy had still operated almost entirely on a subsistence basis. In 1870, more
than 80 percent of the world population lived on what it farmed rather than what it purchased. When 
the French anarchist philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon pronounced, in 1840,
that property was theft, he was being less metaphorical than we might today suppose. You couldna€™ 
t enrich yourself without impoverishing someone else, because the economic
pie barely expanded. Only after 1870 did transoceanic telegraph cables and screw-propeller 
steamships and railroads and improved power looms and the Bessemer steelmaking
furnace, among many other wonders, conspire to accelerate economic growth to the point where one 
mana€™ s wealth accumulation could increase wealth for others.

Before 1870, economic life was governed largely by the principle, laid out in 1798 by the gloomy 
English cleric Thomas Robert Malthus, that population growth (in DeLonga€™ s
loose but apt paraphrase) a€oeate the benefits of invention and innovation a€! leaving only the 
exploitative upper class noticeably better off.a€D For the vast majority, material
conditions never changed. The wages of a construction worker in England were, after inflation, 
exactly the same in 1800 as theya€™ d been six centuries earlier. By 1870, they had
risen more than half, yet even that gave little taste of what was coming. By 2000, they had risen 
more than thirteenfold. Much of that increase was driven by international trade. In
1850, cross-border trade represented about 4 percent of total world production^’’scarcely more than 
the proportion 150 years earlier. By 1880, it represented 11 percent of world
production. Today, it represents 30 percent.

The long twentieth century refuted the Malthusian construct that population growth outpaces food 
production and pushes down wages. Todaya€™ s world population is six times
the size it was in 1870; crop yields are about eight times greater; and per capita income is nearly 
nine times greater. Technological and organizational progress came much faster,
and with far greater benefits, than Malthus could imagine. Since 1870, DeLong calculates, the pace 
of that progress has been four times faster than from 1770 to 1870,12 times
faster than from 1500 to 1770, and 60 times faster than before 1500. This acceleration enabled the 
long twentieth century to become a€oethe first century ever in which history was
predominantly a matter of economics.a€D

The great benefits of this change bypassed what we call today the global south. Prosperity was 
largely confined to the great imperial powers of Britain, Western Europe, and the
United States. (The United States, itself a former colony, is sometimes excluded from this group 
because it practiced a more limited colonizationa€’’mainly in the Philippines,
Cuba, and the South Pacific. But its violent seizure of the North American continent from Native 
Americans and its enslavement of Africans, through violence and the threat of
violence, to perform farm labor in the New World, situated the United States in the front rank of 
imperialist nations, albeit in a way that required little travel.)

European colonization had begun around the sixteenth century, but as the North Atlantic economies 
matured, their need for raw materials from abroad grew more urgent. Trees are a
good example. European nations were deforested, the University of Chicago historian Kenneth 
Pomeranz has noted, and wood became scarce even as demand for it as a building
material increased. In the mid-sixteenth century, 33 percent of France was covered by forest; by 
1789, that was down to 16 percent, and by 1850, forested areas in Great Britain,
Italy, and Spain were all down to 10 percent or less. In the mid-eighteenth century, Britain built 
no fewer than one-third of its merchant ships in its American colonies, simply
because it needed American timber for its masts.

a€oel have had no peace of mind since we lost America,a€D King George III says in Alan Bennetta€™ s 
1991 play, The Madness of George III. a€oeForests old as the world itself,
meadows, plains, strange, delicate flowers, immense solitudes, and all nature new to art. All ours. 
Mine. Gone. A paradise lost.a€D The king sounds as though hea€™ s grieving the
loss                                                                                of a pastoral 
wilderness. But as his speech continues (this part isna€™ t in the 1994 film adaptation), it 
becomes plain hea€™ s grieving the loss of Englanda€™ s opportunity
for plunder. a€oeSoon we shall lose India, the Indies, Ireland even,a€D he says, a€oeour feathers 
plucked one by one, this island reduced to itself alone, a great state moldered into
rottenness and decay .a€D The wealth of his kingdom lay outside it.

Why didna€™t countries in the global south follow the North Atlantic example and turn to 
manufacturing? a€oeWhen I am asked,a€D DeLong writes, a€oel say that the initial
cost advantage enjoyed by Britain (and then the United States, and then Germany) was so huge that 
it would have required staggeringly high tariffs in order to nurture a€~infant
industriesa€™ in other locations. I say that colonial rulers refused to let the colonized try. I 
say that the ideological dominance of free trade kept many others from even considering
the possibility.a€D In summary, the advantage that came from being first to industrialize made 
North Atlantic countries so rich so fast that they were able to make the rules, and the
rules they preferred set the price of entry too high for latecomers. Not until the second half of 
the twentieth century were the nations of Southeast Asia able to raise their
manufacturing capacity to the level of the North Atlantic countriesa€”and then surpass it.

We think today that economic prosperity is a stabilizing alternative to war, but for a very long 
time it had the opposite effect. As the nineteenth century turned into the twentieth, and
Western European nations grew ever wealthier, they built up ever more powerful military forces that 
eventually gave us two world wars. DeLong suggests World War I was a last


hurrah for aristocrats who could find no place in the new economic order. To preserve their 
position, they whipped up nationalistic fervor. Neither the Central Powers nor the Allied

nations fully grasped, until it was too late, that with weaponry more destructive by several orders 
of magnitude than was previously deployed, and with each side matched evenly in
wealth and strength, the result was bound to be a very long and unimaginably bloody stalemate. Even 
Keynes understood this only in retrospect.

After World War I, the economic circumstances of the North Atlantic nations diverged. The United 
States, where the war had not been fought, experienced the frenzied economic
growth of the Roaring a€™ 20s. Europe, still digging itself out of the rubble, struggled through 
economic hardship and social unrest. These were especially destabilizing in
Germany, where the armistice had imposed ruinous economic reparations. The paths of the two 
continents were rejoined in 1929 when the stock market crashed and economies
went   bust all over the world. After Adolf Hitler became German chancellor in 1933, he pulled 
Germany out of the Depression faster, DeLong reports, than any other nations save
the Scandinavian countries and Japan. a€oeWith the Gestapo in the background to suppress agitation 
for higher wages, better working conditions, or the right to strike ,a€D DeLong
explains, a€oeand with strong demand from the government for public works and military programs, 
unemployment fell during the 1930s.a€D Fascism worked, until it didna€™ t.

Hitler was of course the most evil dictator in world history, or close to it. (Stalin and Mao 
murdered more people.) One benefit of looking at Hitler through an economic prism is
learning that the FA^hrer was also a Malthusian. In Mein Kampf, Hitler worried that Germanya€™ s 
growing population would a€oeultimately end in catastrophe.a€D Hence the
Anschluss, the Nazi annexation of Austria, and Lebensraum, Hitlera€™ s program of expansion to the 
East. The United States entered the war at the end of 1941. The economic
mobilization this required restored the United States to economic health. Hitlera€™ s defeat and 
Germanya€™ s loss of its territories were Stalina€™ s gain, as countries occupied
by    the Nazis were absorbed into the USSR and the Eastern bloc. The Allies moved in the opposite 
direction, losing colonies over the following decades. War-impoverished Western
Europe in many cases saw more cost than benefit in the imperial project. Eventually, a crumbling 
Soviet Union would follow a similar course and cut its satellites loose. Russian
President Vladimir Putina€™ s recent Ukraine invasion is a brutal and foolish attempt to reverse 
course yet again, with no obvious economic benefit to anyone.

What DeLong self-consciously calls his a€oegrand narrativea€D falters as he shifts into the postwar 
years. He lays in a lot of Cold War history that, while fascinating in itself, is
related indirectly at best to the economic story, and he gropes for a satisfactory answera€’’maybe 
there is nonea€”to why postcolonial regimes in the global south have stumbled
politically and economically. DeLonga€™ s book is, in fact, fairly undisciplined throughout. Ita€™ 
s loaded with infelicitous witticisms; variations on a€oeblessed be the
marketa€D appear no fewer than 16 times. For pages on end, DeLong argues with himself. For even 
longer stretches, the economic thread vanishes completely. There are many
fascinating treesa€’’intriguing facts and sharp insightsa€”but not much forest. Thata€™ s 
especially true of the booka€™ s second half.

The postwar story is actually fairly simple. For the next 35 years, the North Atlantic economies 
grew at a phenomenal pace, and, within those nations, the benefits were distributed
more broadly than ever before. The French call these years Les Trente Glorieuses; the Germans call 
them the Wirtschaftswunder (a€oeeconomic miraclea€D); Americans call them
the Great Compression. The French economist Thomas Piketty, in his tidier and more lucid new book, 
A Brief History of Equality, writes they were characterized by a€oea massive
and relatively egalitarian investmenta€D across society: in education and health care, 
transportation and other infrastructure, pensions, and a€oereserves, such as unemployment
insurance, for stabilizing the economy and society in the event of a recession.a€D

The economic boom was the fulfillment of demand that had built up in the United States since 1929 
and in Western Europe since 1914. But it was also the logical result of
government spending not, as previously, in service of large private fortunes (greatly diminished, 
especially in Europe, by two world wars and the Depression), but rather to
strengthen    a newly prosperous middle class. The root of this change was a democratizing trend 
that, in those nations that resisted fascism, had been gathering strength since around
1900, with such advances as womena€™ s suffrage, the direct election of senators in the United 
States, diminishment of the House of Lordsa€™ power in the United Kingdom,
and growing union power everywhere.

Part of this story was progressive taxation. It was an old idea, but it didna€™ t really take root, 
Piketty writes, until early in the twentieth century. The United States led the way in
1913 with its progressive income tax, followed by progressive income and inheritance taxes in 
Europe. The two world wars drove taxes highera€’’especially the seconda€”and
after World War II, taxes fell only somewhat. Piketty trumpets the societal benefit of imposing 
a€oeconfiscatorya€D (his unapologetic term) top marginal rates of 80 to 90 percent
in the United States. These put an end to a€oethe most astronomical remunerations.a€D There was no 
reason for companies to push a top executivea€™ s wages above the

threshold for the top marginal tax bracket, because the federal government would collect nearly all 
that additional cash in taxes. That helped prompt companies to spend any surplus
on the rank and file instead. Conservatives today argue that when marginal tax rates rise too high, 
that chokes off innovation. But through the 1950s and 1960s,
a€ceconfiscatorya€D taxes choked off only excessive wage growth at the top. Productivity climbed 
briskly anyway, and so did per capita income.

The good times for the North Atlantic nations ended in the 1970s, through a combination of oil 
shocks, out-of-control inflation, falling productivity, and deceleration of economic
growth. By the end of that decade, manufacturing was shifting decisively to Southeast Asia, 
creating competition for the United States and Europe. In his influential 1975 book,
Equality and Efficiency, Arthur Okun, chairman of President Lyndon Johnsona€™ s Council of Economic 
Advisers, argued that you could increase economic equality or you could
increase economic efficiency, but you couldna€™ t do both at the same timea€”a view that paved the 
way for market fundamentalism. (The favored term in the economics
profession   is a€ceneoliberalism,a€D but I reject it because many critics of market fundamentalism 
with a more diffuse political agenda also called themselves neoliberals, wholly
unaware                                                                                 of its 
other meaning.)

DeLong makes a strong case that the turn in the 1980s to market fundamentalism was a dismal 
economic failure. He notes that President Ronald Reagan and British Prime Minister
Margaret Thatcher, in cutting taxes and reducing regulation, achieved no discernible improvement 
for employment, wages, investment, or economic growth. Inflation came down,
stimulating a cyclical economic expansion, but that was the doing of Paul Volcker, chairman of the 
Federal Reserve Board. Meanwhile, the deregulated banking industry created
first    a savings and loan crisis that caused $160 billion to evaporate, with most of that tab 
picked up by taxpayers, and, later, a mortgage crisis that caused $3.3 trillion in home equity
to evaporate, very little of it reimbursed by the government. Reagan and ThatcheraC™ s true legacy, 
mostly through tax cuts, was to extend and accelerate the late-1970s return to
ever-growing economic inequality, a trend that continues todaya€”and that, contrary to Okun, yields 
absolutely no benefit to economic efficiency.

I take the somewhat conventional view that the long twentieth century ended around 1980. 
Cherry-picking from DeLong and Piketty, here is my summary of the long twentieth
century. At its start, rapid economic growth hypercharged imperialism and militarism. The latter 
spun madly out of control from 1914 to 1945, killing about 100 million people.
After 1945, democratization dating to earlier in the century matured to the point where 
industrialized nations moved steadily toward greater economic equality. But by 1980, both
the rapid economic growth and the egalitarian trend were over. Applause, curtain.

DeLong, however, extends his long twentieth century to 2010. That allows him to include the 
computer-driven economic boom of the late 1990s, which hyper-globalized the
economy and pushed manufacturing, unevenly, into the global south. But the computer revolution was, 
I think, less a culmination of the long twentieth century than a distant echo
of    its beginnings. It seems a big deal to us because we witnessed it. But the latea€ 
“nineteenth- and earlya€“twentieth-century convergence of telephones, electrification, cars,
radios, motion pictures, airplanes, and so on altered economic fife much more dramatically. The 
computer boom mimicked the effects of the Industrial Revolution but fell well short
of  its breadth and magnitude. The wealth it created boosted middle-class incomes for a few years 
in the late 1990s, but it boosted incomes for the superrich much more, and, after
2000, pretty much exclusively. That made it a less transformative event than the Industrial 
Revolution, whose benefits were, during most of the twentieth century, shared widely.

The economic story of the twenty-first century will not, forecasters typically say, be a happy one. 
One school of thought says the economy has entered a long period of what
Harvard economist Larry Summers calls a€oesecular stagnation,a€D or slow economic growth due to a 
reluctance to invest. Another school, led by the Northwestern economist
Robert Gordon, says productivity growth will be sluggish because future technologies cana€™ t 
possibly be as transformative as those of the long twentieth century. Yet another
school of thought says that the economic story of the next 80 years will be China, and that the 
rest of us will just be along for the ride. A virtue of both DeLonga€™ s book and
Piketty a€™ s is that they avoid such crepe hanging. Piketty is guardedly optimistic about the 
prospects for future social progressa€”a pleasant surprise after the pessimism he
expressed in his 2014 book, Capital in the Twenty-First Centurya€”and DeLong says we just cana€™ t 
know what lies ahead. Hea€™ s right.

But whatever our next grand narrative turns out to be, the economic problem wona€™ t be solved. How 
can it be, when inequality is still rising throughout the industrialized world,
and when most of the global south hasna€™ t even started to address the economic problem? Wea€™ 11 
all be richer, but to vastly unequal degrees. Even if we succeed in reversing
the trend toward growing economic inequality, and even if we find ourselves speaking, in awed 
tones, of the tiger economies of Africa and Latin America, the economic problem
will remain unsolved because todayaC™ s notions of sufficiency will (one hopes) be too stingy to 
serve a more prosperous future. So dona€™ t give up your day job just yet.

Subscribe now

