Subscribe now

CONDITION: Slouching Towards Utopia Has Still More Fans:

Matt Yglesias: Transcript: a€~What are three books you would recommend to the audience?a€! Brad 
DeLonga€™ sa€! Slouching Towards Utopia^* a broad-based history of economic growth over the course 
of the long 20th century is really, really gooda€!
Share

FIRST: What Should My Follow-Up Book Be?

What should be the first things I rescue from the cutting room floor from the Slouching Towards 
Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> process and add to to turn into anothera€”shortera€”book?
Here is one possibility:

Share

Ensorcelled by the Devil of Malthus

World Political-Economy History, -6000 to 1870


Between 1848 and 1873 John Stuart Mill published the successive additions of his Principles of 
Political Economy, with Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy. In each edition of the 
book he included the following passage:

Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day's toil 
of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery and 
imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and others to make fortunes. They have 
increased the comforts of the middle classes. But
they have not yet begun to effecta€! great changes in human destiny a€! 
<https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli .2015.36903>

1870 was not that long ago. For somebody like my son, born in 1990, it was the date of birth of his 
great-great grandparents. From 1870 to today is five generations. From -6000 to 1870 is 260 
generations. Moreover, there was about as much proportional technological progress from -6000 to 
1870 as there has been from 1870 to today. Yet between -6000 and 1870
typical human standards of living increased by only perhaps 40% as population grew from 5 to 1300 
milliona€”260-fold. By contrast between 1870 and today humanitya€™ s collective standard of living 
has grown ten-fold as human population has grown from 1.3 to 7.8 billiona€”six-fold.

That population growth is the answer to the question of why humanitya€™ s productivity and standard 
of living has risen so much since 1870, while it rose so little before. Before 1870, that greater 
population puts more pressure on resources caused nearly all of pre-1870 technological progress to 
be eaten up by the need to compensate for the smaller farm sizes and
poorer near-surface ores available to the average member of the growing population. Before 1870, 
technology lost its race with fertility. After 1870, it won it.

Thus the first questions about the pre-1870 economy present themselves:

• Why was technological progress so slow before 1870?

•  And why was population growth so relatively fast, by the yardstick of the contemporaneous rate 
of technological improvement, over the nearly 8 millennia between -6000 and 1870?

• Why, and how?
Put a pin in those questions.

That technology lost its race with fertility over -6000 to 1870 profoundly shaped all of human 
history up to 1870. Technologya€™ s loss of its race against fertility meant that the pre-1870 
world was one of dire poverty: there was absolutely no chance, back then, for humanity to be 
productive enough to bake a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have
enough. People, however, still desperately wanted enough for themselves and their families. What to 
do? Since you could not produce with high enough productivity, you chosea€”if you coulda€”the 
alternative: to take. You established yourself as part of the elite, A©lbowed competitors for 
membership out of the way, dominated, and took: history was then a
coalition of thugs-with-spears plus their accountants, bureaucrats, and propagandists. They lived 
the (relatively) good life that we remember as the high civilizations of the past. The strong did 
what they wished, while the weak suffered what they must.

This book is about those processes, and those years during which humanity was ensorcelled by the 
Devil of Malthusa€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  App Economy Insights: dYs~Tesla: Bigger than Apple ?dYs~: a€~Why Elon Musk believes Tesla will 
be a $4 trillion companya€!

• Tracy Alloway & Joe Weisenthal: That Sound You Hear Is a Reshuffling of Global Capitala€!

• Wikipedia: Sankey diagrama€!

•  Michael A. Clemens & Ethan G. Lewis: The Effect of Low-Skill Immigration Restrictions on US 
Firms and Workers: Evidence from a Randomized Lottery: a€~We evaluate the marginal impact of the 
quota on firms entering the 2021 H-2B visa lottery using a novel survey and pre-analysis plan. 
Firms exogenously authorized to employ more
immigrants significantly increase production (elasticity +0.16) with no decrease or an increase in 
U.S. employment (elasticity +0.10, statistically imprecise) across several pre-registered 
subsamples. The results imply very low substitutability of native for foreign labor in the 
policy-relevant occupationsa€!

•  Ken White: a€~If Adidas stops paying a billionaire for generating goodwill just because he 
speaks his mind about Jewish conspiracies to control America, are our college students really free 
to learn about Austrian economics? Tomorrow on the Cancel Culture Reporta€!

• Norman Angell: The Great Illusiona€!

•  Robert Darnton: The Meaning of Mother Goose: a€~The mental world of the unenlightened during the 
Enlightenmenta€!. Consider a storya€”a story everyone knows, though not in the following version, 
which is the tale more or less as it was told around firesides in peasant cottages during long 
winter evenings in eighteenth-century Francea€!

•  Martin Wolf: Does Economics Drive All Politics: a€~That fever captured by the Brexitersa€! may 
now break, and we will get back to something more normala€!. No one imagines we wona€™ t have a 
fair election. Nobody imagines that we wona€™ t be able to get rid of leaders who misbehave and 
thata€™ s at least modestly encouraging.

•  Branko Milanovic & al.: Prea€DIndustrial Inequality: a€~This article infers inequality across 
individuals within each of the 28 pre-industrial societies, for which data were available, using 
what are known as social tables. It applies two new concepts: the inequality possibility frontier 
and the inequality extraction ratio. They compare the observed
income inequality to the maximum feasible inequality that, at a given level of income, might have 
been a€~extracteda€™ by those in power. The results give new insights into the connection between 
inequality and economic development in the very long runa€!

Leave a comment

AJs:

If you want to claim that conservative governance is good for Britain and that Liz Trussa€™ s 
proposed policies were a€oesound in economic policy termsa€D, do not:

• Stress how British economic growth ceased under Cameron, May, Johnson, and Trussa€!

• Lead with the fact that the lead element of her a€oesound plansa€D was a a€oeA£6O billion 
blowouta€Da€!

•  Stress how her tax cuts were too small for even swivel-eyed true believers to think they would 
have significant supply-side investment-boosting effectsa€!

• Wave hands about how this time red tape really would have been cut.,.

John Cochrane & Jon Hartley: The Liz Truss Tragedy: a€~The countrya€™ s economy is not growing. Its 
GDP per capita is lower than it was in 2007a€!. Sound as Trussa€™ s plans were in economic-policy 
terms, her governments™ s handling of the messaging and the politics was spectacularly inepta€!. 
Trussa€™ s announcement of a
A£60 billion ($68 billion) blowout to hold down gas pricesa€!. By starting with taxes and 
subsidies, Truss and Kwarteng guaranteed that nobody would pay attention to thea€! essential 
pro-growth regulatory reforms that they had described in the 2012 book Britannia Unchaineda€!. 
Truss had also planned to bring back North Sea oil
production and lift the UKa€™ s ban on fracking. These are sensible responses to a global energy 
crisisa€!. Trussa€™ s critics seized on UK bond-market hiccups, though these werea€! largely 
attributable to the Bank of England raising rates, and to a pension risk regulation fiasco. 
Nonetheless, Truss quickly gave ina€!. When an iron lady
was needed, Truss proved to be made of strawa€!

While Noah Smith thinks that any change to Twitter will ultimately get us out of the unsatisfactory 
rut we are stuck in and to a better place, I am much more skeptical. I am looking forward with some 
dread to a Night of the Chaos Monkey:

Matt Levine: Elon Musk Might Buy Twitter This Week: a€~Oh Elon. a€oeThe most entertaining outcome 
is the most likely,a€D Elon Musk once tweeted, as far as I can tell not about a particular event 
but as a general life philosophya€i. It does seem like the deal will close this week. Bloomberga€™ 
s Paula Seligson, Katie Roof and Ed
Hammond reported last weeka€! bankers and lawyers are preparing paperworka€! talksa€! have turned 
cordiala€! banksa€! led by Morgan Stanley, are also ironing out the steps needed to finalize 
fundinga€L Part of me feels like it will never really be over. Lots of story lines will continue 
past closinga€!. Musk Twitter is going to have to pay
something like $1.2 billion a year in interest to its banksa€!. What if it doesna€™ t make enough 
money to cover the interest? Will Musk chip in some money out of his own pocket? Will he not, and 
dare Morgan Stanley et al. to try to take the company from him? What will they do? Imagine being 
Morgan Stanley and deciding whether to
foreclose                                                                                           
                                                                on Musk Twitter. The downsides of 
foreclosing are (1) Musk is the richest person in the world and an important client and now you 
have enraged him and (2) now you own Twitter. Does not seem funa€!. There is something poetic about 
the worlda€™ s richest person issuing the worlda€™ s largest pile of unsellable debta€!. Musk
did not become the worlda€™ s richest person by being stable and conservative and always honoring 
the letter and spirit of his commitments. Will he pay back this debt? Maybe! We have a few years to 
find out. Also hea€™ s going to fire everyonea€!. Muska€™ s basic content plans for Twitter are (1) 
less moderation and (2) less spam, and
while those goals do not logically conflict with each other, there is an obvious practical 
tensiona€!. Also it is a€oenational emotional wellness montha€D at Twitter, oopsa€!


A A V/ V'£,CLAACCCA A Ct A A AAA IV11W VIA CIA J C*\AV1 A A <7 A A A CAAV, □V11OV1.

Adam Smith: Wealth of Nations: a€~Is this improvement in the circumstances of the lower ranks of 
the people to be regarded as an advantage or as an inconveniency to the society? The answer seems 
at first sight abundantly plain. Servants, labourers, and workmen of different kinds, make up the 
far greater part of every great political society.
But what improves the circumstances of the greater part can never be regarded as an inconveniency 
to the whole. No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the 
members are poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge 
the whole body of the people, should have such a
share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably well fed, clothed, and 
lodged.

Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


