Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) Past discrimination in America has created a legacy of present inequality in wealth, income, 
access to education, and so on. Present discrimination amplifies these inequalities
inherited from the past and ensures that they are transmitted into the future. We do not know 
nearly as much as we should about how these processes are working out on the ground
in  the United States today. And if we are going to attain equitable growth, we very much need to 
collect much more data on how these processes are working:

Shaun Harrison: The Imperative of Focusing on Racial Equity in U.S. Economic Statistics: a€~The 
coronavirus pandemic and resulting sharp recession
put a glaring spotlight on the importance of data disaggregation. During the early stages of the 
pandemic, most states were not reporting coronavirus
infections and COVIDa€“19 fatalities by race. Consequently, policymakers did not knowa€”but do 
nowa€”that Black people in the United States died at

1.4 times the rate of White people from COVIDa€“19, and that in certain states, Latinx people were 
3.7 times more likely to have tested positive for the
virus than their White neighbors. This lack of data disaggregation made it more difficult for 
policymakers to understand the contours of the pandemica€!.
Data disaggregation is likewise critically important for better understanding the many racially 
disparate aspects of the U.S. economy and considering
policies to address those disparities. Racial and ethnic discrepancies in economic outcomes have 
long been known, but improvements to data disaggregated
by race and ethnicity by federal statistical agencies can help improve policymakersa€™ 
understanding of economic and social outcomes for all
communities of colora€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-imperative-of-focusing-on-racial-equity-in-u-s-economic-statistics/
>

2) If the history of the past 50 years has taught us anything, it is that the hope that the effects 
of discrimination would rapidly wither away once it no longer had the supporting
authority of the state was either naA“ve or dishonest. Yet this assumption underlies a great deal 
of our public policy. And in the lack of sufficient data as to what is actually
happening, we are largely flying blind into the future:

Danny Yagan: a€~Before I was chief economist at OMB, I was a professor doing research using tax 
data. I could cut the data in myriad way, but not by
race, a huge blind spot and a major hindrance for achieving racial equity a€!

LINK: <https ://twitter. com/dsmitch28/status/1404863217407610882>

3) I knew back in 2010 That the Republican and Democraticic-Righta€™ s refusals to accept that more 
needed to be done to hasten the recovery were disastrous. And I knew at the
time that the Obama administration^™ s decision To rhetorically accommodate that beliefa€”the 
belief that it was time to take your foot off the gasa€”was appalling. But with
each passing year it seems that I get more information about just how disastrous those decisions 
actually were:

Austin Clemens: New Great Recession Data: Congress Should Go Big: a€~Undershooting the policy 
response would be a far more dangerous prospect
and could lead to a repeat of the slow and inequitable economic growth that followed the previous 
U.S. recessiona€!.. After the Great Recession of
2007a€“2009, then-President Barack Obama and the U.S. Congress passed an insufficient stimulus, 
then pivoted too quickly to debt reduction. This was a
crushing mistake that left many U.S. workers and their families stuck in the doldrums for years, 
facing stagnant, or even declining, incomes. The slow and
uneven recovery was the direct result of these policiesa€!. A new data series from the U.S. 
Department of Commercea€™ s Bureau of Economic
Analysisa€”its Distribution of Personal Income seriesa€’’shows just how devastating this pattern 
was for most U.S. workers and their familiesa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/new-great-recession-data-suggest-congress-should-go-big-to-spur-a-broad
-based-sustained-u-s-economic-recoverv/>

4) From four years ago. But still, I think, the best and most lively thing I have participated in 
on the current state of globalization and of it effects:

Gillian Tett, Steven Ciobo, J. Bradford DeLong, John Hagel, Alejandro Ramirez MagaA±a, & Stephen 
Schwarzman (2017): Globalization in the
Crosshairs: a€™ In the 20 years leading up to the financial crisis, international trade grew at 
twice the rate of global output. Since then, trade has struggled
to recover. Recent data is more worrying still, suggesting that tradea€™ s share of global GDP is 
falling. With mainstream political support for multilateral
trade deals diminishing and populist movements on the rise in the U.S. and Europe, it is time to 
examine the future of globalization. Panelists will consider
the following questions: Has international tradea€”and globalization more broadly a€’’entered a 
period of stagnation or even reversal? Once unleashed, can
globalization ever reverse or are we just seeing a slowdown in a normal cycle? What are the 
implications for the global economy and the international
economic order?a€!

LINK: <https://www.youtube .com/watch?v=fPDH_R2Chbk>

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)The plague year is not over. It may be only half-over, depending on what the Delta variant and 
subsequent variants do; and depending on how much Republican politicians and
their media-grifter allies continue to find advantage in trying to suppress vaccination:

Bob Wachter: Covid (@UCSF) Chronicles, Day 453: a€~I know everybodya€™ s sick of playing 
3-dimensional Covid chess. Sorry, but the Delta variant
forces us back to the chess boarda€!. If youa€™ re fully vaxxed, I wouldna€™ t be too worried, 
especiallya€! in a highly vaxxed regiona€!. If youa€™ re
not vaccinated: Ia€™d be afraid. Maybe even very afraida€!. Sadly, ~50% of the U.S. (>age 12) 
remains unvaccinated, and in certain states (mostly
southern & right-leaning), ita€™ s more like 2/3rdsa€!. This is the most dangerous moment to be 
unvaccinateda€!. The virusa€! is better at infecting
peoplea€i.  3 thingsa€! about variantsa€! a) are they more infectious? b) are they more serious? 
(ie, are you likelier to get very sick) & c) are they vaccine
(or   prior Covid-based immunity) resistant?a€! For Delta, Pfizer dose 1 is only ~33% 
protectivea€!. What to do? For a vaccinated person, watch the Delta

%a€!. If youa€™re seeing more cases & more Delta, Ia€™ d restore some precautionsa€! indoor mask 
wearinga€!. If youa€™re unvaxxed, get your
shots!a€! If your strategy was a€oela€™ 11 consider a shot if I see an uptick in cases,a€D thata€™ 
s also a loser, since once a surge begins, you wona€™ t
be  well protected against Delta for 4a€“6 weeksa€!. For unvaxxed, I wish you well but my sympathy 
is flagging. Your bad choice is looking worsea€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/Bob_Wachter/status/1404151502864883713>

2) No. We do not know how to get 8 million people hired in six months. But we should try everything 
to see if we should get it accomplished, and we should be sensitive to not
ripping holes in families finances while we try to do so:

Lauren Bauer, Arindrajit Dube, Wendy Edelberg, & Aaron Sojourner: Examining the Uneven & 
Hard-to-Predict Labor Market Recovery: a€~Any
effects of expanded unemployment insurance benefits on labor supply will dissipate quickly as the 
benefits expire nationally in early September and before
then in an increasing number of states. Indeed, policymakers should be on high-alert for whether 
the expiration of those benefits results in extraordinary
financial hardship for some workers unable to find jobs. There are many signs that the U.S. labor 
market is on the mend. For example, the average net
increase  in payroll employment from February to April was over 500,000. Initial unemployment 
insurance claims continue to decline. The number of
unemployed people per job opening has fallen sharply. Teens are working in the labor market at 
higher rates than at any time in the past decade.

Nonetheless, policymakers must be vigilanta€’’continuing to increase easy access to vaccines and 
helping to make working safe and rewardinga€!
LINK: <https://www.brookings 
.edu/blog/up-front/2021/06/03/examining-the-uneven-and-hard-to-predict-labor-market-recovery/>

3) A very nice interview here about what good anthropologists can bring to economics. The answer 
is: a lot. A standard economists assumption that everyone in the economy is

thinUncr DVA Adam ^mith imacrinAd n Arinin wmitd ic rAattv far fmm adAmiatA*


Gillian Tett: Listen to the Silence: a€~How anthropology helps make sense of the world. The FTa€™ s 
Gillian Tett tells Merryn Somerset Webb why what
people arena€™ t talking about is just as important as what they are, and why combining 
anthropology with economics can help us make sense of asset
prices, markets and the world in a way that pure hard science cana€™ta€!

LINK: <https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=uN9YDE5JUbc>

4) I must say: the claim that those of us who say we are happy with current fed and fiscal policy 
in terms of their Macro economic affects are lyinga€“that claim really, really
annoys me. It is false.

And about Mervyn Kinga€™ s claim that there are a bunch of people who are quiet in public but tell 
him in private that they agree with him about his worries? That annoys me as
well. Mervyn: you Have established that the second group is two-faced. Why are you so sure that the 
face they have turned to you in private is the truth face? A much better
heuristic that I have always found reliable is to listen only to those who have the courage of 
their convictions, and dismiss the two-faced as of no interest or account:

Mervyn King: Make No Mistake, the Risk of Inflation Is Real: a€~Price stability is when people stop 
talking about inflation and their decisions reflect
genuine economic factors. It has been a long time since inflation was a talking point but, 
especially in the United States, it has reentered public debatea€!.
Rising input prices and higher output prices reflecting shortagesa€!. Some of these increases may 
well prove transitory. For the first time since the 1980s,
though, two factors make inflation a serious risk: excessive monetary and fiscal stimulus, and weak 
political resistancea€!. Many economists are reluctant
to criticize the Biden stimulus plans because they share his concerns about the countrya€™ s social 
and political problems. But Ia€™ ve seen few
challenges to the proposition that the degree of stimulus is out of all proportion to the magnitude 
of any plausible output gap. And the same logic applies to
other advanced economiesa€!. Central-bank independence will be tested over the next few yearsa€!. A 
combination of political pressure to assist in
financing budget deficits, promises not to tighten policy too soon, and a growing involvement by 
central banks in political matters all point to a growing
risk   that central banks will respond too slowly to higher inflation.

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-06-07/make-no-mistake-the-risk-of-inflation-is-real
-mervyn-king>

5) A truly excellent window into what the Biden administration is thinking right now about fiscal 
policy. I highly recommend that you watch it:

Kim Clausing: Fiscal Policy for Todaya€™ s Economy

LINK: <https://www.youtube .com/watch?v=r 1 GOlIdmNVw>:

6) Can Chinaa€™ s government judge what activities it might support will generate the largest 
positive engineering externalities? Can it actually run a successful high-tech
industrial policy? Japan did not: when its MITI started trying to push the technological frontier 
rather than simply judging that companies whose products were approved by
purchases on foreign markets were worth subsidizing, Japanese high-tech industrial policy stopped 
succeeding.

It is the United States that has managed, from Eli Whitney to today, to successfully use government 
leversa€’’public investment in education and infrastructure, subsidies, and
procurement guaranteesa€”to actually make the thing work. And yet we do not have a good big picture 
of how this was actually accomplished.

Now it is going to be Chinaa€™ s turn in the barrel:

Economist: The Chinese State Is Pumping Funds into Private Equity : a€~Serving a higher purpose. 
The Chinese state is pumping funds into private
equity. It sounds too good to be true to private investorsa€”and it might bea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/2021/06/05/the-chinese-state-is-pumping-funds-into-
private-equity>

7) Ah. So that is where this comes from. But when and how does a€oeBefore Timea€D shift to the 
a€oeBefore Timesa€D, plural, which is what I hear today?:

Ben Zimmer: a€~The Before Timea€™: A Sci-Fi Idea That Has Made Its Way to Real Life: a€~We likely 
owe the a€oeBefore Timea€D label to an
episode of the original a€oeStar Treka€D series broadcast in 1966, in which the crew of the 
Enterprise encounter a planet populated by children who
survived   a man-made plague. A young girl name Miri (whose name also serves as the title of the 
episode) explains how the planeta€™ s grown-ups, known
as a€ceGrups,a€D disappeared: a€oeThat was when they started to get sick in the Before Time. We 
hid, then they were gone.a€D In 2000, an episode of
a€oeSouth ParkaGD parodying a€oeStar Treka€D repopularized the expression, with lines like, 
a€oeThat was in the Before Time, in the Long Long
Ago.a€Da€! Thea€! trope makes it feel like wea€™re living through our own post-apocalyptic 
science-fiction plotlinea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.wsj.com/articles/the-before-time-a-sci-fi-idea-that-has-made-its-way-to-real-life-11592
580133>

8) a€oelnform your readersa€oe should be the watchword for the media. But, instead, it is still 
much more: a€oePretend to be a neutral observer from nowhere giving equal time to
all sides so that we can sell classified ads to everybodya€D. That still rules. And that, I think, 
makes most American journalists I run into willing accomplices of a lot of bad actors.
If you cannot judge which people are talking to you in bad faith and then call them out in a way 
that makes it obvious to all your readers, I do not think you have any business being
in journalism. And I am heartened that the smart Charlie Warzel agrees:

Charlie Warzel: What Newsrooms Still Dona€™ t Understand About the Internet: a€~Ed Zitron wrote an 
important piece on coordinated online attacks
against reportersa€l a fascinating papera€! bya€! Alice E. Marwick on a€oeMorally Motivated 
Networked Harassment.a€da€! The larger audience of
harassers  is usually convened (sometimes unwittingly, often purposefully) by an amplifier, which 
is usually a high profile or well-followed social media
account                                                                      or community. The 
important function of the amplifier is that they tend to take a persona€™ s comment or idea and 
move it from the authora€™ s
original context and audience and into their audiencea€! context collapsea€!. a€oeThe Twitter staff 
might recognize it as harassment if one person sent you
50 messagesa€! but ita€™ s always the one person [who] posted one quote tweeta€! and then ita€™ s 
50 of their followers who all independently sent you
those messages, right?a€Da€! Serial amplifiersa€’’especially the savvy ones who dona€™t themselves 
harass but signal their disapproval to their large
audiencesa€! tend to get away with launching these campaigns, while smaller accounts get in 
trouble. A good amplifier knows how to create plausible
deniability around their behavior. Often they say they are a€~just asking questionsa€™ or 
a€~leveling a fair critique at a person or public figurea€™ a€!

LINK: <https://warzel.substack.eom/p/newsrooms-dont-understand-the-internet>

