Subscribe now

The big lesson of Alan Blindera€™s Monetary and Fiscal History of the United States, 1961a€“2021 
<https://www.google.com/books/edition/A_Monetary_and Fiscal History _of_ the Uni/vM5qEAAAQBAJ> is 
that there is no big lesson.
There is no linear development.

There is no (or not much) post-WWII a€oeprogressa€D in figuring out how to manage economies for 
macroeconomic stability.
Rather, Blinder writes:

wheels within wheels, spinning endlessly in time and spacea€! [with] certain themesa€! waxing and 
waninga€! monetary versus fiscala€! the intellectual realma€! the world of practical policy 
makinga€! the repeated ascendance and descendance of Keynesianisma€!

The underlying story is thus that of the Wheel of Fortuna.

Problems appear, and are solved (or not solved), but the solution or non-solution then sets the 
stage for the emergence of a different problem, to which the economy is more vulnerable because of 
the actions taken in the recent past. And by the end of the story you feel as though highly similar 
problems have appeared several times: a never-ending game of whack-a-mole.


Stable Diffusion via Night Cafe: a€oeAlan Blinder and the Wheel of Fortunaa€O

Thus Alan writes, concerning the question about whether inflation expectations were well-anchored 
and could be expected to ebb (a€oel± < la€D, in his framing) or was highly persistent, with each 
shift in the inflation rate then permanently embedded in the likely future), about how when he:

entered graduate school in the fall of 1967a€!. empirical evidence virtually screamed out that I± < 
la€!. Theory and empirics clashed sharply. As Groucho Marx memorably asked, a€oeWho are ya gonna 
believe, me or your own eyes?a€D The view at MIT, as I recall, was go with your own eyesa€!

Which was, at the time, the right thing to do. For the MIT economics crowd was looking in the wrong 
direction: a€oeThomas Sargenta€! was demonstratinga€”in a beautiful five-page papera€! 
underappreciated at the timea€”that the debatea€! was beside the pointa€!a€D

Now the same problem is backa€”do inflation expectations remain well-anchored or not? Is the answer 
the same as it was in the 1970s? Perhaps; perhaps not. Right now is one of the few times I do not 
wish in my heart that I was on the Federal Reserve, for right now the burden of responsibility is 
overwhelming while the degree of our ignorance is much greater than usual.
Overall, the book is very nice indeed. It lets us ride along in the passengera€™ s seat over the 
extremely rocky road that the U.S. government has driven as it has tried, since World War II to 
manage the countrya€™ s macroeconomy in attempting to achieve price stability, full employment, 
financial robustness, and healthy investment.

The individual episodes as the Wheel of Fortuna turns are all strikingly, wittingly, anda€”I 
believea€’’almost completely accurately described. The book is highly recommended. Read and absorb 
it, and you will be qualified to present yourself as a wise and respected elder statesmen who has 
seen much in the way of macroeconomic policy, and whose advice about the lessons of history is 
worth listening to.
But are there overarching themes to the book in the great number of successive individual episodes 
to serve as case studies, other than the one of the Wheel of Fortuna!

Here is a second theme that I have picked out. While historya€’’correctly handleda€”can be of great 
utility in understanding current situations, theorya€”at least currently fashionable theorya€”is 
not. Blinder judges that once-fashionable monetarism a€oerose to prominence on a combination of 
some hotly disputed scholarly work, Milton Friedmana€™ s singular brilliance and skill in debate, 
and perhaps most important the rise of inflationa€! [in which]
Keynesianism was unjustly tagged as inherently a€oeinflationarya€D anda€! registered substantial 
influence on policy formulationa€!a€D But its influence on policy was malign: a€oeThe policy debate 
wasa€! about whether fiscal policy not accommodated by monetary policy mattered. As it turns out, 
it dida€!a€D Of New Classical Economics a€oewith this a€~policy ineffectiveness^™ result [which] 
conquered vast swaths of academia in the 1970s and
1980sa€!a€D, Blinder judges that central bankers ignored it, and that they were right to do so and 
it was fortunate that it did so. And is the current workhorse DSGE-New Keynesian academic framework 
useful in understanding those aspects of the world that policymakers need to understand? Blindera€™ 
s skepticism here is, I think, 100% right.

Perhaps there are two other big themes as well to the twoa€”Wheel of Fortuna, and dangers of 
believing in fashionable theorya€”I have noted:

Third, monetary policymakers permanently tarnish their reputations for all time when they make 
their decisions on political grounds. Arthur Burnsa€™ s reputation did not survive his excessive 
concern for Nixona€™ s reelection in 1972. And Alan Greenspan a€oetarnished his gold-plated 
reputation by seeming to endorse the Bush tax cutsa€!a€D His semi-endorsement did, I think, push 
them across the legislative line back in 2001, to the countrya€™ s
substantial detriment.

Fourth, proper demand-management-and-growth fiscal policy is incredibly complex. The appropriate 
rules-of-thumb shift from decade to decade in ways that it is impossible for the political system 
to comprehend in anything like real time. And this is a huge problem. John Maynard Keynes back in 
1936 thought the proper stabilization policy required both fiscal and monetary policy, was 
attainable by technocratic management, and could solve both of
economiesa€™ major macroeconomic problemsa€’’unemployment and income distribution. But we cannot 
get there.

And overall? The book is highly, highly recommended.
Subscribe now

Leave a comment

