Subscribe now

The Candlemass Road'. A FELLOW OF CLARE HALL, being in that state where another houra€™ s tippling 
should render him swine drunk, asked me, if
I had a choice of all mankind that ever lived, which would I choose to sit by me as a guest at the 
next college feast. I made excuse that I was not of his
learned society, but he said all was one for that, and I must choose or be fined in stoupes for the 
company. Still I would have put him off, for I longed to be
quiet in my corner by the fire, away from the babble and ass-laughter of him and his companions, 
and have no part in their silly conceits designed to show
off their wit and learning (and little they had of either) in their cupsa€!.

It put them in a learning mood afterwards that were in the buttery, with such follies as what folk 
lived on the stars, and what part of the anatomy was the
seat of mirth, and anon to debating what cup companion they would choose for their feast. One said 
Julius Caesar, and another Francis, and others Aristotle
and Ptolemy and Roger Bacon, their vanity supposing they could have held equal discourse with these 
champions and sages, and then seeing me that sat
withdrawn, cried out that the old Portingale should speak his mind, aCcefor he hath travelled in 
his time, and been a priest, too, so sure he is ignorant
enough.a€D Seeing their canary humour, I begged again to be let be. a€oeNay, but ye shall answer, 
or be fined!a€D said they. a€ceAnd after wea€™ 11
have    the breeches off thee for a sullen old rascal that hops of his left foot. Choose, now, or 
pay forfeit !a€D

Seeing no help, I said if one must sit by me at any feast of theirs, it should be Attila the Hun, 
so should I be spared their rudeness and intrusion. Some
accounted it a good answer, and laughed, but he that had sneered at me scowled and said they had 
none at their feasts but those they might have good of,
and                                                                     I must name another, since 
Attila was a monstrous beast that none could have any good of, being curst and altogether 
abominable.

At this, I, being part drunk myself, said he lied, for good might be had of the worst that ever 
were, in certain cases. At this he swore that if I could not prove
it by logic, I should pay double forfeit and swim in the Cam for my impudence, so let me say how 
one could have good of Attila or any like him. His
fellows grinned and gleeked about me, and some cried, 'At him, old Papist!' but others 'Confound 
the Jesuit, he mocks us, to the river with him!' and bade
me make good mine argument.

First, I told them, they should name any two from whom they might hope to have the greatest good 
(other than Our Lord, for it was not fit to name Him in
such a question). They that had named Aristotle and St Francis as their chosen guests again cried 
out their names, and with those I was content, saying that
against them I would justify Attila and another like him, as Chingis Khan or Hulagu (of whom I 
doubt these scholars had heard, though they cried aye to
him).

I would do it, I said, on an hypothesis, as thus: 'Here is any one of you, in a lonely place, as a 
little cabin in the wilderness, with no neighbours or friends
by, and ye are sick and feeble, and with you your wife and two fair daughters.' Hereon they cried 
that being young they had no daughters, and would other
mena€™ s daughters do, to give them solace in that lonely place, whereof they doubted not they 
would soon be enfeebled if not sick! I let them bray it out,
and when they were quiet, continued: 'As ye lie there helpless, there approach three great thieves 
and murderers that ye know to be crueller than any devils,
who will surely torment and slay you and ravish your wife and fair daughters, and take and burn all 
besides. There is no help for you at all, being at their
mercy if they come in, but as ye lie in terror for what is to come, a knock falls on the nether 
door of your poor cabin, as it may be some wayfarer seeking
lodging or refreshment. Aye, and it may be he will lend you aid against your enemies approaching!

'You bid your wife open in haste. Now tell me, scholars, what men do you hope to see there when she 
opens? The learned, gentle Aristotle and St Francis
the meek, or Attila the great Hun armed cap-a-pie with Chingis at his elbow? From which pair, in 
your sore need, shall you hope to have the greater good,
the saintly philosophers or the lusty men of war?'

They cried out with scorn that between the enemies before and Attila at their back, it was all one, 
they should have nothing but evil at the hands of either.
'Not so,' says I, and bade them look in the chronicles, 'for there you shall read that the Scythian 
and the Mungul both, though in their conquests they were
monsters of cruelty that put whole nations to the sword, yet in their private and domestic ways 
were zealous for good order and discipline of law, being
such   as would not suffer weak or poor folk to be despoiled or hurt by thieves and ravishers. Aye, 
of that Chingis was it said that while he carpeted all Asia
with bones, yet might a virgin with a bag of gold walk the length of his dominions without harm, so 
perfect was his governance. So, again I say, who shall
better serve you in time of peril, the philosophers who wish you well but cannot front the 
murderers save with words, or the bloody ravagers of empires
who are yet ready to turn their weapons against common spoilers?'

At this they fell to babbling and dispute, and one fell down drunk crying 'Paradox! Paradox!' while 
another said that for all he knew Aristotle might be a
right swashing boy when it came to a fray. I asked would he wager on him with sword and buckler 
against my two savages, let roaring Francis give what
aid  he might, and he said, no, not at any odds. And while a few of them held that such as Attila 
and Chingis would do no good service to any, the more held
that I had made my case, and should not be fined or insulted, but pressed more drink upon me that I 
durst not refuse for fear of their rough merriment, and
called me a jolly old Pope, and how I came home I know not, for they found me sodden among the 
cabbages in the almshouse garden, and I was two weeks
abed thereafter with the sciatica.

And lying therea€l I fell to meditating on the good that evil men may do, by design or more 
commonly by chancea€!. I remembered sundry instances that I
had seen, and in especial the man Waitabouta€!. As to the Waitabout, he was no Attila yet had done 
ill enough in his time, and if he did good it was upon
compulsion and for a brief hour only, and still I know not whether it was good or no. But certain 
it is he was no common man, though common seeming, a
robber  and slayer and broken wanderer that had in him, I think, the making of a sage if not a 
saint. He read me a lesson, aye, and so too did my Lady Dacre,
though what it was I can hardly tell even now.

Yet I would tell of them both that have been out of my mind these many years, saving that visit my 
lady paid me five years agone, fair and smiling still and
brought me a gift of candles of fine Italian wax, though not scented, 'for we shall burn no incense 
between us, nor make graven images neither,' as she said,
which was an old jest between us. 'A remembrance of Candlemass,' says she, 'aye, of the Candlemass 
road,' and told me they had made a ballad of it, and of
what befell betwixt the fires at Triermain, which I marvelled to hear her speak of so lightly. But 
of Waitabout she spake not at alla€!.

If I am to tell of that road, I cannot come to it direct, for that would be to begin in medias res, 
as we clerks say when we mean in the midst of things but
wish to awe the commonalty with our learning (give us a fourth tassel, good Lord, for vanity!), but 
must needs give some preamble, about myself, and then
come in proper order to Waitabout, or Archie Noble as his name was, called Lang Archie, or 
Wait-about-him, or Master Noble as my lady styled him once
or twice, I think to his content, for broken men are not used to such courtesies. Of myself first 
then, not out of pride, but for your better understanding of
that which follows. And it is right, too, that the gown should take precedence of the renegado.

I, Luis Guevara, once a priest and ever a sinner, was born in Portugal, and came to England by a 
long road which it would weary you as much to heara€!

Share

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment


