Subscribe to get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. &/or become a paid subscriber support my hiring 
an RA for this, & to get the Directora€™ s Cuta€!

Type your emaila€|     Subscribe

FIRST: Higher Education and the Public Sphere as ??? Institutions:

A very nice book from Michael BA©rubA© and Jennifer Ruth, very nicely reviewed by Ryan Cooper in 
The American Prospect.

Ryan Cooper: The Cure for Hate Speech Is Not More Speech'. a€~Ita€™ s Not Free Speech: Race, 
Democracy, and the Future of Academic Freedom, by Michael BA©rubA© and Jennifer Rutha€!. BA©rubA© 
and Ruth were motivated by the Trump years and the George Floyd protests to reconsider their 
previous views on free speech and academic freedoma€!. [That] the two things are identicala€! 
doesna€™ t survive contact with the case of James Tracya€! who loudly promoted the conspiracy 
theory that the Sandy Hook school shooting was a false flag, and took to harassing the
victimsa€™ parentsa€! [claiming] academic freedom has nothing at all to do with free speechaCI 
academics should be protected [only] when they are commenting on their area of specific 
expertiseaC!. doesna€™ t work eithera€!.

BA©rubA© and Ruth argue that the way to thinka€! is by judging commentsaCI by whether they cast 
doubt on a professora€™ s fitness to participate in intellectual life. Academic freedom should 
protect professorsa€™ ability to say controversial things and start hard discussions, but it comes 
with an equally important responsibility that those statements be grounded in serious thought and 
researcha€”and in realitya€!. Ulrich Baera€! argues thata€! a€oespeech that proposes that some 
humans are innately inferior to others, and thus undermines the baseline assumption of human 
equalitya€!
degenerates into an exercise in domination.a€Da€! Thisa€! sounds like censorship, anda€! it is. 
Buta€! there are dozens of ideas that are de facto banned from the academy: flat earth theory, 
geocentrism, phlogistona€! a€oethe Jews had it coming,a€D a€oevaccines cause autism,a€D a€oeclimate 
change is a hoax,a€D and a€oephrenology has much to teach us.a€Da€!

Free speech and free discussion are public goods that require regulation to preserve just like any 
other kind of public gooda€!. The most widely applicable part of the book is a more general 
consideration of free speech itselfa€!. It is simply naA“ve to think that argument will convince 
people intent on leveraging liberal tolerance to seize power and murder their political opponentsa€!
LINK: 
<https://prospect.org/culture/books/cure-for-hate-speech-is-not-more-speech-berube-ruth-review/>

LINK: Michael BA©rubA© & Jennifer Ruth: Ita€™ s Not Free Speech: Race, Democracy, and the Future of 
Academic Freedom'. a€~When a professora€™ s intramural or extramural speech calls into question his 
or her fitness to servea€! how to manage the simmering tension between the academic freedom of 
faculty and the antidiscrimination initiatives of campus offices of diversity, equity, and 
inclusiona€! <https ://www.indiebound .org/book/9781421443874>

Modern societies have, among their most important parts, the fiduciary institution or science, the 
mercenary institution of the commodity market economy, and the institutions of the public sphere 
and higher education:

One excellence of the fiduciary institution of science is that, by assigning judgment to peer 
review by the community of those who seek to become masters of knowledge, it provides a sieve for 
distinguishing discovery from error. A second excellence of science is that by assigning priority 
and hence status to the first discoverer, it incentives both hard work and the creation of 
knowledge and the most rapid possible dissemination of that knowledge so that others can then build 
upon it. Thus the fiduciary institution of science solves the societal problem of incentivizing and 
then disseminating true and valid discovery.
This fiduciary institution goes wrong when the peers who are doing the reviewing do not seek above 
all to become masters of knowledgea€”do not prioritize the judgments of nature and experiment above 
all elsea€”and are in an absorbing state, where results that reinforce their prejudices are seized 
upon and those who generate such results are promoted, and results that contradict their prejudices 
are dismissed and those who generate such results dismissed as well. But as long as there is a 
continuous infusion of young who at least start out wanting to become masters of knowledge and 
believing in listening to
nature and experiment, science progressesa€”if only funeral by funeral.

One excellence of private property is that by assigning a€ceownershipa€D it has the potential to 
push decision-making power out from the ignorance center to the periphery where the information 
actually is and people understand the situation. One excellence of market exchange is that the 
prices it produces and disseminates serve as very good signals of the intensity of need for 
production and transport (or, rather, of the intensity of need times the wealth of those who have 
the moneya€”for those who do not have the money are invisible to the market). A second excellence 
is that the act of exchanging a commodity
for a price greatly incentivizes the production and transport of commodities the market has judged 
as valuable. A third excellence is that the market equilibrium coordinates: those whose 
opportunity-cost to produce or transport is less than the market price do so, those whose 
willingness-to-paya€”that is, their intensity of desire times their wealtha€”is greater than the 
market price utilize, and the two are balanced. Thus the mercenary institution of the commodity 
marketa€’’private property and market exchangea€’’solves the societal problems of information, 
incentivization, and coordination with respect to the
production, transport, and distribution of commodities. This mercenary institution goes wrong (a) 
where there are externalitiesa€’’where third parties are affected so that market-exchanges are not 
win-win-wina€”and (b) where the distribution of wealth is not in accord with the values in the true 
societal well-being function.

Suppose one were to attempt a similar analysis of the institutions of the public sphere and of 
higher education. What would it look like? I am not sure. But I think that BA©rubA© and Ruth may 
have just given us a very good starting place.
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


Very Briefly Noted:

• Brad DeLong: a€~Matthew Yglesias points to the problem of Bob Woodward 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2006/09/whv_oh_why_cant 26.html>

• Ben Thompson: The Current Thing'. a€~A world where the ability for anyone to post any idea has, 
paradoxically, meant far greater mass adoption of popular ideas and far more effective suppression 
of a€cebada€D ideasa€! <https://stratechery.com/2022/the-current-thing/>

• Scott M. (March 16,2003): Nestor Makhno & Me: a€~Getting rid of Makhno was one of the better 
things the Bolsheviks dida€! <https ://web.archive.org/web/20100717144259/http 
://pedantry.blogspot.com/2003_03_ 16_pedantry_archive.html#90784783>

• Stephen Broadberry & Mark Harrison: The Economics of the Second World War: Seventy-Five Years 
on<https://voxeu.org/article/economics-second-world-war-seventy-five-years-new-ebook>

• David Stockman: Author at Antiwar.com: a€~Pearl Harbor My Eye!: We were already getting sick and 
tired of this Zelensky clown, but the sheer chutzpah of comparing Ukrainea€™ s predicament with 
Pearl Harbor or 9/1 la€! <https://original.antiwar.com/author/David Stockman/>

• Annotations by Molly White & al.: The Edited LatecomeraC™ s Guide to Crypto: a€~On March 20,2022, 
the New York Times published a 14,000-word puff piece on cryptocurrenciesa€! [by] Kevin Roosea€! 
<https://www.mollywhite.net/annotations/latecomers-guide-to-crypto> 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2006/09/why_oh_why_cant 26.html>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Aaron Rupar: I spent all weekend being a punching bag for Trumpers. Herea€™ s why I have no 
regrets: a€~Given Ginni Thomasa€™ s involvement in a coup attempt, the nature of her marriage is 
very much in the public interesta€!


I spent all weekend being a punching bag for Trumpers. Here's why I have no regrets.

Over the weekend, I managed to attract the attention of the extremely online right for a tweet I 
posted about Clarence and Ginni Thomas. Given that I write a lot about right-wing media and am now 
driving traffic to it through no fault of my own, I thought ita€™ d be appropriate to devote part 
of todaya€™ s newsletter to explaining why I stand by what I tweeteda€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 19 likes A ll comments A- Aaron Rupar

• David Corn: a€™ At the Gridiron dinner, NH Gov Chris Sununu on Trump: a€oeHea€™ s fa€”ing 
crazya€!. I dona€™ t think hea€™ s so crazy he should be in a mental asylum. But if he is in one, 
hea€™ s not getting outa€Da€l

David Corn @DavidCornDC

At the Gridiron dinner, NH Gov Chris Sununu on Trump: a€oeHea€™ s fucking crazy.a€D Ia€™ 11 deny I 
said it. a€oel dona€™ t think hea€™ s so crazy he should be in a mental asylum. But if he is in 
one, hea€™ s not getting out.a€D Check against the tape.
3:11 AMT™ Apr 3,2022

10,338Likesl ,722Retweets


•  Edward Luce: d€™ lb Trumpian conservatives, Ukrainea€™ s cause is equivalent to Black Lives 
Mattera€”a liberal crusade they must deteat. Jacob Heilbrunn on how Putman™ s cause is only gettmg 
stronger among trump Republicans. God give me patiencea€;

r

■k a

Edward Luce @EdwardGLuce


politico .comTrumpian Conservatives Hold an a€~Emergencya€™ Meeting Over RussiaAt a Washington 
Marriott, the nationalist wing of the Republican Party wrestles with what Putina€™ s war means for 
their movement.
2:18 PM r™ Apr 2,2022

145Likes58Re tweets

• Tom Fallows: Bucha, Katyn, & Srebrenica



Breaking the News

Guest Post: Another Katyn Massacre, Another Srebrenica

Last month I put up two posts about Ukraine and Russia by my brother, Tom Fallows, a life-long 
scholar of Russian affairs. They were a€oeKiev in the 1970s, and Kyiv a€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 16 likes A- 3 comments A- James Fallows
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

I had been thinking that one-in-ten was about the right ratio of paid to total subscribers to this 
a€~Stack, but over the winter the fraction has drifted down to one-in-twenty. So if you are not a 
paid subscribera€”and if you can think of something I could add to the Directora€™ s Cut that would 
induce you to become a paid subscriber^’’please email your suggestions to me at 
brad.delong@gmail.com. &, please, become a paid subscriber to some a€~Stack, even if not this one. 
Chris, Hamish, and company are working hard and deserve more money, and their ability to satisfy 
their VC wolves with raw meat would, in
the long run, help create a much better public sphere, I think...

I had been thinking that one-in-ten was about the right ratio of paid to total subscribers to this 
a€~Stack, but over the winter the fraction has drifted down to one-in-twenty. So if you are not a 
paid subscribera€”and if you can think of something I could add to the Directora€™ s Cut that would 
induce you to become a paid subscriber^’’please email your suggestions to me at 
brad.delong@gmail.com. &, please, become a paid subscriber to some a€~Stack, even if not this one. 
Chris, Hamish, and company are working hard and deserve more money, and their ability to satisfy 
their VC wolves with raw meat would, in
the long run, help create a much better public sphere, I think...

Type your emaila€|     Subscribe

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

This seems to me both complete genius and badly in error. For one thing, it is not impossible to 
hold a position other than the dominant onea€”for what is the dominant position depends very much 
on onea€™ s own social network. But it is the case that, for nearly everyone, their 
internet-enabled social network will have a strongly dominant position, the authority of which is 
rarely worth resisting, and resisting which can rapidly become very painful. I will have to think 
much more about this:

Ben Thompson: The Current Thing'. a€~Aggregation Theorya€! the explosion of content on the 
Internet: the first order implication isa€! that there are far more categories of thought than ever 
before! And, if you dig deep enough into the Internet, this is true. Most people, though, dona€™ t 
dig that deep, just as they dona€™ t dig that deep for content or contacts or commerce: ita€™ s 
just far easier and more convenient to rely on Google or Facebook or Amazon. Why wouldna€™ t this 
same dynamic apply to ideas ?a€! We all outsource our intuition for what events matter, and what our
position on those events should be, to the most convenient option, especially if that option has 
obvious moral valence. Police brutality against people of color is obviously bad; people dying from 
COVID is obviously bad; Russia invading Ukraine is obviously bad; why wouldna€™ t each of us snap 
into opposition to obviously bad things?a€! Sure, the Internet makes possible a wide range of 
viewpointsa€”you can absolutely find critics of Black Lives Matter, COVID policies, or pro-Ukraine 
policiesa€”but the Internet, thanks to its lack of friction and instant feedback loops, also makes

nearly every position but the dominant one untenable. If everyone believes one thing, the costs of 
believing something else increase dramatically, making the consensus opinion the only viable 
option; this is the same dynamic in which publishers become dependent on Google or Facebook, or 
retailers on Amazon, just because that is where money can be made. Again, to be very clear, that 
does not mean the opinion is wronga€!. The more that an entity becomes dependent on an Aggregator, 
the more perilous the economic outlook for said entity. If you depend on Google or Facebook for 
traffic,
or Amazon for sales, the more liable you are to have your margin consumed by said entities. A truly 
sustainable business model depends on being able to connect to your customers on your own terms, 
not an Aggregatora€™ s. A similar critique can be made of ideasa€!. A world where the ability for 
anyone to post any idea has, paradoxically, meant far greater mass adoption of popular ideas and 
far more effective suppression of a€cebada€D ideasa€!

LINK: <https://stratechery.com/2022/the-current-thing/>

This is the David Stockman who was once Daniel Patrick Moynihana€™ s babysitter, and Reagana€™ s 
budget director. I used to think this kind of person did what he did because he had done some 
things he should not have in front of rolling spy cams in Red Square hotels. But now I am driven 
towards more Freudian a€oesomething is deeply broken in many men that impels them to fascisma€D 
explanations:

David Stockman: Author at Antiwar.com: a€~Pearl Harbor My Eye!: We were already getting sick and 
tired of this Zelensky clown, but the sheer chutzpah of comparing Ukrainea€™ s predicament with 
Pearl Harbor or 9/11 is just flicking outrageous. To paraphrase Senator Lloyd Benstena€™ s famous 
retort to Dan Quayle in the 1992 VP debate: We knew the United States of America and Ukraine isna€™ 
t any Uniteda€! Washingtona€™ s Hawks Are About To Wreck Global Commerce: We did get that right. At 
an intense seven-hour session in Rome, Bidena€™ s national security
advisor, Jake Sullivan, told the Chinese in no uncertain terms they are next in line for the 
sanctions hit paradea€! Bidena€™ s Sanctions on Russia Will Cause Havoc in Western Markets: What a 
tangled web these war-loving fools spin. We are referring, of course, to WashingtonaC™ s belated 
attempts to ease or remove sanctions against oil producers Venezuela and Iran. Thata€™ s so it can 
crank up the sanctions against the new villain of the month, Russia, without monkey-hammering 
American consumers with $7 gasoline prices. Then again, whya€! The War From TDS (Trump
Derangement Syndrome): Hear us out here. The Donald himself is the approximate casus belli of the 
World War III prelude now raging in Ukraine, reminding us once again that sometimes history morphs 
in the strangest ways. But the truth is, Trump single-handed generated such a deep, intense and 
irrational wave of TDS (Trump Derangement Syndrome) in thea€! The Eazy-Peazy Ukrainian 
Alternativea€’’Partition: A wise observer once cautioned about the danger of overthinking matters. 
That is, sometimes per OccamaC™ s Razor the right answer is the most direct, obvious and simple
one;   and that certainly applies in spades to the unfathomable mystery of how Washington got 
itself to the brink of wara€!

LINK: <https://original.antiwar.com/author/David_Stockman/>

A very nice classic piece about 20th century life in Ukraine from Aze Oide Web:

Scott M. (March 16,2003): Nestor Makhno & Me: a€~Dark Light by Ken MacLeoda€! a minor bit nearly at 
the end of the book: a€oea€~Bad news. What about the Party branch?a€™ Endecotta€™ s sandy eyebrows 
twitch, very slightly. a€~Theya€™re solid. Most of them.a€™ a€~What party?a€™ Annie asks 
suspiciously. a€~Uh, latera€™ , says Matt. He has an absurd flash-forward of her taking Endecott to 
task for Kronstadt, Makhno and the Barcelona Phone Company.a€da€! Nestor Makhno was an anarchist 
with a small army who took over a big chunk of the Ukraine during the
Civil War. Later, he was exiled to Paris and still has his fansa€!. Alla€! incidents when more 
orthodox communists took action against socialist anarchists. The thing is, for some people, Makhno 
was a terrorist. Ia€™ m one of those people, and one of the reasons is that they terrorised my 
grandfathera€™ s parents, and my grandfather used to tell the story regularly. Not that Grandpa 
could ever have entertained this thought, but getting rid of Makhno was one of the better things 
the Bolsheviks dida€!

LINK: <https://web .archive.org/web/20100717144259/http://pedantry.blogspot.com/2003_03_ 
16_pedantry archive .html#90784783>

SUBJECT: 2022 Battle of Kyiv

How much of this is true? At least these are coherent narratives: Antonov Airport, supply convoy, 
lipin (urban defense)-Vyshhorod (urban defense)-Makariv (ambush). Troop strength numbers seem to me 
to be simply guesses:

Tomi T. Ahonen: a€™ The Battle of Kyiv was decisive battle in Ukraine War that Russia launced 
invading on Feb 24,2022. Russian assault on Kyiv was catastrophic military failure, overwhelming 
victory for Ukraine. Because of Social Media, we have a unique ability to reconstruct history in 
near-real time, to know EXACTLY what happened and WHEN. And sort out the lies, propaganda and 
a€~fog of wara€™ . Not WHILE it happens, but very shortly thereafter. During the battle we cannot 
know WHICH of the social media postings is accurate, even to the best honest efforts of those
posting (because it could have been misunderstanding or a deliberate military diversion, intended 
to get attention). But after a battle, we can see what had actually happened, who won, who lost. 
Where the battle was fought. And we can tell quite well, which parts of the original postings were 
ACCURATEa€”and then collect the best TRUE history of what happened.

This is SIGNIFICANTLY better than reading or viewing the BEST news sources that were CONTEMPORARY 
because those were always subject to the same current analysis errors. Not knowing the big picture 
and the full story. Now we know.

We know NOW that yes, Putin had a 4 hours plan to win the war in Ukraine. And his a€~Plan Ba€™ was 
a 3 days plan to defeat Kyiv if the 4 hours plan somehow failed. He deployed both of these plans 
with MASSIVE military force, against Kyiv. We now know how:


FOUR HOUR PLAN: Yes. There was a plan to defeat Ukraine in a€~four hoursa€™ . It could have worked. 
Russia (=Soviet Union) used this in Hungary 1956, Czechoslovakia (1968) and Afghanistan (1979). 
Seize the capital, take the TV/radio, & declare on TV you won. Putin plan to defeat Ukraine in 4 
hours involved an air assault force of 1,000 men taking Antonov Airport at Hostomel, then IL 76 
transport planes would land 7,000 men and their armored vehicles, to take the Presidential Palace 
(& TV stations) in Kyiv. This bold plan to defeat Ukraine in 4 hours might have worked.
Russia had done that before when toppling a government. About 30 Mil 17 transport helicopters and 
their escort helicopters attacked at dawn of Feb 24 & assaulted Antonov Airport.

BATTLE OF ANTONOV AIRPORT: The first battle of the Ukraine War and first battle in the Battle for 
Kyiv was the Battle of Antonov Airport, 24a€“25 Feb 2022. Initial assault force arrived at dawn in 
about 30 Mil 17 helicopters & their attack helicopters. The assault force had airborne troops from 
either 11th or 35th Guards Air Assault Brigade. Some of their helicopters were shot down. The 
remaining force of about 1,000 elite paratroop units faced Ukrainea€™ s 3rd Special Purpose 
Regiment waiting to defend. While this battle for the airport was under way, the main air assault 
force
(7,000 more men & their armored vehicles) arrived over the airport in giant IL 76 transport cargo 
jets. They attempted to land. Ukraine shot down two IL 76. Landing was aborted. The IL 76 jets were 
diverted to nearest Russian-controlled airfield which was on the Belarus side of the border, town 
of Gomel (Homel).

Meanwhile Ukrainea€™ s Kyiv defense sent 4th Rapid Reaction Brigade to reinforce the defenders who 
retook the airport. Antonov Airport, briefly in Russian hands in the morning of Feb 24, was now 
back in Ukrainian control by afternoon of Feb 24. They knew a large land invasion army was coming 
South from Belarus, and proceeded to destroy the runways of this airport. The Russian paratroops 
attacked Antonov Airport in a massive helicopter assault of 200 helicopters and about 5,000 men, 
taking the airport again, on Feb 25. But Ukraine defenders prevented their breakout encircling
the airport.

The main army attacking Kyiv came overland with tanks and armor, the 35th Combined Arms Army. It 
fought itself to and through the perimeter of the Antonov airport & afternoon Feb 25 airport was in 
Russian hands. But now unusable so was pyrrhic victory. If you remember early hysteria that Kyiv 
might fall, or President Zelensky might be captured or killed, & Western allies begged Zelensky to 
flee Kyiv. This was all realistic & the threat was real. Russians TRIED an air assault on Kyiv. 
Putin Plan A was to defeat Ukraine in 4 hours. He launched a massive air assault with 8,000 elite
paratroops, their armored vehicles, dozens of helicopters & dozens of giant cargo planes & DID 
seize the airport suitable for this mission.

Plan A failed

PLAN Ba€”ENCIRCLE KYIV: While Plan A was under way, ALSO Russia had prepared for Plan B, just in 
case. On same morning Feb 24, they launched the full assault on Kyiv, to take the capital city by 
force. And this plan was modeled on Grozny, Chechen War. In Putina€™ s first war (then as Prime 
Minister) the Second Chechen War 1999a€“2000, Putin encircled capital city of Chechnya, Grozny (pop 
450,000). Laid a minefield around it. Bombarded it every day & night until literally every building 
destroyed. This EXACT same Grozny battle plan is used by Putin today in Ukraine,
in siege of Mariupol (pop 450,000). To undestand Plan B for Kyiv, look at Mariupol. That was 
Putina€™ s Plan B for Kyiv (pop 3M). Not invade Kyiv but encircle it & then bombard to rubble.

BATTLE OF KYIV: The Battle plan to take Kyiv was to send Russian 35th Combined Arms Army from 
Belarus to a staging town outside Kyiv (Hostomel just outside of Irpin) on Day 1. Then refuel. Then 
encircle Kyiv on Day 2. Start destruction of Kyiv on Day 3. Note, the Russians did not expect that 
Kyiv would capitulate after 3 days, only that in this battle plan, they would encircle Kyiv in 3 
days, essentially guaranteeing Russiaa€™ s eventually destruction of Kyiv (six months to two years 
later) or surrender. The Battle of Kyiv plan needed only one significant element to work. The
refueling of their tanks, armored vehicles & self-propelled artillery. The distance from Belarus 
border to Kyiv is EXACTLY the maximum fuel they could carry. Needed refueling.

If refueled after one day this 35th Combined Arms Army (that I estimated was roughly 70,000 men, 
7,000 armored vehicles incl 2,100 tanks) would have enough fuel to complete the encirclement of 
Kyiv on Day 2, so to lay siege on Kyiv from 26th of February. Part 1 of this plan worked exactly as 
planned. The tanks crossed border into Ukraine on 24 February. By 25th February they had reached 
Hostomel, 13 miles (20km) from Kyiv. But they were out of fuel. They came to their designated 
refueling area.. Their promised fuel had not yet arrived. So they waited. They called up the convoy
where that precious fuel was, and found out, the fuel trucks are less than an hour away. So they 
waited. And called an hour later. Delay. Four hours later. Still delayed. At some point the 
commander of 35th Combined Arms Army decided to postpone refueling to next day, told his troops to 
get some sleep. And called up his fuel trucks. They were still delayed, just 1 hour out, facing 
local resistance, it is a narrow road.

The 70,000 men and 7,000 armored vehicles attacked from Belarus border, crossed 70 miles (115km) & 
reached their Day 1 target on schedule Had the fuel been there this army would have encircled Kyiv 
on Day 2. Something prevented that. The 40 mile convoy
BATTLE OF 40 MILE CONVOY: Had Russia figured out, on Feb 25, that this convoy of the fuel they 
needed, would never arrive, they would have ordered a replacement convoy, & received full fuel (and 
food and ammo) no later than Feb 28.

Ukraine tricked them.

With what would become known as a€~the 40 mile convoya€™, the Ukrainian defenders of Kyiv, managed 
to play a cat-and-mouse game with gullible Russian commanders, to believe for TWO WEEKS that this 
convoy might reach the starved troops & tanks.

We now know, that the initial delays to 40 mile convoy were done by a specialist forest combat unit 
of only 30 commandos, led by Ukrainian Col Yaroslav Honchar. They used quad bikes to move fast in 
the swampy forest. They had night vision gear & drones. The Ukrainian unit did what any convoy 
combat needs, they disabled (or destroyed) the first 3 vehicles at a narrow point on the road. It 
blocked passage forward. Then harassed the convoy as it grew longer and more congested. Fast 
hit-and-run attacks. At some point (I do not yet know when or where) at least one bridge, possibly
several bridges were destroyed preventing the extremely heavy cargo trucks from passing over modest 
water obstacles. So Russians brought bridging gear, delay delay delay. The convoy that kept 
growing, to its full length of 40 miles (64 km) had eventually about 1,400 supply trucks jammed on 
this narrow road. They had a small security detail of about 2,000 Russian soldiers. And were never 
able to break through Ukrainians.

The Russian command did not figure out how Ukraine was playing them until about March 11. And 
Russia sent several smaller replacement convoys on other roads, that reached the Russian 35th 
Combined Arms Army around 14 March. This delay saved Kyiv.
BATTLE OF IRPIN: While the armored vehicles were without fuel and could not maneuver, the 35th 
Combined Arms Army did not sit idly. They would need to move from the planned encirclement inwards 
in any case, to get good artillery positions to shell Kyiv.

So just a few miles from Hostomel towards Kyiv, is the next town on the suburbs of Kyiv, named 
Irpin (pop 30,000). The battle for Irpin would be the turning point in the Battle of Kyiv. It 
lasted one month. The Russian 35th Combined Arms Army arrived to edge of Irpin on 25th February. 
The assault on Irpin started on 27th Feb. The Ukrainians were there, ready, & determined to hold. 
This was test of unstoppable force vs immovable object. One month of combat.
Irpin is 11 miles (17km) from Kyiv. Russia never took Irpin. This was how close the massive 
invasion army of Russia got to Kyiv. 11 miles. Here is where Ukraine turned them back. On 28 March, 
Ukrainians had kicked all Russians out, and liberated Irpin.

THE SIEGE OF KYIV: The 3 Day War Plan to defeat Ukraine involved encircling Kyiv. Day 1 of that 
encirclement plan went exactly according to plan & schedule. But the required fuel did not arrive 
to move forward on Day 2. So the Russian armor had to wait. The mighty 35th Combined Arms Army of 
Russia, with about 70,000 men, 7,000 armored vehicles, that crossed 70 miles (115km) in 24 hours, 
would have easily covered the two pincers the next 24 hours to encircle Kyiv, each only 20 miles 
(32km) of distance. But once the Ukrainians knew where the Russians were, and saw
exactly the force there, on satellite photos and drone video, Ukrainians built the required 
defenses to stop this force from encircling Kyiv. There were only 2 directions to go from Hostomel. 
Ukrainians knew, that heading West from Hostomel comes the Dnepro (Dnieper) river. Last town before 
the river is Vyshhorod. And next town East was Makariv. So the Ukrainians knew where Russia would 
go, once it was refueled.

The Ukrainians saw on satellite images when the Russians finally figured out their cat-and-mouse 
game with the 40 mile convoy, when Russia finally sent replacement convoys on other routes. Ukraine 
shelled those too, but most got through. By March 16 the Russians had finally been able to refuel 
their armor stuck in Hostomel. And what remained of 70,000 men after 3 weeks of combat, could 
finally start the total encirclement of Kyiv. This would turn into an utter disaster.
Towards the West the Ukrainians had urban combat defenses in the suburb of Vyshhorod now as heavily 
defended as Irpin. The Russians never got even a foothold in Vyshhorod. They had waited too long. 
But they also attacked East. Because Ukraine knew, the path West was impassable, this 35th Combined 
Arms Army was forced to go East to encircle Kyiv, they were waiting in ambush near town Makariv.

While battle in Irpin lasted a month in man-to-man urban combat, the armored units of the Russian 
35th Combined Arms Army clashed with Ukrainian armor & anti-tank units in ambush, outside Makariv & 
lasted only two days. Makariv was liberated on 22 March. In the Battle outside Makariv Ukraine was 
able to hit the command post of the total 35th Combined Arms Army reportedly wounding the commander 
of the Northern invasion army (was listed early as one of Generals killed but seems to be alive). 
With the armor destroyed outside Makariv and much of the infantry wiped out in
the urban combat meat grinder attempting to move into Irpin, the 35th Combined Arms Army had 
probably half in casualties (dead or injured). The assault on Kyiv had now failed.

The remnants of the Russian 35th Combined Arms Army retreated out of Ukraine, back to Belarus on 31 
March. Those that were able to escape did. At least 700 vehicles got out, could be 10,000 men, 
partly injured. The Battle of Kyiv was now won by Ukraine.
Putin sent an airborne assault army, the size of one division, 8,000 men to go take an airport (by 
helicopter assault) and then fly the division in my cargo planes, to take the Presidential Palace & 
broadcast on Ukrainian TV that Ukraine had surrendered.

Putina€™ s backup plan, if the 4 hour war would fail, was the 3 day war to encircle Kyiv. After the 
air assault was repelled by Ukrainea€™ s brave resistance at Antonov Airport in Hostomel, the 
massive Russian army arrived to the edge of Kyiv to lay siege. From Feb 25 the Russian army was at 
the gates of Kyiv, yet Ukrainians turned a huge army into a paper tiger and humiliated the Russians 
so badly, they turned and ran back to Belarus on 31 March
The Battle of Kyiv is an enormous victory for Ukraine

LINK:

Tomi T Ahonen To Be Reinstated Miss World on May 9 @tomiahonen

Battle of Kyiv Thread 12/ While this battle for the airport was under way, the main air assault 
force (7,000 more men & their armored vehicles) arrived over the airport in giant IL 76 transport 
cargo jets. They attempted to land. Ukraine shot down two IL 76. Landing was aborted


3:23 PM a~™ Apr 2,2022

654Likes 115Retweets

Trent Telenko: a€™ This is a really nice history snapshot thread on the Battle of Kyiv that has 
been making the rounds. I have a few minor objections to it based on what is missing. Ukrainian 
leadership & Russian corruption thread.

The 1st missing piece is the Pres. Zelensky statement to the West a€oel need ammunition, not a 
ride.a€D a€oeThe moral is to the physical what ten is to onea€Da€”NapolA©on Bonaparte of France. 
This political act that set the table for the defeat of the Russian VDV outside Kyiv. It prepared 
the Ukrainian Army for a fight to the death at Kyiv and in a sentence gave the Ukrainian people a 
rallying cry.
The 2nd thing left out was a military decision by Pres. Zelensky that defeated the 3-day plan to 
encircle Kyiv. Zelensky ordered the approaches to be Kyiv flooded. It was this act that set the 
table for Ukrainian Aerorozvidka weaponized commercial drones to block the bottlenecked by flooding 
road supply line to the 70,000 Russian troops sitting out of fuel North West of Kyiv.

The last objection is explaining how the Ukrainians could a€oeplay gamesa€D with Russian 
communications. This involved the failure in by corruption of the Russian Azart digital spread 
spectrum software defined radio. a€oe Azart proved less capable than expected under combat 
conditions because there were not enough of them and these radios were unable to remain in contact 
with higher headquarters. In combat Russian support forces are supposed to erect temporary repeater 
towers or employ vehicles carrying mobile towers so that Azart users on the front line could stay 
in touch with
other units and the chain of command that went all the way back to the Stavka (Great Staff) in 
Moscow that controlled all military operations. The repeater towers did not work because armed 
Ukrainians found and destroyed them.a€D

And a little later at the same link: a€oeThe Ukrainians know all about Azart because soon after 
Russian troops began receiving them in 2017, many also showed up on the black market, where anyone 
could buy one. The Ukrainians did so and, along with NATO, discovered what Azart could do and what 
its weaknesses were. Ukrainian and NATO tech experts concluded that, with proper countermeasures, 
the Azart radios would become a major liability for Russian commanders and it was.a€D
This a€oefailure by corruptiona€n of the Azart radios enabled Ukraine to counterfeit a€oeThe Fuel 
convoy is cominga€D messages that took quite some time for the Russian Army HQ to pick up on. This 
was aided greatly by capturing the Azart radio gear frequency, password & encryption setting 
documents of the 1st VDV assault on the Antonov facility.

Zelenskya€™ s leadership & Russian corruption (including tires as well as radios!), plus the blood 
of Ukrainian Patriots beat all of Putina€™ s plansa€!
LINK: <

Trent Telenko @TrentTelenko

It was this act that set the table for Ukrainian Aerorozvidka weaponized commercial drones to block 
the bottlenecked bv flooding road supply line to the 70,000 Russian troops sitting out of fuel 
North West of Kviv. businessinsider.com/elite-ukrainiaa€! 5/


businessinsider.comAn elite Ukrainian drone unit on quad bikes ambushed Russian forces, helping to 
defeat Putina€™ s plan to capture Kyiv, report saysAerorozvidka is an elite drone unit set up by 
tech-savvy young Ukrainians that used quad bikes under the cover of night to ambush Russian columns.
10:25 PM r™ Apr 3,2022

597Likes7 IRetweets

Trent Telenko: a€™ This is a near term, course of the Ukrainian War, prediction thread. Russian air 
forces at Melitopol are now in AFU long range rocket artillery attack range via BMa€“30 Smersh & 
Toshka-U now on the north shore of the Dneiper. The major Ukrainian airbase at Melitopol was the 
former hub for Ukrainian Ila€“76MD CANDID operations. It is now used as a FOB for Russian helos & 
Sua€“25a€™ s. The AFU is now making public comparisons to the RuAF experience with Smersh & 
Toshka-U at Chornobaivka AB near Kherson.

Now the predictions: Right now Ukrainian Aerorozvidka ATV & Drone teams & a lot of ATGMa€™ s are 
being infiltrated across the Dnieper river at night to besiege Kherson & scout Melitopol with 
Ukrainian SF stay behind teams & Territorial defense forces. And what I mean by the Aerorozvidka 
a€cescoutinga€D is they are flying their DJI drones, landing them on isolated stretches of road the 
Territorial Defense a€~road watchersa€™ tell them are frequented by Russian supply trucks, & are 
then generating digital target reference points for long range rocket artillery & local mortars.
The latter are being infiltrated across the Dnieper with the ATGMa€™ s.

These rocket & mortar TRP will supplement Ukrainian convoy kill teams awaiting big game. The 
repetition of the RuAF experience at Chornobaivka AB will eventually cause a similar Melitopol AB 
bug out. The big game the Aerorozvidka are waiting for are the RuAF mechanics, tool & spare parts 
in the trucks leaving the Melitopol AB. With those gone the RuAF loses the ability to generate 
enough air interdiction sorties in the South to stop a AFU general offensive by its mobile 
mechanized brigades crossing the Dnieper. This will force Russian ground forces out of their 
fortified positions
to deal with the Ukrainian mobile formations.

Then the real trap will be spring.

You see, the real Ukrainian killing force isna€™ t their mobile brigades. It is the light infantry 
ATGM & Drone supported mortar teams who are listening to compromised Russian radios. A lot of these 
ATGM & Drone a€oeFire sacka€D ambushes will be at night to minimize Ukrainian casualties due to the 
lack of Russian night vision devices & aircraft PGMa€™ s. Given the Ukrainian penetration of 
Russian Azart radios, Russian mechanized units will be slow, clumsy & brittle in Southern Ukrainian 
mobile operations. If the Ukrainians play their cards right. This is the recipe for a Russian
Army general collapse & rout to Crimea.

The reason Ia€™ m laying this out ahead of time is due to the fact the Russians are helpless to 
stop it. The only counter to light infantry the way the Ukrainians are using it is more Russian air 
mobile light infantry in helicopters. The Russian name for that is the VDV. Which was pa€“sed away 
trying to take Kyiv. And even if the Russians placed VDV remnants into helicopters in the South, 
they would still have no reliable radios. While Ukrainian light infantry has Stinger, Starstreak & 
Aerorozvidka Drones.
Schadenfreude is a ba€”h and her stripper name is Karma.

LINK:

Trent Telenko @TrentTelenko

This is a near term, course of the Ukrainian War, prediction threaddY§^ Russian air forces at 
Melitopol are now in AFU long range rocket artillery attack range via BM-30 Smersh & Toshka-U now 
on the north shore of the Dneiper. 1/ en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BM-30 Smea€!


en.wikipedia.orgBM-30 Smerch - Wikipedia
10:28 PM r™ Apr 4,2022

273Likes85Retweets


en.wikipedia.orgBM-30 Smerch - Wikipedia
10:28 PM r™ Apr 4,2022

273Likes85Retweets


en.wikipedia.orgBM-30 Smerch - Wikipedia
10:28 PM r™ Apr 4,2022

273Likes85Retweets

