Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)Back when I worked at the Treasury, it was completely and totally routine for us to have 
distribution tables by incomea€”not by race, but the ones by income were not an unreasonable proxy. 
It was a problem that are distributional tables were not very good. To make them good woulda€™ ve 
required a significant staff boost. The same will be true for CBO. I want to be sure that everyone
voting for this will also be voting for a substantial increase in the CBO budget that it will need 
to do a good job of carrying out this increase in mission:

Corey Husak: Congress Needs Distribution Analyses to Make Informed, Equitable Policy Choices, & the 
CBO FAIR Scoring Act Would Deliver If. a€~Before voting on legislation, members of Congress usually 
receive a cost estimate, or score, for that legislation from the Congressional Budget Office. This 
score provides nonpartisan CBO analystsa€™ best estimate of
how the legislation will affect the federal budget deficit. A cost estimatea€! represents only one 
side of the equationa€!. Members of Congress rarely receive analysis to assess who will benefit 
from bills and by how mucha€!. Reps. Ro Khanna (D-CA) and Dean Phillips (D-MN) in the U.S. House of 
Representatives and Sens. Elizabeth Warren (D-MA) and Michael
Bennet (D-CO) in the Senate introduced the CBO FAIR Scoring Acta€! directing the Congressional 
Budget Office to prepare distribution analyses by race and income for all legislation with 
substantial budgetary effectsa€! provid[ing] membersa€l with CBO analystsa€™ best estimate of how 
the legislation would affect different groups of peoplea€’’critical information
for evaluating who would benefita€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/congress-needs-distribution-analyses-to-make-informed-equitable-policv-
choices-and-the-cbo-fair-scoring-act-would-deliver-it/>

2) Michelle Meagher is a truly impressive economist and policy analyst, and this is one of the most 
insightful an interesting interview sessions I have seen this year:

Michael Kades: In Conversation with Michelle Meagher. a€~Kades and Meagher discuss: The Balanced 
Economy Project and the missing infrastructure of antitrust policy. The global monopoly problem. 
The problem with worshiping competition. The broader impact of failing competition on the 
environment and society. The monopoly problem with global supply
chains. The problem of monopoly power in global economic development. The big antitrust and 
competition research questionsa€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/in-conversation-with-michelle-meagher/>

3) Hoisting this from more than a year ago. I would say that it is not so much that the plague has 
increased income or wealth inequality, but rather that it has very much sharpened the stakes. 
Differences that you could say were differences between convenience and inconvenience before are 
now differences that are matters of health and sickness, and in the limit of life and death:

Leah Stokes & Matto Mildenberger (2020): A Plan for Equitable Climate Policy in the United States: 
a€~This crisis will increasingly and dramatically exacerbate economic inequality in the United 
States. Low- and middle-income Americans have minimal safety net protections from the impact of 
climate change. These communities are more vulnerable to health-
related risks, dona€™t have the financial resources to recover from climate disasters, and are more 
vulnerable to climate-related hazards in the first instance. And U.S. workers and communities who 
may face economic costs from the energy transition to a more clean economy dona€™t have guaranteed 
access to healthcare, pensions, and the necessary assistance to
maintain their dignity and quality of life. Already, insurers are declining coverage for housing 
against growing climate risks such as flooding and wildfires. Without equitable climate policies in 
place, low-income Americans will have to face a double threat. They will be more likely to die in 
heatwaves, struggle to recover from hurricanes and wildfires, and, without health
insurance, face greater burdens from diseases pushing into new ranges as the planet warms. At the 
same time, they will struggle the most to pay for the costs associated with preventing even worse 
climate change impactsa€!. Equitable climate policy is both good economic policy and good 
politicsa€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/a-plan-for-equitable-climate-policv-in-the-united-states/>

4) Hoisted from last winter. The extent to which we have been under investing in infrastructure for 
a generation and a half now is truly appalling. We working in the Clinton administration understood 
the problem, but we found we had too much on our plate and too little time before our congressional 
majorities collapsed. And neither of the George W. Bush, Obama, or Trump administrations
seemed to have a clue:

David Mitchell: The evidence Behind BidendC™ s Big Plans: a€~During his first 100 days in office, 
President Joe Biden turned core elements of his Build Back Better campaign plan into concrete 
policy proposalsa€!. The American Jobs Plana€! large-scale, and in some cases permanent, 
investments in the nationa€™ s physical and human infrastructure^!. Many of the
big ideas included in the two new plans are backed by extensive academic evidence, much of which 
has been funded and featured by the Washington Center for Equitable Growtha€I. We know from 
academic research that the decline in public investments has weakened growth and increased 
inequalitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-evidence-behind-bidens-big-plans-for-rebuilding-infrastructure-redu
cing-poverty-and-combating-inequalitv/>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) ita€™ s not at all clear to me that we will get by the Delta wave on the plague without a 
substantial increase in the plague death rate. There are a lot of people who are not vaccinated, 
and while the non-vaccinated are disproportionately young, they are not entirely young, and they 
are extremely reckless:

Dylan Scott: The US Epidemica€”& Peopled€™ s Risk from Covidd€“ 19d€”Has Changed: a€~Covid cases 
rise with delta variant, but deaths dona€™t thanks to vaccinea€!. Unvaccinated people are up to 
eight times as likely to be infected with Covida€“19 and experience symptoms. They are also 25 
times more likely to be hospitalized with serious symptoms, and
24 times as likely to die of the infection, compared to people who are vaccinated. Unvaccinated 
people with natural immunity due to previous infection probably arena€™t showing up much in the 
case numbers right now becausea€! immunity appears fairly robust to datea€!. Immunocompromised 
peoplea€!. Vaccines appear less effective for thema€!. "Vaccines are
literally life-saving, but only via the decisions of others,a€D Kumi Smith, a University of 
Minnesota epidemiologist, told mea€!. Partly thanks to the vaccine and partly because health care 
providers know a lot more now about how best to treata€ [deaths have not risen nearly as quickly as 
cases in the current wavea€!. The risk of asymptomatic vaccinated people
transmitting the virus is currently one of the big open questionsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.vox.eom/coronavirus-covidl9/2021/8/5/22608142/us-covid-19-cases-deaths-delta-variant-va
ccines>

2) Highlighting this from three years ago because I think it is a very, very, very important to our 
understanding what is going on with our political economy:

Adam Serwer (2018): The Cruelty Is the Point: a€~President Trump and his supporters find community 
by rejoicing in the suffering of those they hate and feara€!. Trumpa€™ s only true skill is the 
con; his only fundamental belief is that the United States is the birthright of straight, white, 
Christian men, and his only real, authentic pleasure is in cruelty. It is that cruelty,
and the delight it brings them, that binds his most ardent supporters to him, in shared scorn for 
those they hate and fear: immigrants, black voters, feminists, and treasonous white men who 
empathize with any of those who would steal their birthright. The presidents™ s ability to execute 
that cruelty through word and deed makes them euphoric. It makes them feel good,
it makes them feel proud, it makes them feel happy, it makes them feel united. And as long as he 
makes them feel that way, they will let him get away with anything, no matter what it costs thema€!

LINK: 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2018/10/the-cruelty-is-the-point/572104/?utm_source=charl
ieiane&utm_medium=email>

3) Disillusion with utopian left-wing politics has long followed a standard pattern. There are 
impressive parallels between disillusionment with the French revolution, the Lenin-Stalin wave, the 
Mao wave, the Castro wave, and the North Atlantic Scenew leftSD wave. There are important lessons 
for remaining moored to reality and preventing overreach in times of political transformation to be
gained from history here, but I am not quite sure what they are:

Isaac Deutscher (1957): The Ex-Communista€™ s Conscience: S™The communist of the early drafts was a 
revolutionary before he became, or was expected to become, a puppet. The communist of the later 
drafts hardly got the chance to breathe the genuine air of revolution. Nevertheless, the original 
motives for joining were similar, if not identical, in almost every
case: experience of social injustice or degradation; a sense of insecurity bred by slumps and 
social crises; and the craving for a great ideal or purpose, or for a reliable intellectual guide 
through the shaky labyrinth of modern societya€!. Socialism, classless society, the withering away 
of the Statea€”all seemed around the cornera€I. Communism seemed a new
Prometheusa€’’except that he would not be pinned to the rock by Zeusa€™ s wratha€!. Our 
ex-communist now bitterly denounces the betrayal of his hopes. This appears to him to have had 
almost no precedent. Yet as he eloquently describes his early expectations and illusions, we detect 
a strangely familiar tone. Exactly so did the disillusioned Wordsworth and his
contemporaries   look back upon their first youthful enthusiasm for the French revolutiona€!

LINK: <https://archive .org/details/hereticsrenegadeOOdeut/page/n 11 /mode/2up>

4) A very smart man here. The line that editors care not about objectivity but about not being 
accused of lacking objectivity is brutal, and true. Not in my wheelhouse, but very much worth 
reading:

Wesley Lowery: A Reckoning Over Objectivity, Led by Black Journalists: a€~Alex S. Jonesa€!. 
Objectivitya€! a€oealso means not trying to create the illusion of fairness by letting advocates 
pretend in your journalism that there is a debate about the facts when the weight of truth is 
clear.a€D He critiqued a€oehe-said/she-said reporting, which just pits one voice against
another,a€D as a€oethe discredited face of objectivity. But that is not authentic 
objectivity.a€Da€! In newsrooms todaya€! focus [is] on predicting whether a given sentence, opening 
paragraph or entire article will appear objective to a theoretical reader, who is invariably 
assumed to be whitea€! depriv[ing] their readers of plainly stated facts that could expose reporters
to accusations of partiality or imbalancea€!. Neutral objectivity trips over itself to find ways to 
avoid telling the trutha€!

LINK: <https://www.nvtimes.com/2020/06/23/opinion/obiectivity-black-iournalists-coronavirus.html>

5) Funny, but true:

Kameron Hurley: a€™ Wea€™ re paying $2000 a month to make spousea€™ s grandmaa€™ s longterm care 
possible on her pension plus Social Security. My parents have also hit this wall and, ita€™ s not 
looking good. My long-term care plan is to keel over dead in my garden at 70 and get eaten by 
possums. America!a€!
LINK: <https://twitter.com/KameronHurley/status/1425065494244167680>


Kameron Hurley @KameronHurley

ossums. America!

nyti.msOpinion I Getting Old Is a Crisis More and More Americans Cana€™ t AffordThe looming 
financial crisis for seniors.
12:04 PM r™ Aug 10,2021

29Likes2Retweets

6) As I had predicted:

Matthew C. Klein: U.S. Inflation Is Normalizing'. a€~The temporary acceleration in price increases 
is already fading. But keep an eye on a few consumer services dependent on low-wage workersa€!. 
Prices that were depressed during the pandemic continue to normalize and as consumer demand for 
motor vehicles continues to moderate. The Consumer Price Index in
July was 0.47% higher than in June on a seasonally-adjusted basis. Thata€™ s the slowest monthly 
CPI inflation rate since February 2021 (0.35%) and significantly slower than in June (0.90%). 
Inflation is currently running just 1.1 standard deviations faster than the January 1995-February 
2020 average, compared to 2.7 standard deviations faster in Junea€!

LINK: <https://theovershoot.co/pZus-inflation-is-normalizing>


THE


The Overshoot

U.S. Inflation Is Normalizing

The temporary inflation spike associated with reopening is already beginning to fade as prices that 
were depressed during the pandemic continue to normalize and as consumer demand for motor vehicles 
continues to moderate. The Consumer Price Index in Julya€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- Matthew C. Klein

7) I think this is painting things a bit too rosy. Whether it is true or not will ultimately depend 
on the shape the Reconciliation Bill takes, and whether it passes. And the Reconciliation Bill may 
not pass at all, not in any form:

Noah Smith: Score 2 for Bidenomics: a€~The bipartisan infrastructure bill is a solid success for 
the new economic paradigma€!. Ita€™ s a very rare thing for Republicans to pass legislation that 
helps the country while a Democrat is President; if Dems act too triumphant about the bill, it 
could cause the GOP to lose face, since that would mean they handed Biden a
partisan victory. Instead, they have to wail and moan, both to allow Republicans to say a€oeHey 
look, we got away with stiffing the Demsa€D, and to leave no doubt in the Demsa€™ mind that theya€™ 
11 be letting their voters down if the reconciliation bill gets watered down. In fact, the bill is 
a major success for the Bidenomics agenda, even if Biden himself ends up
reaping only modest political rewards. Remember that government investment is a core element of 
Bidena€™ s program. Government investment has been falling as a percent of GDP for decades, even as 
private investment has mostly held upa€!. Cleaning up lead is an amazing landmark initiative, and 
of course electric vehicles are great, but Ia€™ d have probably
skipped the rural broadband (as the technology threatens to be obsolete soon). But you know what? 
These kinds of spending initiatives are highly encouraging, because they suggest that our leaders 
have at least some small smidgen of vision for a country that doesna€™ t just look like a 
patched-up version of 1985.1 mean, come ona€”we just got Republicans to vote to
replace all the lead pipes in the nation. How cool is that??a€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/score-2-for-bidenomics>

Noahpinion

Score 2 for Bidenomics

Many people apparently have reasons to be disappointed about the bipartisan infrastructure bill 
that just passed the Senate. Some are very justifiably angry because of the time and hassle it 
takes to actually disburse the money that gets spent on infrastructure projects in the U.S.. 
Othersa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 40 likes A- 42 comments A- Noah Smith

8) this is definitely not in my wheelhouse, but I found it funny and true enough to be worth 
highlighting here:


skipped the rural broadband (as the technology threatens to be obsolete soon). But you know what? 
These kinds of spending initiatives are highly encouraging, because they suggest that our leaders 
have at least some small smidgen of vision for a country that doesna€™ t just look like a 
patched-up version of 1985.1 mean, come ona€”we just got Republicans to vote to
replace all the lead pipes in the nation. How cool is that??a€!

LINK: chttps://noahpinion.substack .com/p/score-2-for-bidenomics>

Noahpinion

Score 2 for Bidenomics

Many people apparently have reasons to be disappointed about the bipartisan infrastructure bill 
that just passed the Senate. Some are very justifiably angry because of the time and hassle it 
takes to actually disburse the money that gets spent on infrastructure projects in the U.S.. 
Othersa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 40 likes A- 42 comments A- Noah Smith

8) this is definitely not in my wheelhouse, but I found it funny and true enough to be worth 
highlighting here:

Jonathan M. Katz: Letter to Some Middle-Aged Contrarians: a€~Youa€™ll never go broke selling racial 
innocencea€!. The successful contrariana€™ sa€! takes are always a bit edgy, a bit haute couture, 
but ultimately they reify what a substantial portion of the market and those in power are primed to 
believe. Just as with any other kind of fashion, the easiest sell is to
refurbish and repackage what was popular a few years, if not decades, beforea€!. There is always 
some excuse that can be made as the podcast host strokes her chin and says: a€oeThe simple, 
accepted narrative that we all seemed to go along witha€”that was just all too clean and too 
simple.a€D And as long as there is someone willing to pay for that sort of thing,

anyone willing to disrupt the debates of the present with the pieties of the past will be able to 
find good, if not entirely honest, paying worka€!
LINK: <https://katz.substack.eom/p/letter-to-some-middle-aged-contrarians>

The Long Version

Letter to some middle-aged contrarians

The other day on Twitter I found myself in a debate about the ghost of Christopher Hitchens. The 
proposition was whether the once-famous, now-dead iconoclast could get his work published in 2021. 
On one side, a writer insisted that, given Hitchensa€™ catholic list of targets (his favorites 
included Henry Kissinger, Bill Clinton, Princess Diana, God, anda€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 7 likes A- 2 comments A- Jonathan M. Katz
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


iv JVIIIV imuuiv~a^uu uvuuaiiaiij

The other day on Twitter I found myself in a debate about the ghost of Christopher Hitchens. The 
proposition was whether the once-famous, now-dead iconoclast could get his work published in 2021. 
On one side, a writer insisted that, given Hitchensa€™ catholic list of targets (his favorites 
included Henry Kissinger, Bill Clinton, Princess Diana, God, anda€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 7 likes A- 2 comments A- Jonathan M. Katz
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

