i greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:


Subscribe now

CONDITION: But Her Emails!!

JAY. JULY 21.2022

N    (      A19


Documents Suggest
Trump Plan to Steer

2024

I Trump Told Lawmaker
In Wisconsin to Reject
States Electoral Votes


Census for Party Gain

By MICHAEL C. BENDER
and REID J. EPSTEIN

Donald J. Trump called a top Re­
publican  in  the  Slate  Legislature

iterating  his endorsement of Da­

vid Farnsworth for a Stale Senate
seat in Arizona. Mr. Farnsworth is
running  against  Rusty  Bowers,


By MIRIAM JORDAN

A new stash of documents ob­
tained by Congress has confirmed
that  the  "Dump  administration
pushed to add a citizenship ques­
tion to the census to help Republi­
cans win elections, not to protect
people's  voting  rights,  a  House
committee  report  concluded  on
Wednesday.

The report from the Committee
on Oversight and Reform, the cul­
mination of a yearslong investiga­
tion, detailed new findings based
on drafts of internal memos and
secret email communications be­

tween political appointees at the
Commerce Deoartmpnt

late  the  census  for  political  gain
while lying to the public and Con­
gress about their goals,” she said.

When  some  internal  communi­
cations first came to light in 2018,
the  Commerce  Department  said
that  nothing  in  them  contradicted
the rationale Mr. Ross had earlier
offered to Congress.

“Executive  branch  officials  dis­
cussing  important  issues  prior  to
formulating  policy  is  evidence  of
good  government,”  a  department

spokesman,  Kevin  Manning,  said
at the time.

,comm>Bee was expected

t0 mark UP a Ml to

an unlawful edge.

ebruary that “we’re
ing it again a third
erred to his wife,

in  Wisconsin  in  recent  days  to
lobby  for  a  measure  that  would
overturn his 2020 loss in the state
to President Biden, the latest sig­
nal that the former president re­
mains  undaunted  by  congres­
sional  and  criminal  investigations
into his election meddling.

Mr.  Trump's  advisers  said  the
former  president  saw  an  opening
to  press  the  Republican  official,
Assembly Speaker Robin Vos, af­
ter  a  Wisconsin  Supreme  Court
ruling  prohibited the use of most
drop  boxes  for  voters  returning
absentee ballots.

Since drop boxes were used dur­
ing the 2020 election, Mr. Trump

argued, the state should be able to
invalidate the results of that elec­
tion. He pushed Mr. Vos to support

fhnf wniild rtift—fkn

who is the Republican speaker of

the  Arizona  House  and  who  has
been  critical  of  the  former  presi­
dent’s  attempts  to  overturn  the
election.  In  the  statement,  Mr.
TTump called Mr. Bowers a “weak
and   pathetic"   Republican   who
"didn’t  have  the  guts  to  do  any­
thing  about  the  rigged  and  stolen
election.’’

Mr.  TTump  has  never  stopped
looking  for  ways  to  undo  the  re­
sults  of the 2020 election, and his
desire  to  keep  talking  about  his
false  claims  of  widespread  fraud
has  intensified  as  investigations
into  his  conduct  have  become
more focused.

In Arizona, a review of the 2020
vole failed to change the outcome
and  instead  affirmed  the  result.
Mr. Trump’s allies have come up


oven^s the Census ..................... ..               u,e institutional inde-
'ounterparts in                  LI ence of the Census Bureau in

as “the future

— .            «■ w» VVAIM « X- I • MIX

state’s 10 electoral votes cast for
Mr. Biden. Mr. Ttump’s advisers

empty in their bid to oven urn the

results   in   Georgia.   In   recent
mAnlka hie nllioc howA          I

Imagine waking up every morning, and knowing that you are going to work at a place that puts these 
stories on A16 and A19. What kind of mind must you have to keep you from immediately turning around 
and going back to bed?
Share

FIRST: From the Cutting Room Floor: A Prologue to a€ceSlouchmg Towards Utopiaa€D

The first thing to note to understand the history of the Long 20th Century is that, back before it 
began, back before 1870, life for a typical human being was pretty awful. A life expectancy of less 
than thirty. Ferocious mortality meant that in the typical couple the woman spent nearly two 
decades eating for twoa€”eight pregnancies for six live births to get three children surviving to 
age ten, and barely more than two surviving to reproduce.

Why was mortality so high? Because the typical person was undernourished and stunted: human 
populations were too large relative to our low (and slowly improving) level of technology and our 
limited ability to harvest natural resources. Why were populations pressing so hard upon the limits 
of subsistence? Because patriarchy meant that womena€™ s durable social power came pretty much only 
from being mothers of surviving sons. Slowly-improving
technology meant that there was only room for the next generation to be a bit more numerous than 
the last: the pre-1870 human population growth rate was 10% per century, or less.

And so about one woman in three was left without surviving sons.

Hence, even if you already had a son or sons, the pressure to try to have another, just in case 
your current son or sons died was immense. That meant that whenever any technological headroom to 
support higher productivity and grant a household greater resources emerged, the overwhelming 
pressure was to use those resources to boost the population. That was the force that kept humanity 
poor, thus before 1870 it was Thomas Robert Malthusa€™ s world:
humanity ensorcelled by and under the spell of the Malthusian devil.

That, however, was not all.

In a poor world, with limited technology and upward pressure on the population creating resource 
scarcity, it was only possible for a few to have enough. Moreover, the way those few could get 
enough for themselves and their children was for them through force and fraud, to run an 
exploitation-and-extraction machine against the bulk of humanity. Humanitya€™ s societal energies 
were thus directed not toward making humanity more productive but, rather,
toward making the force-and-fraud exploitation-and-extraction system run more 
securelya€’’punctuated by the occasional peasant revolt. In such a world, those ideas that were 
promoted and thus flourished were not those that made humanity capable of doing more things more 
efficiently and effectively. They were, instead, the ideas that shored-up the force-and-fraud 
exploitation-and-extraction system. Thus the rate of technological advance was slow indeed:
figure 5% per century.

Thus my crude guess is that there has been as much proportional technological progressa€’’useful 
ideas discovered, developed, deployed, and then diffused throughout the global economya€’’making 
humanity more productive in the 150-year span since 1870 as there were in the entire nearly 
10,000-year span since the beginnings of the creation of agriculture around the year -8000. 
Moreover, from -8000 to 1870 poverty, patriarchy, and slow technological
progress kept humanity under the spell of the Devil of Malthus, with nearly all of the potential 
benefits of better technology being eaten up by population growth and resulting resource scarcity. 
Think of something like $900/yeara€”the living standard of the poorest half-billion of our eight 
billion todaya€”as the living standards of a typical human back before 1870.

Then, after 1870, everything changed.

Economic historians debate and will debate as long as there is a human species and perhaps longer 
exactly why the change came in 1870, whether the change could have come earliera€’’perhaps starting 
in Alexandria, Egypt back in the year 170 when Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus ruled in Rome, or 
in the year 1170 when Emperor Gaozong ruled in Hangzhoua€”or whether we might have missed the bus 
that arrived in 1870 and still, today, be trapped in a
Malthusian steampunk, gunpowder-empire, or neo-mediA!val world. But we did not miss the bus. A lot 
of things had to go right and fall into place to create the 
astonishingly-rich-in-historical-perspective world we have today. And the last three 
elementsa€’’modern science and the industrial research lab to discover and develop useful 
technologies, the modern corporation to develop and deploy them, and the globalized market economy 
to deploy and diffuse
them throughout the worlda€”fell into place around 1870.

Ever since, advancing science, turned into technology by industrial research labs, deployed at 
scale by modern corporations, and then diffused throughout the world by that magnificent 
crowdsourcing mechanism that is the global market economy have taken us on a wild ride. The rate of 
global technological progress, a rate that was perhaps 0.05%/year before 1500,0.15%/year over 
1500-1770, and perhaps 0.45%/year over 1770-1870, went into high gear, and
has averaged 2.1%/year on average since. The deployed-and-diffused technological capabilities of 
humanity have thus roughly doubled every generation since 1870.


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Sarah McBride & Lizette Chapman: Andreessen Horowitz Pushes VC Center of Gravity Away From Bay 
Area: a€~The location of its new headquarters: a€oethe clouda€Da€!. But even as tech workers 
disperse and VCs spurn San Francisco, actual venture dollars are still clearly concentrated in 
Northern Califomiaa€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/newsletters/2022-07-22/andreessen-horowitz-pushes-vc-center-of-gravi
ty-away-from-bay-
area?cmpid=BBD072222 TECH>

• Virginia Heffernan: The Intoxicating Pleasure of Conspiratorial Thinking <https ://www. wired 
.com/storv/conspiratorial-thinking-qanon-beliefs/>

• Jo Freeman: The Tyranny of Stucturelessness <https://jofreeman.com/joreen/tyranny,htm>

• Yakov Feygin: Public Options as Industrial Policy <https 
://building-a-ruin.ghost.io/public-options-as-industrial-polic y/>

• Yakov Feigin: In Memory of Janos Komai: The Contradictions of a Surplus Economy 
<https://building-a-ruin.ghost.io/in-memorv-of-janos-komai/>

• Samuel C. Woolley: Digital Propaganda: The Power of Influencers 
<https://muse.jhu.edu/article/860232>

• John Geweke (2001): A Note on Some Limitations of CRRA Utility <http://bit.lv/3ziZAfY>

• Henry Farrell & Bruce Schneier: Common-Knowledge Attacks on Democracy 
<https://ssm.com/abstract=3273111>

• Gillian Tett: The Semiconductor Chip Pendulum Is Slowly Swinging West 
<https://www.ft.com/content/1 dd8a704-9412-4f6c-a7c2-80ab 171 b026d>

• Jonathan Bernstein: The Jan. 6 Hearings on the Capitol Riot Hit the Bulla€™ s Eye 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2022-07-22/the-jan-6-hearings-on-the-capitol-riot-hit-th
e-bull-s-eye#xj4y7vzkg>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Matthew C. Klein: Chinaa€™ s Unbalancing Is Going Into Overdrive <



The Overshoot

China's Unbalancing Is Going Into Overdrive

Chinaa€™ s trade surplus is soaring thanks to a€oeCovid Zeroa€D and the ongoing crisis in the real 
estate sector. Domestic spending is being squeezed, which is holding down imports even as exports 
continue to hold up. The result is a great a€oeunbalancinga€D, with debt rising relative to income 
and a smaller share of Chinese production enjoyed by ordinary Chinesea€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 4 likes A- 1 comment A- Matthew C. Klein

• Diana Butler Bass: Mary the Tower

Mary the Tower

July 22 is the Feast Day of Mary Magdalene, beloved of Jesus, and the a€oeApostle to the Apostles 
,a€D Earlier this week, I posted an audio of a sermon I delivered at the Wild Goose Festival on 
a€oeAll the Marys ,a€D Within just a few hours after posting it here at The Cottage, it was 
downloaded nearly 10,000 times. Many listeners asked for a written text a€” here ita€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 23 likes A- 24 comments A- Diana Butler Bass

• Matthew Yglesias: La Dolce Mailbag


Slow Boring

La Dolce Mailbag

Back from Italy soon a€” ita€™ s been a fantastic trip, but vacation cana€™ t last forever. BD 
Anders: Have recent developments changed your prior generous evaluation of Joe Manchin and his 
negotiation style? Yes. Genevieve: Thoughts on the degrowth interview in the New York Times 
yesterdaya€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 28 likes A- 127 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

•  Jonathan V. Last: Will Merrick Garland Solve the Republicansa€™ Problem for Them?'. a€~Hoping 
that Trump is indicted while doing everything possible to prevent Trump from being indicted. 
Thata€™ s their strategya€!


Will Merrick Garland Solve the Republicansa€™ Problem for Them?

No TNB tonight: Wea€™re watching the hearing at 8:00 pm. and you should, too. 1. a€ceBoosting,a€D 
Again Jonathan Swan made me lose my mind a little bit yesterday: I think this summary is somewhat 
misleading. Let me explain. If you read Swana€™ s summary and havena€™ t actually watched the ads, 
you might reasonably conclude that Democrats were running pro-Cox ads, in which they made an 
affirmative argument for Coxa€”or portrayed him as
a good candidatea€”and that now Democrats have to a€cepivota€D in their messaging to describe Cox 
as extremea€!

Read more

7 months ago A- 74 likes A- 116 comments A- Jonathan V. Last
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please the button below. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of 
supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

A?s

The creation and maintenance of the form of government that is disinfomatocracy is vastly 
understudied and undergrasped. Part of it is that, in history, there have been few democracies that 
neighboring autocracies have thought worthy of devoting resources to an information attack. I read 
Farrell and Schneider, and and all of a sudden I want to learn much, much more about fifth columns 
undermining democracies in the interests of fascism in the 1930s, and on
Philip of Macedon's creation and maintenance of a pro-Macedonian faction in Athens, as Philip rose 
to be hegemon of Greece:

Henry Farrell & Bruce Schneier: Common-Knowledge Attacks on Democracy. a€~Stable autocracies will 
have common knowledge over who is in charge and their associated ideological or policy goals, but 
will generate contested knowledge over who the various political actors in society are, and how 
they might form coalitions and gain public support, so as to make it more difficult for coalitions 
to displace the regime. Stable
democracies will have contested knowledge over who is in charge, but common knowledge over who the 
political actors are, and how they may form coalitions and gain public support. These differences 
are associated with notably different attack surfaces and threat models. Specifically, democracies 
are vulnerable to measures that a€ceflooda€D public debate and disrupt shared decentralized 
understandings of actors and coalitions, in
ways  that autocracies are nota€!

LINK: <https://ssrn.com/abstract=3273111>

As they said in Yes, Minister, the opposition is the opposition, but the cabinet member sitting 
next to you is your enemy:

Matthew Yglesias: La Dolce Mailbag'. a€~People you are ideologically adjacent to are more annoying 
than people you are deeply distant from, because you view their bad takes as influencing the 
persuadable. For this reason, Ia€™m actually not going to share any secret Twitter annoyances 
because the people whose tweets annoy me most are people who I like and respect and it drives me 
crazy that they tweet dumb stuff!Thata€™ s all
a little bit different from someone like me or Liz Bruenig becoming a Twitter Hate Figure because 
we have come to symbolize something that people see as larger than any one persona€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

La Dolce Mailbag

Back from Italy soon a€” ita€™ s been a fantastic trip, but vacation cana€™ t last forever. BD 
Anders: Have recent developments changed your prior generous evaluation of Joe Manchin and his 
negotiation style? Yes. Genevieve: Thoughts on the degrowth interview in the New York Times 
yesterdaya€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 28 Ekes A- 127 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

I find myself less optimistic about the prospects for this branch of industrial policy than 
Gillian. I am not sure why I am less optimistic, and I do think it is worth doing, but I do not 
expect much from it:

Gillian Tett: The Semiconductor Chip Pendulum Is Slowly Swinging West: a€~Will the (belated) 
funding of the Chips Act become the computing equivalent of Americaa€™ s shale industry a€’’namely 
a trigger for more self-sufficiency? Not quickly or easily. It takes at least two years to start a 
fab. And America lacks the talent base and infrastructure that has enabled Taiwan to dominate. As a 
result, Morris Chang, founder of
Taiwana€™ s dominant TSMC group, says that production in its US TSMC factories costs 50 per cent 
more than in Taiwana€!. Yet, even if it will be tough to shift the supply chain pattern, nobody 
should doubt that the pendulum is swinginga€!. The geopolitical chip wars could soon turn even more 
interesting. And they should count themselves lucky that western companies do not depend on Russia 
for chipsa€!

LINK: chttps://www.ft .com/content/1 dd8a704-9412-4f6c-a7c2-80ab 17 lb026d>

Now I want to read how this was so successfully executed:

Jonathan Bernstein: The Jan. 6 Hearings on the Capitol Riot Hit the Bulla€™ s Eye: a€~The targets 
were wobbly journalists, worried Republicans, social-media influencers and even Donald Trump 
himself, and the aim turned out to be surea€!. The committee has done about as good ajoba€! as 
possible. Ita€™s found a way to take a well-known story of a president who attempted to overturn an 
election and keep the focus on the big
picture of exactly what former President Donald Trump and his allies did to undermine the republic, 
while at the same time filling in lots of relevant and fascinating new details. The inquiry also 
planted within that story a number of sidebars likely to spark interest from the pressa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2022-07-22/the-ian-6-hearings-on-the-capitol-riot-hit-th
e-bull-s-eve#xi4v7vzkg>

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please the button below. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of 
supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


Subscribe now

