Subscribe now

First:

Science fiction. But the science is history. That is, as Paul Krugman observes, what made Isaac 
Asimova€™ s Foundation series so striking and thought-provoking:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Erik Anderson: California Condors Reproduce Without a Male. A Firsf. a€~Routine genetic testing 
revealed that two unrelated condors only had one parent. Their eggs were not fertilized by male 
sperma€!. The females did not need a male condor to produce a viable offspringa€!. a€oelt hit us in 
the face,a€D said Oliver Ryder, a geneticist with the San Diego Zoo Wildlife
Alliance. a€oeWe werena€™t looking for it. We didna€™ t expect it.a€Da€! The California condor is 
the largest flying bird in the world with wingspans that can reach nine feeta€! 
<https://www.kpbs.org/news/local/2021/1Q/28/california-condors-reproduce-without-male-first>

• Graham Greene: The Quiet American 
<https://archive.org/details/quietamerican00gree_2/page/n3/mode/2up>

• The Economist: How Did India Beat CovidaC “19?'. a€~The virus exhausted itself after tearing 
through the vast population^! 
<https://www.economist.com/the-economist-explains/2Q21/10/29/how-did-india-beat-covid-19>

Paragraphs:

Bobby Jindal & Alex Castellanos: Immigration Without Assimilation Is Just Invasion'. a€~Should we 
allow anyone, from anywhere, to come here at any time? Amid the political establishment^™ s 
promotion of all immigration as virtuous and their relentless attacks on all things traditional or 
patriotic, we can demand something better: An immigration system that is good for America and
requires that the immigrants we admit want to be Americansa€!. Wea€™re getting pretty good at the 
a€oeopen to alla€D component. Most would agree diversity, equality, and an open society are pretty 
darn a€oeAmerican.a€D However, we have nearly erased a€oeone shared American culturea€D from our 
equationa€”and when there is nothing to which we all belong, diversity becomes
division. Openness, without a uniting culture, becomes chaosa€!. The American lefta€! insist[s] no 
one is better than anyone, that failure should be rewarded with self-esteem instead of shame, and 
there is no delight beyond the pleasures of the presenta€!. We must require newcomers to adopt 
English as our common language and embrace an ethos of self-sufficiency. We must require a
commitment to the rule of law, protection of minority rights, equality in opportunity and before 
the law, not outcomes, and individual autonomy, not an unlimited governmental

LINK: <https://thefederalist.com/2021/06/04/immigration-without-assimilation-is-iust-invasion/>

Samuel Hammond: The Free-Market Welfare State: Preserving Dynamism in a Volatile World'. a€™ I 
argue that the contemporary rise of anti-market populism in America should be taken as an 
indictment of our inadequate social-insurance system, and a refutation of the prevailing a€oesmall 
governmenta€n view that regulation and social spending are equally corrosive to economic freedom.
The universal welfare state, far from being at odds with innovation and economic freedom, may end 
up being their ultimate guarantora€!. a€oeThe perennial gale of creative destruction^ !a€D wrote 
the economist Joseph Schumpeter, a€oea€!is the essential fact of capitalism .a€D For new industries 
to rise and flourish, old industries must fail. Yet creative destruction is a process that is
rarelya€”if evera€’’politically neutrala€!. Schumpeter believed that capitalism would become the 
ultimate victim of its own success, inspiring reactionary and populist movements against its 
destructive side that would inadvertently strangle any potential for future creativitya€!. The 
countries that have eluded Schumpetera€™ s dreary prediction have done so by combining free-markets 
with


LINK: 
chttps://www.niskanencenter.org/wp-content/uploads/old_uploads/2018/04/Final_Free-Market-Welfare-Sta
te.pdf>

Davis Kedrosky: Peata€™ s Cradle'. a€~Ita€™ s hard to imagine an Industrial Revolution without 
coala€!. But as late as 1650, Britain was neither the worlda€™ s richest nor most energy-intensive 
economy. That honor fell to the Netherlandsa€!. Peat forms when plant matter, usually in marshy 
areas, fails to fully decay because of a lack of oxygen. Ita€™ s sort of an intermediate stage on 
the
road to coal formation, and is really only semi-renewablea€”it takes 1000 years to form one meter, 
provided that you leave it undisturbed. The energy density of peat is equivalent to that of 
wooda€”15a€“17 MJ per kga€”though lower than coal (24 MJ/kg) or charcoal (29 MJ/kg). And the Dutch, 
thanks to their geography, had plenty of the stuffa€!

LINK:

Davis Kedrosky

Economic History Research


economic History Research

Peat's Cradle

Ita€™ s hard to imagine an Industrial Revolution without coal. Whether as an input in blast 
furnaces or steamship engines, in lighting forges or turning factories, coke was ubiquitous as a 
companion of Britisha€”and later Europeana€’’development after the late eighteenth century. 
Britaina€™ s transition from a€oeadvanced organic economyaCD to fossil-fuel and generally a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- 1 comment A- Davis Kedrosky

Jeet Heer: The Federalist Societyd€™ s Silent Brush Off'. a€~The Federalist Society has a 
longstanding relationship with Eastman and indeed still maintains a webpage for him as a 
distinguished member. They havena€™ t quite severed ties with Eastman but clearly dona€™ t want him 
to be their public face. The relationship between the Federalist Society and Eastman parallels how
establishment Republicans like Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell treated Donald Trump after 
the January 6 riot. McConnell refused to support the impeachment and sanctioning of Trump and just 
wished the former president, as well as the embarrassment Trump has brought to the Republican 
party, would simply go away. The political calculation is that it is too damaging to either
embrace   Trump (and thus alienate many moderate voters) or to condemn him (thus alienating the 
right-wing base). Similarly, if the Federalist Society were to make explicit that Eastman is no 
longer welcome, they would alienate many of their own members and donors (who might, in fact, agree 
with Eastman). If they continued to host events with Eastman, the Federalist Society would lose 
their
status as a respectable mainstream institution that can be trusted to provide advice to the 
Republican party. Like McConnell, the Federalist Society has worked out a dodge, a way to whistle 
past the graveyard of a failed insurrection in the hopes that no ghosts will be revived. They show 
signs of embarrassment but not of shame or repentancea€!

LINK:


TIME of MONS TERS


% 11

Ite TIME of MONS TERS

The Time of Monsters

The Federalist Society's Silent Brush Off

On September 23,1 argued that law professor John Eastmana€’’author of memos advising Donald Trump 
and Mike Pence on a pathway for retaining executive power after being defeated in an 
electiona€”should be ostracized by respectable society. Part of my thinkia€l
Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- Jeet Heer
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

