Subscribe now

Joseph Shieber: From A Balancing Act: Wealth Creation And Equality

<https://3quarksdailv.com/3quarksdailv/2022/09/a-balancing-act-wealth-creation-and-equality.html>

In a recent essay for The New Republic, a€oeWhy Isna€™t Everybody Rich Yet?a€D, Timothy Noah points 
out that Keynes actually UNDERSOLD the magnitude of the growth
presaged by the advances in the second half of the 19th centurya€!. Noah introduces Keynes to frame 
a review of Brad DeLonga€™ s new book, Slouching Towards Utopia.

Although Noah clearly admires the book (read the whole review), he does quibble that:

What DeLong self-consciously calls his a€oegrand narrativea€D falters as he shifts into the postwar 
years. He lays in a lot of Cold War history that, while
fascinating in itself, is related indirectly at best to the economic story, and he gropes for a 
satisfactory answera€’’maybe there is nonea€”to why
postcolonial regimes in the global south have stumbled politically and economically. DeLonga€™ s 
book is, in fact, fairly undisciplined throughout.

Ita€™ s loaded with infelicitous witticisms; variations on a€oeblessed be the marketa€D appear no 
fewer than 16 times. For pages on end, DeLong argues
with himself. For even longer stretches, the economic thread vanishes completely. There are many 
fascinating treesa€’’intriguing facts and sharp
insightsa€”but not much forest. Thata€™ s especially true of the booka€™ s second halfa€!.

DeLong addresses Noaha€™ s essaya€! his sharp eyes focus on the paragraph with the quibble. Delong 
laments that,

The one thing disappointing to me in Tim Noaha€™ s review is that he does seem to have missed the 
forest. He wants to claim that the 20th century really
came to an end in 1980 with the Neoliberal Turn and the rise of the Neoliberal Order, as that was 
when, as Eric Hobsbawm put it in his 1977 lecture,
a€~The Forward March of Labour Halteda€™ . But a forward march toward greater equality and greater 
prosperity is profoundly not the story of the 20th
century, at least not of my 20th century.a€D

In that post, DeLong responds to Noah by attempting to highlight the underlying thread of argument 
in Slouching Towards Utopia, the thread that he thinks that Noah misses:

• The forces-of-production underlying hardware is being replaced every generation.

• Thus the economic-sociological softwarea€”the rough running code of societya€’’needs to be 
rewritten on the fly every generation.

•  Cobbled-together so that it will not crash, for whatever worked well a generation ago will not 
work well, or not work at all, today.

• This rewriting takes place in tension between von Hayek and Polanyi

•  Von Hayek: the market can give us wealth but not fairness or justice. But reaching for fairness 
and justice will destroy the wealth-creation and put us on the Road to
Serfdom: a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the marketa€D is the 
best we can do.

• Polanyi: the market says the only rights that matter are property rights, but people think they 
have and demand other rights: comfortable communities, economic
stability, the proper allocation of incomes to the deserving. Tell people the only real rights are 
property rights and they will revolt, and the system will crash.

• Polanyi: government must recognize and accomodate the fact that a€oethe market was made for man, 
not man for the marketa€D.

• It is this unresolvable tension in how to rewrite the software economic-sociological code every 
generation on the fly that has caused the problems of slicing and tasting
the economic piea€”of equitably distributing it so that everyone has enough, and of using our 
technological powers to enable us all to live our lives wisely and wella€
have flummoxed and continue to flummox usa€!.

The crucial step in that argument seems to be this, from the lesson that DeLong draws from Hayek: 
a€oereaching for fairness and justice will destroy a€! wealth-creation.a€Da€l
Hayeka€™ s lesson that a€oereaching for fairness and justice will destroy a€! wealth-creationa€D is 
simply false. Turning to Thomas Pikettya€™ s new book, A Brief History of
Equality, for support, Noah observes that:

Piketty trumpets the societal benefit of imposing a€ceconfiscatorya€D (his unapologetic term) top 
marginal rates of 80 to 90 percent in the United States.
These put an end to a€oethe most astronomical remunerations.a€D There was no reason for companies 
to push a top executivea€™ s wages above the
threshold for the top marginal tax bracket, because the federal government would collect nearly all 
that additional cash in taxes. That helped prompt
companies to spend any surplus on the rank and file instead. Conservatives today argue that when 
marginal tax rates rise too high, that chokes off
innovation.  But through the 1950s and 1960s, a€ceconfiscatorya€mtaxes choked off only excessive 
wage growth at the top. Productivity climbed briskly
anyway, and so did per capita income .(Emphasis mine)

The thirty glorious years of the post-WWII period pretty decisively demonstrate that remarkable 
growth IS in fact compatible with equality-boosting measures. This means,
however, that a€“ as a statement of ironclad law a€“ the idea that DeLong attributes to Hayek, that 
reaching for fairness is incompatible with growth, is just not true.

So what might be the lesson that DeLong wants us to derive? I think ita€™ s rather, as he says 
before he provides his summary of the thread of his argument, that a€oea forward
march toward greater equality and greater prosperity is profoundly not the story of the 20th 
century.a€D If THATa€™ S the lesson, however, then DeLong sabotages it by
overstating the Hayek point. What DeLong actually needs is the weaker claim that growth is 
COMPATIBLE with inequality, rather than that growth REQUIRES inequality, the
latter being the lesson that DeLong takes from Hayek. And, of course, plenty of data points 
illustrate that growth is compatible with inequality!

Here are two, both from Noaha€™ s essay. First, Nazi Germany before the start of WWII:

After Adolf Hitler became German chancellor in 1933, he pulled Germany out of the Depression 
faster, DeLong reports, than any other nations save the
Scandinavian countries and Japan. a€~With the Gestapo in the background to suppress agitation for 
higher wages, better working conditions, or the right to
strike,a€™ DeLong explains, a€~and with strong demand from the government for public works and 
military programs, unemployment fell during the
1930s.a€™ Fascism worked, until it didna€™ ta€!

Second, the computer economy at the end of the 1990a€™ s and the beginning of the 2000a€™ s:

The computer boom mimicked the effects of the Industrial Revolution but fell well short of its 
breadth and magnitude. The wealth it created boosted
middle-class incomes for a few years in the late 1990s, but it boosted incomes for the superrich 
much more, and, after 2000, pretty much exclusivelya€!

Indeed, DeLonga€™ s underlying point a€“ that the complex and delicate machinery driving economic 
growth needna€™ t always sync in tandem with the kludgy strategies
available to policy makers to further equality and justice a€“ is one that Noah seems to share! He 
ends his essay on a solemn note:

Whatever our next grand narrative turns out to be, the economic problem wona€™ t be solved. How can 
it be, when inequality is still rising throughout the
industrialized world, and when most of the global south hasna€™ t even started to address the 
economic problem? Wea€™ 11 all be richer, but to vastly
unequal degrees. Even if we succeed in reversing the trend toward growing economic inequality, and 
even if we find ourselves speaking, in awed tones, of
the tiger economies of Africa and Latin America, the economic problem will remain unsolved because 
todaya€™ s notions of sufficiency will (one hopes)
be too stingy to serve a more prosperous future.


