Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support 
my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: I AM Fa€”a€”a€”ED: a€oeYou screwed up: you trusted usa€!a€D: There I was, defending Fed 
Vice Chair Richard Claridaa€™ s stock transactions as almost certainly innocent rebalancinga€”and 
saying that, while Fed officials should not have control over their money, this was not 
exploitation of inside information. And it turns out I was a fool to believe the Fed, and the
Fed was foolish to believe Claridaa€™ s claims it was a previously-planned rebalancing:

Jeanna Smialek: A Fed Officiala€™ s 2020 Trade Drew Outcry. It Went Further Than First Disclosed'. 
a€~Richard H. Clarida, the departing vice chair of the Federal Reservea€! came under fire for 
buying shares on Feb. 27 in an investment fund that holds stocksa€”one day before the Fed chair, 
Jerome H. Powell, announced that the central bank stood ready to help the
economy as the pandemic set ina€!. Mr. Claridaa€™ s recently amended financial disclosure showed 
that the vice chair sold that same stock fund on Feb. 24a€!. The Fed initially described the Feb. 
27 transaction as a previously planneda€! a€cerebalancinga€Da€l

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2022/01/06/business/economy/richard-clarida-fed-stock-fund.html>
Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.

Share

First:

The first two of these strike me as on target. The thirda€! not so much:

Bryan Caplan: The Missing Moods'. a€~You can learn a lot by comparing the mood reasonable 
proponents would hold to the mood actual proponents do holda€!.
The hawka€!. The reasonable hawkish mood is sorrowa€“and constant yearning for a peaceful patha€!. 
[But] the standard hawk moods are anger and machismoa€!.

The immigration restrictionista€!. The reasonable restrictionist mood is anguish that a tremendous 
opportunity to enrich mankind and end poverty must go to wastea€“and pity for the billions punished 
for the a€oecrimea€n of choosing the wrong parentsa€!.

The proponent of labor market regulation. Labor regulation^!. The reasonable pro-regulation mood is 
humility about the size of the gains plus wonder that even modest gains are on the tablea€i. 
"Strangely, that disemployment effect turns out to be smalla€“even in the long-run. As a result, 
labor market regulation usually makes workers better off even taking the
downside into account. The evidence is so strong that it overcame our initial presumption that the 
downside was serious, especially in the long-run. a€D

This mood is essentially non-existent among non-economists, and rare among pro-regulation 
economistsa€!. They dona€™t sound surprised that the law of demand coincidentally breaks down just 
when they hoped it would, or stressed that they might have failed to account for long-term damage. 
This doesna€™ t prove theya€™re wrong, but even the intellectually
strongest proponents of labor market regulation are hard to take at face valuea€!

LINK: <https://www.econlib .org/archives/2016/01 /the_invisible_t.html>
I read this, and I think:

First, you really do not need a negative or a small disemployment effect to justify a minimum wage. 
All you need is for those who draw their incomes from capital to be significantly richer than those 
who draw their incomes from labor, that the disemployment effect not be overwhelmingly large, and 
assent to the proposition that there is declining marginal utility of wealth. Then, from any
utilitarian point of view, a minimum wage that redistributes income from capital to labor helps to 
repair the greatest of all market failures: the divergence between the wealth-weighted a€oesocial 
welfare functiona€D maximized by the competitive market and the equal-weighted social welfare 
function that those of us who are not shills for the rich and powerful take as our baseline.

Thus the mood affiliation should go the other way: It is Bryan Caplan who ought to be bitterly, 
bitterly disappointed to find that large differences in incomes are essential to the productive 
functioning of the economy and deeply, deeply regret that they are needed for the progress of the 
human race. He should lament that people like me require high compensation in order to put out our 
best and


One Picture:

In many US states, ICU patient numbers are already approaching record levels as Omicron takes off

Covid cases, hospitalisations and ICU patient numbers, each relative to its pre-Omicron peak.

Circle indicate new records in each metric • • •                                           Cases

United States

Has set a new record for cases —•

Pre-Omicron peak ►


Maska                                                                                               
                  Maine

A

Nov 2020       Jan 2022

LATEST DATA

Washington    Idaho        Montana      North Dakota Minnesota        Wisconsin     Michigan

California Utah             Colorado Nebraska Missouri Illinois                       Kentucky 
Maryland Washington DC New Jersey

Arizona       New Mexico Kansas          Arkansas      Tennessee West Virginia Virginia             
North Carolina Delaware

Oklahoma Louisiana Mississippi Alabama                   Georgia      South Carolina

Texas

=T analysis of data from Johns Hopkins CSSE and US CDC. Cases shifted forward to adjust for lag 
between testing positive and developing severe disease

:T graphic: John Burn-Murdoch / @jburnmurdoch

©FT

John Burn-Murdoch: a€™NEW chart for US Covid-watchers: Key question with Omicron wave is whether 
severe diseasea€’’hospitalisations & ICUa€’’decouples from cases. In the UK it has, but there are 
signs the US decoupling is weaker, perhaps due in part to lower vax rates. Track it here for every 
state: chttps: //t .co/J OyM6 AXo2G>

John Burn-Murdoch @jburnmurdoch

NEW chart for US Co vid-watchers: Key question with Omicron wave is whether severe disease a€” 
hospitalisations & ICU a€” decouples from cases. In the UK it has, but there are signs the US 
decoupling is weaker, perhaps due in part to lower vax rates. Track it here for every state:


10:28 PM r™ Jan 6,2022

54Likes22Retweets

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Emma Agyemang: Legislators Face Battle to Implement Historic Global Tax Deal'. a€™ Countries 
agree reform of corporate revenues but will struggle to make it legally bindinga€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/585a7b3d-3ce7-4959-b72a-ed6f66f451b5>

• Doug Saunders: The Era of Globalization Has Come to an End. We Dona€™ t Yet Know What Replaces 
Zr<https://www.theglobeandmail.com/opinion/article-the-era-of-globalization-has-come-to-an-end-we-do
nt-vet-know-what/>Doug (Mule): In the Middle of Transition: 2022 Semiconductor Outlook'. a€~If 
there were ever a scenario of an historically cyclical and supply-driven
market shifting into a seularly growing, demand-driven market, wea€™re living in ita€!


abricated Knowledge

In the Middle of Transition: 2022 Semiconductor Outlook
Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- Doug (mule)

• Aaron Rupar: January 6 Was About Ending Democracy. Republicans Told Us as Much'. a€~GOP 
gaslighting cana€™ t change what we all sawa€!



Public Notice

January 6 was about ending democracy. Republicans told us as much.

As we neared todayS™ s first anniversary of the January 6 attack on the Capitol, I began seeing a 
number of tweets resurface from that day and the days preceding it; some of them genuinely shocked 
ma€!

Read more

a year ago A- 11 likes A- 3 comments A- Aaron Rupar

Paragraphs:

Martin Sandbu: While We Wait for Levelling Up: S~More than two years after the UK government was 
elected on the flagship promise (next to Brexit) of Soelevelling upSD the countryS™ s 
unconscionable regional inequality, there is not much flagship policymaking to show for itS!. 
Regional inequality is one of Free LunchS™ s favourite interestsS!. What it is that should be 
levelled
upS! is productivityS!. ItS! depends here and now on productive businesses choosing to expand, and 
on businesses generally to shift into higher-productivity production practices. That is most likely 
in a Soehigh-pressure economySUS!. An immediate support system for job seekers and job switchers 
with little or no savings to carry them through the time it takes to retrain or search for
better jobsS!. Allow full expensing of investment costs for businessesS!. Boost spending in 
left-behind placesS! money in the hands of households, to sustain the kind of local economic 
activities that double as community spacesS!. How can we ensure that capital does not flee 
left-behind areas but flows to them?S!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/7c23d4b3-d7dc-4543-9efl-c59aa6blle0d>

Tim Harford: How to Stand Up to Your Bullying Inbox: S~I delete most emails immediately after 
scanning themS!. If a polite SoeThanksISD is required, I tend to schedule it to be delivered the 
next day. Instant replies risk provoking a back-and-forth conversation. Nobody wants that. The 
trick here is to make sure that getting emails out of the inbox is an effortless processS! LINK:

<https://www.ft.com/content/f4c9f878-0b66-4d7c-a452-7967f29c6854>

Simon van Zuylen-Wood: The radicalization of a€ceHillbilly Elegya€EJauthor J.D. Vance: S~National 
conservatism sells itself as a philosophy that could save these places, with its child subsidies 
and steel tariffsS!. In the Senate, Josh Hawley crusades against Seethe tyranny of big tech,SD 
while Marco Rubio pushes for an industrial policy to revive domestic manufacturing. Meanwhile,
NatCon junior member Mitt Romney used the emergency of the pandemic to break with party orthodoxy 
on spending, authoring widely praised legislation offering parents up to $15,000 a year to defray 
child-rearing costsS!. But they havenS™ t meaningfully tilted the GOPS™ s direction. Seel mean, 
Donald Trump was elected, and the only thing the Republican Party accomplished in two
years with control of Congress was a big tax cut,SD says Oren Cass, who runs a new 
national-conservative think tank, American Compass. Worth noting: Rubio, Hawley and Romney all 
supported TrumpS™ s corporate tax cut. Seel think anti-wokeness is probably enough to win elections 
,SD Vance told me. SoeBut I donS™ t think it can actually bring the country together to solve some
of our big problems."S! In late November, the Ohio Republican Party held a very awkward candidate 
forumS!. Eventually, however, Vance landed on something that got the audience going: He called for 
Republicans to shut down the government until President Biden ended his vaccine mandate for federal 
workers. A vaccine mandate is exactly the sort of idea that a Soecommon goodS □
national conservative like Vance should support. Yet a few days after the forum, I got a text 
message from his campaign, raising money off the lineS!

LINK: <https://www 
.washingtonpost.com/magazine/2022/01/04/jd-vance-hillbilly-elegy-radicalization/>

Timothy Burke: Fakepolitik: S~Take Robin WrightS™ s New Yorker article on the Soelooming crisisSD 
of IranS™ s nuclear threat as an example. ItS™ s entirely written from the perspective of US 
military and executive officials and academics who closely hew to their world. The Iranian 
Ambassadors! enters into the article at the very end, but thereS™ s no other Iranian perspectives
quoted or exploredS!. ThatS™ s pretty weirdS!. I have no fondness for nor illusions about the 
present rulers of Iran: theyS™ re authoritarians who sponsor a good deal of violence and disorder 
throughout the Middle East and who oppress their own citizens. It would be a good thing if Iran 
became a more democratic state that was more focused on good governance within its own bordersS!.
Perhaps even less promising is something that WrightS™ s article only touches on a few times when 
it really ought to be the lead, which is that Iranian negotiators are utterly rational in thinking 
that there is absolutely no point to bargaining with the United States given that they did so 
before, arrived at an agreements! kept to the terms of the agreements! watched it torn up by Donald
TrumpS!  faced an American government that openly talked about a major military attack on IranS! 
killed a high-ranking government official in a very public wayS!. Which again, makes IranS™ s 
foreign policy and its acquisitions of missiles perfectly rationalS!. Even Superman knows that if 
he just has to negotiate with Lex Luthor, heS™ s got to give Luthor something that Luthor
wantsS”and that heS™ s got to stick to the terms of the bargain if he ever expects to negotiate 
with any enemy in the futureS!

LINK:


Eight by Seven

The News: Fakepolitik

When government actors and a very particular subset of experts who work closely with those 
officials operate within a very tight network that has a shared discursive vision of some problem 
or issue in the world, the results can be a bit surreala€”some basic common sense understandings or 
perspectives on that problem can be completely absent in their exprea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- Timothy Burke

Aaron Rupar: What We Learned from the Hannity Texts Released by the Jan. 6 Committee'. a€™Fox News 
host Sean Hannita€! an unofficial adviser to the Trump White Housea€!. Trump was at least 
daydreaming of coup-like schemes to keep power even after January 6a€!. Ffrom December 31 suggests 
that Hannity had foreknowledge of what was planned for January 6, thought it was likely
to do Trump more harm than good, and was advising Trump to essentially take the L, cede power, and 
head to Floridaa€!. a€oelm very worried about the next 48 hours,a€D Hannity texted Meadows on 
January 5, a comment diametrically opposed to what he said on TV and on radio later that daya€!. As 
Mikey Kay put it on Twitter, a€oethe interesting bit here is Hannitya€™ s voice of reason
off camera, and the pushing of conspiracy theories and unabated support for Trump on camera. The 
views we see on Hannitya€™ s show are clearly not his personal viewsa€Da€!

LINK:


Public Notice

What we learned from the Hannity texts released by the Jan. 6 committee

Text messages released Tuesday by the House January 6 committee show once again that Fox News host 
Sean Hannity was basically functioning as an unofficial adviser to the Trump White House, a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 24 likes A- 3 comments A- Aaron Rupar
Leave a comment

Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support 
my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

David French: The Places Where Truth Goes To Die: a€~How do I make my point in a way that skeptical 
and hostile readers will hear it and consider it, rather than simply dismissing it out of hand as 
the bigoted rantings of a hateful Evangelical? After all, I dona€™ t just want to be heard. I want 
to persuade. I believe what Ia€™ m saying is true, and I want readers to at least consider my
wordsa€!

T TNTIZ-


The Places Where Truth Goes To Die

Late last week I had an experience thata€™ s both completely normal and fundamentally absurd. It 
was thisa€“I spent a ridiculous amount of time agonizing over the wording of a simple Twitter 
thread. I struggled to use exactly the right words to express what should be a completely normal 
and reasonable pointa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 316 likes A- 740 comments A- David French

He is angry at University of Pennsylvania transsexual swimmer Lia Thomas. He very much wants to 
make the point that:

It is not invidious discrimination to prohibit a biological male from competing in female sports. 
Indeed, drawing rational distinctions between biological males and biological females might be 
necessary to protect equal opportunities for women to enjoy access to athletic opportunities^!. How 
do I make my point in a way that skeptical and hostile readers will hear it and
consider it, rather than simply dismissing it out of hand as the bigoted rantings of a hateful 
Evangelical? After all, I dona€™ t just want to be heard. I want to persuade. I believe what Ia€™ m 
saying is true, and I want readers to at least consider my wordsa€!

My first reaction: I really dona€™ t want to hear from anyone who is not genuinely torn about this. 
One does not undergo gender-reassignment surgery because one wants to collect some medals in 
intercollegiate athletics. One does feel dissed when the person swimming in the next lane has had 
the equivalent of six years of massive steroid boosts before the testosterone-suppression kicked in.
The athletics governing bodies are trying to draw lines here. They are doing so imperfectly. They 
will inevitably do so imperfectly.

It would certainly make Lia Thomas happier if her acceptance into Womena€™ s Country included the 
opportunity to compete in womena€™ s athletics. It would certainly make some swimming against her 
happier if they were not racing against somebody with this equivalent of an enormous steroid boost.
David French feels the first, but not the second.

So: no. I dona€™ t want to hear from him. Not until he gains some empathy, and is willing to lift 
at least one finger to try to love his neighbor Lia Thomas as himself.

Plus there is a history here. David French was been preprogrammed, wound up, and unleashed upon the 
world to fire up the boiling kettle of the Trans Panic. Before that, he was reprogrammed, wound up, 
and unleashed upon the world to fire up the boiling kettle of the Gay Marriage Panic:

Christians must lose their jobs, lose their businesses, and close their schools, unless they bend 
the knee to the sexual revolution. Bonds of friendship and loyalty are meaningless if the cultural 
conservative holds the wrong view on same-sex marriage, and Christian clubs are vile discriminators 
if they simply want to be led by Christian leaders. In the a€cebluea€D sectors
of America, particularly the academy, some Christians feel that they have to live under deep cover 
to protect their careers. Ita€™ s important to understand that this wave of coercive intolerance is 
not mere aberrational excess but the natural and inevitable byproduct of grafting same-sex 
relationships into an institution that is a key building-block to civilization itselfa€!

And David French comes from an organization, National Review, which has in its DNA the gleeful 
assertion that whatever are the necessary means to continuing the domination of white southerners 
in the Jim Crow south, by God, white southerners are entitled to take them:


The Places Where Truth Goes To Die

Late last week I had an experience thata€™ s both completely normal and fundamentally absurd. It 
was thisa€“I spent a ridiculous amount of time agonizing over the wording of a simple Twitter 
thread. I struggled to use exactly the right words to express what should be a completely normal 
and reasonable pointa€l
Read more

a year ago A- 316 likes A- 740 comments A- David French

He is angry at University of Pennsylvania transsexual swimmer Lia Thomas. He very much wants to 
make the point that:

It is not invidious discrimination to prohibit a biological male from competing in female sports. 
Indeed, drawing rational distinctions between biological males and biological females might be 
necessary to protect equal opportunities for women to enjoy access to athletic opportunities^!. How 
do I make my point in a way that skeptical and hostile readers will hear it and
consider it, rather than simply dismissing it out of hand as the bigoted rantings of a hateful 
Evangelical? After all, I dona€™ t just want to be heard. I want to persuade. I believe what Ia€™ m 
saying is true, and I want readers to at least consider my wordsa€!

My first reaction: I really dona€™ t want to hear from anyone who is not genuinely torn about this. 
One does not undergo gender-reassignment surgery because one wants to collect some medals in 
intercollegiate athletics. One does feel dissed when the person swimming in the next lane has had 
the equivalent of six years of massive steroid boosts before the testosterone-suppression kicked in.
The athletics governing bodies are trying to draw lines here. They are doing so imperfectly. They 
will inevitably do so imperfectly.

It would certainly make Lia Thomas happier if her acceptance into Womena€™ s Country included the 
opportunity to compete in womena€™ s athletics. It would certainly make some swimming against her 
happier if they were not racing against somebody with this equivalent of an enormous steroid boost.
David French feels the first, but not the second.

So: no. I dona€™ t want to hear from him. Not until he gains some empathy, and is willing to lift 
at least one finger to try to love his neighbor Lia Thomas as himself.

Plus there is a history here. David French was been preprogrammed, wound up, and unleashed upon the 
world to fire up the boiling kettle of the Trans Panic. Before that, he was reprogrammed, wound up, 
and unleashed upon the world to fire up the boiling kettle of the Gay Marriage Panic:

Christians must lose their jobs, lose their businesses, and close their schools, unless they bend 
the knee to the sexual revolution. Bonds of friendship and loyalty are meaningless if the cultural 
conservative holds the wrong view on same-sex marriage, and Christian clubs are vile discriminators 
if they simply want to be led by Christian leaders. In the a€cebluea€D sectors
of America, particularly the academy, some Christians feel that they have to live under deep cover 
to protect their careers. Ita€™ s important to understand that this wave of coercive intolerance is 
not mere aberrational excess but the natural and inevitable byproduct of grafting same-sex 
relationships into an institution that is a key building-block to civilization itselfa€!

And David French comes from an organization, National Review, which has in its DNA the gleeful 
assertion that whatever are the necessary means to continuing the domination of white southerners 
in the Jim Crow south, by God, white southerners are entitled to take them:

The central question that emergesa€”and it is not a parliamentary question or a question that is 
answered by merely consulting a catalogue of the rights of American citizens, born Equala€”is 
whether the White community in the South is entitled to take such measures as are necessary to 
prevail, politically and culturally, in areas in which it does not predominate
numerically? [sic] The sobering answer is Fes a€’’the White community is so entitled because, for 
the time being, it is the advanced racea€!

And if firebombing Black churches turns out, empirically, to be part of the necessary means? 
a€oeSuch means as are necessarya€n are Bill Buckleya€™ s weasel words so that he can claim to 
liberals that he does not endorse them, and wink to conservatives that he does.
David French wants to know what he can do to get me to consider his position on the Transgender 
Panic. I dona€™t know. Perhaps find a time machine, go back to the 1950s, and make a National 
Review that someone not a psychopath could be proud of?

