Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: Omicron Is a More Vicious Beast West of the Atlantic:


England

300

2020               21            22

*Seven-day moving average

^Lagged by 16 days

Sources: JHU CSSE; UK Health Security Agency;

US Department of Health and Human Services; The Econoi

I confess that this is not something I had expected to see. And this is very depressing:


New York City

c pa


100% of
last winter
peak

•Cases on
Dec. 18

• Deaths
I 21 days
I later

50


Last winter New York had no vaccinesa€”all it had was acquired immunity from the spring and summer 
waves of plague. Now New York is 70% vaccinated, and, indeed, vaccination is doing a very good job 
of protecting people. But the 30% who are not vaccinateda€”they are the ones who are catching cases 
of the disease that are serious enough to
get recorded in the system. And it looks like they are dying at the same rate that the unvaccinated 
population was dying last winter. If this is representative, it is not that Omicron is less 
virulent, it is, rather, that vaccinations work.

First: The Late-Antiquity Pause, & the a€oeBright Ages!a€D

a€~In 572, after the capitulation of Paviaa€! King Alboin was assassinateda€! by his wife Rosamund 
and her lover, the noble Helmichisa€!. They were forced to flee together to the Byzantine territory 
before getting marrieda€!. Later in 572, the thirty-five dukes assembled in Pavia to hail king 
Clepha€!. He, too, fell victim to
regicide in 574, slain by a mana€! who perhaps colluded with the Byzantines. Following Clepha€™ s 
assassinationa€! for a decade dukes ruled as absolute monarchs in their duchiesa€!. In 584 the 
dukes agreed to crown King Clepha€™ s son, Autaria€!. He assumed, like the Ostrogoth Kings, the 
title of Flavio, with which he
intended to proclaim himself also protector of all Romans in Lombard territorya€!.

Autaria€! marr[ied] a princess, Theodelinda, from the Lethings dynastya€! a line of descent from 
Wacho, king of the Lombards between 510 and 540, a figure surrounded by an aura of legenda€l. 
Autari died in 590, probably due to poisoninga€!. The young widow Theodelindaa€! [then] chose the 
heir to the throne and her
new husband: the Duke of Turin, Agilulfa€!. A rebellion among some dukes in 594 was preempteda€!.

[A] new organisation of power, less linked to race and clana€! more to land managements!. The 
Lombard kingdoms I gradually lost the character of a pure military occupations!. Agilulf made some 
symbolic choices aimed atS! gaining credit withS! Latin[s]S!. The ceremony of ascension to the 
throne of his son
Adaloald in 604, followed a Byzantine riteS!. Gratia Dei rex totius Italiae, "By the grace of God 
king of all Italy", and not just Langobardorum rex, "King of the Lombards'S!. Strong pressure, 
particularly from Theodelinda, to convert the LombardsS!.

After the death of Agilulf in 616, the throne passed to his son Adaloald, a minor. The regency 
(which continued even after the king passed into majority) was exercised byS! Theodelinda, who gave 
command of the military to Duke SundaritS!. A civil war broke out in 624, led by Arioald, Duke of 
Turin and AdaloaldS™ s
brother-in-law (through his marriage to AdaloaldS™ s sister Gundeperga). Adaloald was deposed in 
625 and Arioald became kingS!. Rivalry between the Arian and Catholic factionsS!. The Arians also 
opposed peace with Byzantium and the Papacy and integration with the RomansS! At [ArioaldS™ s] 
deathS! Queen
Gundeperga had the privilege to choose her new husband and king. The choice fell on Rothari, the 
duke of Brescia and an ArianS!

That is from Wikipedia: Kingdom of the Lombards <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kingdom_of the 
Lombards>.

A Bright Age, indeed, was Italy around 600 under the Lombards!

As you can see, Matthew Gabriele & David M. Perry (2021): The Bright Ages: A New History of 
Medieval Europe (New York: Harper) <https://www.google.com/books/edition/The Bright 
Ages/UgwiEAAAQBA> rubbed me rather the wrong way with its rather bizarre and tendentious claims 
that:

One premise: Rome did not fall. Things continue and things changeS!. Cities never vanish but they 
do shrink, both in population and in importance, as people find new ways to organize political, 
economic, and cultural life in seeking stability. That stability comes with innovative ways of 
thinking about Goda€! sparking a fire
that will nourish a blossoming of intellectual and literary lifea€!. But then circles turn 
againa€!. Connections between regions that were never severed did stretch and attenuates! creating 
the conditions for a medieval Italian poet to follow in the footsteps of a late Roman empress. 
Welcome to The Bright Agesa€\

And yet, in ex-Roman Italy, we have: a pure military occupation for the first two generations, 
Soestrong pressurea€D to convert people to Christianity (and we know how that goes), kings trying 
to convince a subject population that they are more than barbarian bully boys by claiming that they 
are of RomeS™ s Flavian clanS”that is, kin in some
sense to the late-OOs Roman Empire Titus Flavius Vespasianius (as claiming status as kin to a Roman 
princeps et imperator of the past was a thing to conjure with)S”the near-collapse of urban life, a 
substantial reduction in the ability of the rural population to purchase cheap mass-produced 
conveniences that make life comfortable from urban
workshops, possibly a reduction in exploitation to feed an upper class, certainly a loss-of-status 
as small independent farmers who can no longer trust in the pax Romana. What was the alternative, 
then? To go to the local bullyboy, and put yourself in bondage as a colonus or a villain'.

By the Lord before whom this sanctuary is holy, I will to [NAME] be true and faithful, and love all 
which he loves and shun all which he shuns, according to the laws of God and the order of the 
world. Nor will I ever with will or action, through word or deed, do anything which is unpleasing 
to him, on condition that he will
hold to me as I shall deserve it, and that he will perform everything as it was in our agreement 
when I submitted myself to him and chose his will.

(Parenthetically, the last person to conjure with names, attempting to gain authority by claiming 
kinship with a Roman princeps et imperator from before the Dark Ages was Albert Frederick Arthur 
George Windsor, George VI, who called himself SoeCaesar of IndiaS□ up until 1947.)

Starting 50,000 years ago, we have our guessesS”my guessesS”of the level of average annual real 
income per capita y, measured in todayS™ s dollars, and of the human population P. Define the level 
of human technological prowess H as equal to y times the square-root of P. Why is H proportional to 
y? That is just a definition, a normalization:
technology enables and enhances a finer and more productive human division of labor, and so it 
makes sense to define H so that a counterfactual globe with the same population and resources but 
twice as high a living standard y would require twice as great a level of technology H to support 
that higher living standard. Why the square-root of Pl Well,
if    we defined H = yP, we would be implicitly saying that individual human hands, eyes, brains, 
and mouths were of no account: that to support twice the population at the same living standard 
would require twice the technology. That makes no sense. If we defined H = y we would implicitly be 
saying, to the contrary, that national resources were
unnecessary and unproductive. That also makes no sense. The square-root seems a reasonable 
compromise.

Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

-48000

Technological
Ideas-Stock
Growth         Rate h

0.002%

Technological
Ideas Stock

Level H (1870 = 1)

0.011

Average Annual
Real Income per
Capita y

$1,200

Total Human
Population L
(millions)

0.2


-8000

-5000

-3000

-1000

800

1500

1770

1870

2010

0.003%

0.006%

0.027%

0.030%

0.061 %

0.016%

0.059%

0.149%

0.442%

2.159%

0.036

0.043

0.074

0.136

0.250

0.285

0.429

0.643

1.000

20.557

$1,200

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

$1,100

$1,300

$11,600

2

5

15

50

170

220

500

750

1300

6900

Thus from our guesses as to average real income y and global population P, we can construct guesses 
as to H: the value of the stock of useful and productive technological ideas about the manipulation 
of nature and the organization of humans known by the time-binding anthology intelligence that is 
the human race. And we can construct guesses as to

h, the proportional growth rate of the value of that as stock.

When we do this, we see that h has been 2.2%/year for a century and a half in our age of Modern 
Economic Growth; that it was less than a quarter as mucha€”0.45%/yeara€”for the Industrial 
Revolution Age century before that; that it was a third of thata€”0.15%/yeara€”for the 
Imperial-Commercial Age from 1500-1770; that it was 2/5 of thata€”
0.6%/yeara€”for the High MediAlval Age from 800-1500; and that it was a quarter of 
thata€”0.015%/yeara€”from the year 1 to the year 800. We see for the past 2000 years an upward 
march of the level of technology Ha€”although for the first 1500 years this upward march is 
diverted to compensate for increasing resource scarcity as greater human
numbers  mean smaller farm and grazing-land sizes per persona€”at an increasing pace.

But then, as we look back from the year 1 to the year -1000, we see something odd. Human population 
increased by only 30% from 1 to 800. (That is what drives our h of 0.015%/year.) But in the 1000 
years before the year 1 human population more than tripled. (That gives us a Classical Antiquity 
Age h of 0.6%/year, equal to what we saw from 800 to
1500.)

So what happened in the years up to 800? It was not technological regress (though there was some: 
loss of the ability to make cement, for example). The world population was 30% larger and thus 
people were managing on 30% smaller farm sizes than they had back in the year 1 But the pace of 
innovation appears to have fallen to 1/4 of what it had
been in the pre-1 years of Classical Antiquity. And there was a definite loss at the eastern and 
western provinces of Eurasia of the ability to invest in building and maintaining physical capital. 
It was most pronounced by far at the western edge of Eurasia, in the Roman Empire, and especially 
the western Roman Empire.


100-

80-

60*

40"

20-

0-

200 v. Chr. 0            200      400       600    800 n. Chr.

Graph 3: dated wood remains from western Germany (Trier laboratory)

200 v. Chr. 0            200       400       600     800 n. Chr.

Graph 4: archaeological finds in western Germany (Trier laboratory)              Graph 2: Lead 
pollution in Greenland ice cores22

Source: Jongman, Willem M. (2007) “Gibbon was Right: The Decline and Fall of the
Roman Economy,” in O. Hekster et. al. eds. Crises and the Roman Empire, Brill.

But you can, if you squint, see a fall in the indexes we have of long-distance trade and durable 
construction across the supercontinent.

The rest of the pattern of human history would have suggested an increasing h from l-800a€’’perhaps 
to 0.1%/year or soa€”and a world population of 375 million or so. Such human numbers not reached in 
our history until the eve of the 1346-8 Black Death.
It seems to me to try to write human history without taking note of thisa€! leta€™ s politely call 
it a€oethe Late-Antiquity Pausea€Da€”that is not just to present Hamlet without the prince, but 
without the king, queen, advisor, lover, and best friend as wella€!
Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!

Share


Paragraphs:

Oren Cass: The GOP Needs Fewer Tax Cuts & More Labor Unions'. a€™ Applying conservative principles 
doesna€™t mean just keep flipping through the 1980 playbook until you find the right tax cuta€! 
LINK: 
<https://podtail.com/podcast/the-long-game/the-gop-needs-fewer-tax-cuts-and-more-labor-unions/>

Daniel Cohen: The Battle for the French Right'. a€~The French presidential election in April will 
almost certainly be decided in a second-round contest between the incumbent, Emmanuel Macron, and 
one of the right-wing candidates. Much therefore will depend on the performance of potential 
spoilers like N%onc Zemmour, the French version of
Donald Trumpa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/french-presidential-election-battle-for-right-bv-danie
l-cohen-2022-01>

Duncan Black: Political Press Psychopaths'. a€~Bidena€! heads to Sen. Harry M. Reida€™ s memorial 
Saturdaya€!. Not everyone thinks ita€™ s the best use of his timea€!. Annie Linskey: a€™ He spoke 
at a private memorial for the former first lady of Indiana, eulogized two former Republican 
senators and sat in the audience to honor the life of a
onetime GOP secretary of state. He flew to Delaware to pay homage to the statea€™ s former 
governor. And he made a four-hour round trip to Wilmington on a Wednesday night in May to drop in 
at the viewing of a longtime former Senate aide. All while running the country .a€oe Imagine 
pitching that one to the editor, and having the editor poke YES
YES YES as hard and fast as possible. Thata€™ s your political press corps. When we last saw 
Linskey, she tweeted this about Biden visiting the graves of [checks notes] his son, first wife, 
and daughter: Annie Linskey: a€DBiden goes to church and walks through a graveyard in Wilmington as 
his legislative agenda is dying in Washingtona€!

LINK: <https ://www.eschatonblog .com/2022/01/politcal-press-psychopaths .html>

Heather Cox Richardson: January 9, 2022: a€~Putin insists that Ukrainea€™ s interest in joining 
NATO threatens Russiaa€™ s securitya€!. Antony Blinkena€!. International peace and security relies 
on a€oethe principle that one country cana€™t change the borders of another by force, the principle 
that one country cana€™ t dictate to another its
foreign policy anda€!its choices including with whom it will associate, the principle that one 
country cana€™ t exert a sphere of influence to subjugate its neighbors.a€D The State Department 
and the Biden administration have worked hard to rebuild the alliances that frayed under Trump, and 
now NATO is standing so strong that non-NATO countries
like Finland and Sweden are discussing whether they might like to joina€!. Blinken and President 
Joe Biden have made it clear since the beginning of Bidena€~s term that they see the defense of 
democracy as being global as well as locala€!

LINK:

Letters from an American
January 9,2022

There are two big stories for the coming week: diplomatic conversations with Russia and the passage 
of voting rights legislation in America. The two are related. In the last several months, Russia 
has massed nearly 100,000 troops on the border of Ukraine, and its president, Vladimir Putin, has 
threatened to invade the independent country again, as
Russiaa€l

Read more

a year ago A- 947 likes A- 445 comments A- Heather Cox Richardson

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription


Oren Cass: The GOP Needs Fewer Tax Cuts & More Labor Unions'. a€™ Applying conservative principles 
doesna€™t mean just keep flipping through the 1980 playbook until you find the right tax cuta€! 
LINK: 
<https://podtail.com/podcast/the-long-game/the-gop-needs-fewer-tax-cuts-and-more-labor-unions/>

Daniel Cohen: The Battle for the French Right'. a€~The French presidential election in April will 
almost certainly be decided in a second-round contest between the incumbent, Emmanuel Macron, and 
one of the right-wing candidates. Much therefore will depend on the performance of potential 
spoilers like N%onc Zemmour, the French version of
Donald Trumpa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/french-presidential-election-battle-for-right-by-danie
l-cohen-2022-01>

Duncan Black: Political Press Psychopaths'. a€~Bidena€! heads to Sen. Harry M. Reida€™ s memorial 
Saturdaya€!. Not everyone thinks ita€™ s the best use of his timea€!. Annie Linskey: a€™ He spoke 
at a private memorial for the former first lady of Indiana, eulogized two former Republican 
senators and sat in the audience to honor the life of a
onetime GOP secretary of state. He flew to Delaware to pay homage to the statea€™ s former 
governor. And he made a four-hour round trip to Wilmington on a Wednesday night in May to drop in 
at the viewing of a longtime former Senate aide. All while running the country .a€oe Imagine 
pitching that one to the editor, and having the editor poke YES
YES YES as hard and fast as possible. Thata€™ s your political press corps. When we last saw 
Linskey, she tweeted this about Biden visiting the graves of [checks notes] his son, first wife, 
and daughter: Annie Linskey: a€DBiden goes to church and walks through a graveyard in Wilmington as 
his legislative agenda is dying in Washingtona€!

LINK: <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/01/politcal-press-psychopaths.html>

Heather Cox Richardson: January 9, 2022: a€~Putin insists that Ukrainea€™ s interest in joining 
NATO threatens Russiaa€™ s securitya€!. Antony Blinkena€!. International peace and security relies 
on a€oethe principle that one country cana€™t change the borders of another by force, the principle 
that one country cana€™ t dictate to another its
foreign policy anda€!its choices including with whom it will associate, the principle that one 
country cana€™ t exert a sphere of influence to subjugate its neighbors.a€D The State Department 
and the Biden administration have worked hard to rebuild the alliances that frayed under Trump, and 
now NATO is standing so strong that non-NATO countries
like Finland and Sweden are discussing whether they might like to joina€!. Blinken and President 
Joe Biden have made it clear since the beginning of Bidena€~s term that they see the defense of 
democracy as being global as well as locala€!

LINK:

Letters from an American
January 9,2022

There are two big stories for the coming week: diplomatic conversations with Russia and the passage 
of voting rights legislation in America. The two are related. In the last several months, Russia 
has massed nearly 100,000 troops on the border of Ukraine, and its president, Vladimir Putin, has 
threatened to invade the independent country again, as
Russiaa€l

Read more

a year ago A- 947 likes A- 445 comments A- Heather Cox Richardson

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

