Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) Susan Helper has plans for making outsourcing, offshoring, and other transformations that create 
very high-bandwidth links between firms in value chains win-win as opposed to
win-lose: to have ringmaster firms find it more advantageous to partner with high-productivity 
firms to raise the surplus, rather than with firms able to find workers with little market
power in order to redistribute the surplus. I think it will be very interesting and 
informativea€”well worth watching:

Equitable Growth: Webinar: Transforming U.S. Supply Chains to Create Good Jobs: a€~When: May 3,2021 
l:30PMa€“2:30PM. Where: This event is
virtual and not held in person, The Washington Center for Equitable Growth, 15th Street Northwest, 
Washington, DC, USAa€!. Large firms shifted from
doing many activities in-house to buying goods and services from a complex web of other companies. 
Sometimes this restructuring can lead to innovation
if supplier firms specialize in producing complex technologies or processes. But in other cases, 
firms outsource so they can offload production onto firms
with weak bargaining power and thus little ability to compete except by aggressively holding down 
wagesaCI [a] a€celow-roada€D modela€!. High-road
supply networksaCIbenefit firms, workers, and consumers alike. High-road outsourcing, however, 
requires overcoming both market and network
failuresa€!. Susan Helper, the Carlton professor of economics at the Weatherhead School of 
Management at Case Western Reserve Universitya€! ona€! a
set                                                                      of policy proposals that 
directly address each of the reasons that outsourcing increases wage inequalitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/event/webinar-transforming-u-s-supply-chains-to-create-good-jobs/>

2) We economists often take too narrow a view of poverty and of societal well-being. Here Mark Rank 
provides an excellent remedy for that. And I think we at Equitable Growth
are going to cross-examine him again soon:

Alix Gould-Werth: In Conversation with Mark Rank: a€~How to usefully measure poverty in the United 
States. The actual causes of poverty. Poverty and
race and ethnicity. Poverty and the broader U.S. macroeconomy. Myths about poverty and their 
consequences. Poverty and policymaking. Poverty and
inequality in the United States. Alix Gould-Werth: "I am here today with Mark Rank, and I am so 
glad that you are able to join us. Thanks for being
here.a€!

LINK: <https ://equitablegrowth .org/in-conversation-with-mark-rank/>

3) What my faction of economists thinks about the strong need for more public investment:

Hilary Hoynes, Trevon Logan, Atif Mian, William Spriggs, & al;. Seize a€ceHistoric Opportunity to 
Make Long-Overdue Public Investmentsa€V2to
Boost Economic Growth: a€~Dear Senate Majority Leader Schumer, Senate Minority Leader McConnell, 
Speaker Pelosi, and House Minority Leader
McCarthy ,a€! Policymakers have an historic opportunity to make long-overdue public investments in 
physical and care infrastructure to boost economic
growth and productivity. The share of our GDP invested in federally-funded research and development 
has fallen from around 2% in 1960 to just 0.6%
today; this means less knowledge creation, fewer good jobs, and a harder time boosting employment 
in new sectors. Researcha€”and common sensea€”
tell us that this disinvestment is damaging for U.S. communities and our economy as older 
infrastructure depreciates and economic and social challenges
go unaddresseda€!. In addition to federal research, physical infrastructure needs must be 
addressed. The private sector alone is not capable of making the
large-scale investments needed to address the overlapping structural challenges currently facing 
the countrya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/press/more-than-200-economists-to-congress-seize-historic-opportunity-t
o-make-long-overdue-public-investments-to-
boost-economic-growth/>

4) I really do not understand where and how those who are forecasting a€ceoverheatinga€D over the 
next twelve months are getting their numbers for their estimates:

Brad DeLong: I Do Not See a€oeOverheatinga€mThis Yeara€\: a€~Yes, there will be some 
inflationa€”base effects and sectoral shifts and simply the
speed of reopening will create bottlenecks in the system, and those with pricing power will take 
advantage. Buta€’’unless the coronavirus plague has done
a lot more damage to the economic division of labor than I believea€”it will not be because 
production and employment are in any manner above stable­
inflation a€cepotentiala€D. Think of whatever inflation might happen as skidmarks and burning 
rubber, rather than any form of boilovera€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/i-do-not-see-overheating-this-year>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)1 confess it is remarkablea€”the extent to which a great many in the insular Washington DC media 
establishment ecosystem have learned little from the Age of Trump, and either
do not share or feel that their career requires that they pretend not to share core American 
democratic values:

Dan Froomkin: The National Journal: a€~a€oeBoth parties are trying to game the election rules to 
their advantage. But the Democratic effort in the
House is being hailed as a reform, while GOP efforts are slammed as voter suppression.a€D 
@HotlineJosha€™ s latest a€DAgainst the Graina€oe

<https://buff.ly/3ritIRv>a€□. The twittersphere screamed in agony. Politics professor Brian Klaas 
offered a translation: a€oeBoth the arsonist and the
firefighter interact with fire. But the firefightera€™ s efforts are being hailed as anti-fire, 
while the arsonist is being slammed as pro-fire .a€D MSNBC host
Mehdi Hasan called it a€oeone of the worst, most dangerous, most inaccurate a€~both sides!a€™ takes 
of 2021 .a€D And history professor Thomas
Zimmer wrote: a€oeThis is obviously written in bad faith. But even if it werena€™ t, think about 
how little you must value democracy to argue that
a€~saving  and extending voting rightsa€™ and a€~curtailing the right to vote for specific 
groupsa€™ are equally legitimate forms of a€~gaminga€™ the
rules.a€D But Kraushaar is not alone in wanting to treat this simply as a partisan disputea€!

LINK: <https://presswatchers 
.org/2021/04/as-voting-issue-gets-white-hot-political-reporters-try-to-duck-the-moral-implications/

2) It is very difficult to understand what is going on in the Senatea€”the extent to which 
Republican senators seek to be highly obstructive partisans while avoiding accepting the
blame and obloquy that comes from being highly obstructive partisans. The fact that there is no 
faction in the Republican House caucus that is even trying to play a positive role in
legislation is a negative sign:

Haley Byrd Wilt: Welcome Back to Infrastructure Week: a€~a€oeLeta€™ s just say, notionally: The 
president and our caucus, we are trying to get $2
trillion worth of infrastructure and job investments moving ahead,a€D Delaware Democrat Sen. Chris 
Coons told reporters Thursday. a€oeWhy
wouldna€™   t you do $800 billion of it in a bipartisan way and do the other $1.2 trillion 
Dems-only through reconcifiation? Why wouldna€™ t you do that?
a€Da€l. West Virginia Republican Sen. Shelley Moore Capito, who is also involved in the 
conversations, has indicated she would not mind if Democrats
proceed on that path. In an interview with CNBC earlier this week, she said Republicans and 
Democrats should first pass items that have bipartisan
agreementa€! LINK: <https://uphill.thedispatch.eom/p/uphill-welcome-back-to-infrastructure>

3) Yes, the economy will be substantially different as a result of adjustment and failure of 
adjustment during the coronavirus plague year. But we are not yet quite sure how:

Rani Molla: What Data on Money Spent on Travel, Grocery Shopping Tells Us About the Pandemic 
Recovery: a€~How dramatically the pandemic affected
our spendinga€!. While certain types of clothing spend have recovered, the physical stores at which 
they were once purchased havena€™ t. Earnest
Research data on foot traffic by categorya€’’which is different from their spending categories 
because it tracks entities like mallsa€”shows that people
havena€™  t completely returned to clothing stores. In conjunction with the elevated spending data, 
this suggests that online sales have taken a bigger

portion of clothing sales in a move thata€™ s likely to be permanenta€! LINK: 
<https://www.vox.com/recode/22379584/spending-foot-traffic-earnest-
rp.spa rr h -d a ta -na n dem i r.-rer.nvprv>


4) The shift of smartphone component design and manufacture industrial leadership is accomplished. 
Not it looks as though the shift of central processing unit and system-on-a-chip
industrial leadership in manufacture and perhaps design is well-accomplished as well. This was not 
something I foresaw twenty years ago:

Tae Kim: InteldC™ s Plan to Take On TSMC & Win Big in Chips Has Big Risks: a€~Intela€™ s strategic 
pivot to chip making comes at an ideal moment,
but that wona€™ t make its task any easiera€!. Intel will spend $20 billion to build two new 
factories in Arizona, vastly expanding capacity for both
internal use and for customers of its new program, called a€oelntel Foundry Services," or IFSa€!. 
Herea€™ s the biggest question for the chipmaker: Can
it  win a large chunk of business away from market leader Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co.? 
During his strategy presentation, Gelsinger
confirmed for the first time that the company will be using TSMC to manufacture some of its 
top-of-the-line CPU processors in 2023. This is a result

of years of Intel delays in moving to the latest chipmaking technologies. With Intel compelled to 
use TSMC for some of its leading products, ita€™ s going
to be difficult at least in the near term for the company to argue that its services are 
significantly better than its Asian rivala€!. There are some tailwinds for
Intela€™ s manufacturing businessa€! security concernsa€! future subsidies and tax incentives from 
the Biden administration^!. While it is easy for Intel
to  talk a big game about building a a€ceworld-classa€D foundry business, it will be much harder to 
create a viable and profitable onea€! LINK:

<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-04-Q7/intel-s-plan-to-take-on-tsmc-and-win-big-in-c
hips-has-big-risks>

5) The very smart Dan Wang on the complexities, contradictions, and antinomies of China in 
technology and organization: simultaneously more advanced and more retarded, the
future and the past:

Dan Wang: China, the U.S., & Technology: a€~China has become a lot more brutal than I expected and 
then second of all, China looks a lot more
successful than I expecteda€!. You have to be able to recognize that things in China are getting 
worse, and then things in China are also getting better, just
depends                                                                      on the particular 
segment. China last year looked especially brutal, as it was able to control the virus fairly 
successfully. I think the lived
experience to all of us in Beijing where I was based, right now Ia€™ m in Shanghai, was that China 
was able to control everything more or less by April of
last year and it was really able to get its factories restarted by thena€!. China was really, 
really good at figuring out these short-term problems. The central
government, the local governments, but especially the companies themselves were able to organize 
production effectively and what Ia€™ m now hearing
from so many companies now is that China is still the worlda€™ s best growth story. That was the 
case in 2020, and that might still be the case for the next
10 years relative to a lot of other emerging countries. In addition to that, China is the worlda€™ 
s best place to manufacture so many different types of
goods and theya€™ re more or less doubling down a lot more on China as a major market and also as a 
producera€!. Ia€™ ve come to the view now
thata€! we have to spend much more time taking a look at whata€™ s going on with the leading 
companiesa€!. There are some areas of Chinese
technological success, I would cite areas like solar panels, high-speed rail, mobile telephony 
equipment, so this is the 5G stuff that Huawei has become
really good at. But if you take a look at a much bigger ticket items, things like semiconductors or 
aviation technologies, China has been a manifest
failurea€!

LINK: <https://stratechery.com/2021/an-interview-with-dan-wang-about-china-the-u-s-and-technology/>

6) The extent to which the technocrats of the Trump administrationa€”such as they werea€”failed to 
understand the difference between the structure of the world economy and the
shadows cast by various forms of tax arbitrage is absolutely stunning. Never mind that the policies 
would not have been very likely to be successful if the world had been as they
thought it. The world was simply not as they thought it was:

Paul Krugman: Trumpa€™ s Corporate Tax Cut Was a Flop: a€~I want to talk abouta€! why even many 
critics, myself included, thought the Trump tax
cut was less bad than the usual Republican tax plan, followed by three reasons we were, it turned 
out, too kinda€!. Republican tax cuts are usually
concentrated on high-income individuals, and are justified with the claim that cutting marginal tax 
rates will lead to an explosion in individual effort,
entrepreneurship, and so ona€!. There have been many debunkingsa€!. The rationale for the corporate 
tax cut was, however, quite different. It wasna€™ t
about  individual work effort; instead, it was about incentives to invest in the United States as 
opposed to other nations. Thata€™ s clearly a real issue in a
world of mobile capitala€!. I accepted this logic, at least as a qualitative matter. I still 
thought the tax cut was a bad idea, but that was because I believed
that  the inflow of capital would be smaller and take much longer than the plana€™ s advocates 
claimed, and as a result wouldna€™ t be enough to
compensate for the loss of revenue. But I was, it turned out, being too generous. As a 2019 
analysis by the International Monetary Fund found, the Tax
Cuts    and Jobs Act ended up having no visible effect at all on business investment^!. How can we 
understand this abject failure? I see three reasons, one of
which I missed completely back in 2017, two of which I knew about but didna€™ t give sufficient 
weighta€!. The corporate profits tax isna€™ t a tax on
capital, ita€™ s a tax on a particular aspect of corporate financial structure. Analysesa€”mine 
included !a€’’that treat it simply as raising the cost of capital
are being far too generous to tax cutters. Business investment isna€™ t that sensitive to the cost 
of capital, anywaya€!. Most business assets are fairly

short-liveda€!. And demand for short-lived assets isna€™t very sensitive to the cost of capital. 
[Ita€™ s] the demand for houses [that] depends hugely on
the interest rate borrowers have to paya€!. Monopoly: Financial industry types often talk about the 
FAANGs: Facebook, Apple, Amazon, Netflix, Google
a€” tech companies that loom large in the stock market. These companies look very different from 
past market leaders like General Motors in its heyday;
ita€™ s much harder to link their value to the tangible assets they owna€!. The profit tax is at 
this point largely a tax on monopoly or quasi-monopoly
profitsa€!. NaA“ve calculations of the effect of tax cuts on business investment have to be 
a€oegeared downa€Da€!. But why did anyone ever believe that
corporate tax cuts would do great things for the economy? The big argument for cutting corporate 
taxes has long been that if we dona€™ t, corporations
will  move capital and jobs to lower-tax nationsa€!. What wea€™ ve learned over the past 7 or 8 
years, however, is that wea€™ re mainly looking at
accounting tricks rather than real capital flighta€!. The Trump tax cut is that it didna€™t reverse 
capital flight because the capital flight never happened in
the   first placea€!. The U.S. government gave up hundreds of billions of dollars to fix a 
nonexistent problem. Now the Biden administration wants to go
after the real problem, which was always tax avoidance, not loss of jobs to foreigners. Will they 
manage to pass the necessary legislation? Wea€™ 11 just
have to wait and see.

LINK: <https://www.nvtim.es 
.com/2021/04/09/opinion/trump-corporate-tax-reform.html?referringSource=articleShare>

7) It was very strange, the Obama administration: so many people who were very interested in 
accomplishing technocratic long-run policy goals, but not in doing the foundation
work to make those accomplishments durable. Obama progress on rebalancing federal finances melted 
away the moment his second term ended, the Affordable Care Act barely
survived, and those were the two most notable accomplishments. The Biden people seem aimed at a 
better reinforcing structure of policy, political credit, and societal support:

Ezra Klein: The Best Explanation ofBidena€™s Thinking Ia€™ve Heard: a€~With the $2 trillion 
American Jobs Plan, the economic theory that is
Bidenomics is taking shape. Ita€™ s big. It puts climate at the center of everything. It is more 
worried about political risksa€’’losing the House, giving
Donald  Trump a path back to powera€”than some traditional economic risks, like wasting money and 
bumping up inflation. It prefers to err on the side of
spending more and making sure people know they got a bridge or a job than doing less and having 
people question whether government is working for
them.  But I still have a lot of questions about Bidenomicsa€!. Brian Deese is the director of the 
National Economic Councila€!. I asked Deese to join me
on  the podcast to talk about how his economic policymaking and thinking have changed since 
2009a€!. "Growing economic inequalitya€! was laid bare
during the pandemica€!. Climate change; wea€™ ve also seen the impact acceleratinga€! [and] having 
an economic strategy that is unresponsive or
agnostic  to those issues is no longer a viable optiona€!. One of the important things politically 
is making sure that the ultimate beneficiaries of the things
you  are trying to accomplish know and understand what youa€™re trying to accomplish^!. The 
president is thinkinga€!. When hea€™ s thinking about
the infrastructure investments necessary, a lot of it is in contraposition to what he is seeing 
China doing in terms of strategic investmentsa€!. There is a big
questiona€!. Can the United States deliver for its own citizens? Can the United States competently 
govern and invest in things that are obviously beneficial
to    its own welfare, its economic strength, its economic resilience? Because the world has 
watched now for a couple of years where the United States
operated in a way that was very difficult for our international counterparts to fathom. That is 
really the dominant questiona€!. Can the U.S. get its house in
order? And that question is inevitably framed vis-A -vis Chinaa€!

LINK: <https ://www.nytimes .com/2021/04/09/opinion/ezra-klein-podcast-brian-deese .html>

8) When you buy an option from somebody who then delta-hedges it, what you really have done is: (a) 
taken a very small position in the underlying, and (b) committed to a
positive-feedback trading strategy that will continually plow a very large share of notional 
profits you may earn on your position back into the underlying by massively raising your
leverage:


Robert Armstrong: The Nope Theory to Explain Volatility in Equity Markets'. a€~One factor in many 
of the strangest market episodes is the shadow cast

by the equity options marketa€!. Options to buy and sell shares have to be hedged by the dealers 
which offer them. When options-related volume is a
significant portion of the market, this makes the market unstablea€!. The delta of an option 
changes with the price of the underlying stock. So if a stock
really  starts to run up, dealers of options in it have to buy more of it to hedge the options they 
have sold. This adds to the upwards price pressurea€!. This
kind                                                                     of snowball was behind the 
more violent spikes in GameStop, a name retail option buyers piled into heavily. The punchline is 
that the state of the
equity options market at any given moment tells you something about pressures that will be 
subsequently felt in the equity market itselfa€”and it should be
possible to trade on this facta€!. Francusa€™ core concept is an indicator called Nopea€! a 
rough-and-readya€! gauge of the weight the options market is
exerting on the stock market. It estimates the amount of the liquidity available in a certain stock 
or index that is being sopped up by options dealersa€™
hedginga€! the delta of all the outstanding a€oecalla€n options to buy stocks, less the delta of 
all the a€ceputa€D options to sell them, divided by the

total daily volume trading of the shares. When Nope gets unusually high, Francus says, a€oethe 
market has a strong tendency to reversea€Da€;. This
volatility-encouraging character of options is a nice iteration of a familiar Wall Street irony: a 
financial instrument designed to manage risk is turned into a
speculative  device, making the market riskier. Credit default and total returns swaps are two 
other good examplesa€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/dd3b8f7b-ff0c-4887-b730-52a0fb0alld2>

