Home base for this: chttps://equitablegrowth.org/insights-expertise/value-added/>
Share

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)It used to be that there were high-wage occupations and high-wage firms, and that these were 
different and, to a large extent, countervailing sources of income inequality. But over the past 
generation this has ceased to be the case to a remarkable degree. How much of this is 
deunionization? How much of this is tech winner-take-all, and why has modern tech been so friendly 
to winnera€”or, rather, winning-teama€”take all? These are still profound mysteries
to me:

Nathan Wilmers & Clem Aeppli: Consolidated Advantage: New Organizational Dynamics of Wage 
Inequality: a€~The two main sources of inequality in the US labor marketa€’’occupation and 
workplacea€”have increasingly consolidated. Workers benefiting from employment at a high-paying 
workplace are increasingly those who already benefit from membership in a high-paying occupation. 
Drawing on occupation-by-workplace data, we show that two-
thirds of the rise in wage inequality since 1999 can be accounted for not by occupation or 
workplace inequality alone, but by their increased consolidation.

This consolidation is not attributable to firm turnover or to how occupations have shifted across a 
fixed set of high paying firms (as in outsourcing). Instead, consolidation has resulted from new 
bases of workplace pay premiums. Workplace premiums associated with teams of professionals have 
increased, while premiums for previously high-paid blue-collar workers have been cut. Yet the 
largest source of consolidation is bifurcation in the social sector, whereby
some previously low-paying but high-professional share workplaces, like hospitals and schools, have 
deskilled their jobs, while others have raised pay. Broadly, the results demonstrate an 
understudied way that organizations affect wage inequality: not by directly increasing variability 
in workplace or occupation premiums, but by consolidating these two sources of inequality.

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/consolidated-advantage-new-organizational-dynamics-of-wa
ge-inequality/>

2) Fresh off the press, this is a very nice survey indeed of the childcare-affordability problem in 
America today:

Taryn Morrissey : Addressing the Need for Affordable, High-Quality Early Childhood Care & Education 
for All in the United States: a€~In 2017a€“2018, most children in the United States under 6 years 
of agea€”68 percent of those in single-mother households and 57 percent in married-couple 
householdsa€’’lived in homes in which all parents were employed. Most of these families require 
nonparental early care and educationa€!. 12.5 million of the 20.4
million children under the age of 5 living in the United States (61 percent) attended some type of 
regular childcare arrangementa€!. Families with young children are spending more on childcare than 
they are on housing, food, or healthcarea€!.

I argue that greater policy attention to early childcare and education is warranted for three 
reasons: High-quality early care and education promotes childrena€™ s development and learning, and 
narrows socioeconomic and racial/ethnic inequalities. Reliable, affordable childcare promotes 
parental employment and family self-sufficiency. Early care and education is a necessary component 
of the economic infrastructure^!.
A universal early care and education plan, particularly one with a sliding income scale to provide 
progressive benefits, may not pay for itself in the short term, but will very likely do so in the 
long term by boosting broad-based U.S. economic growth and stability while narrowing economic 
inequalitya€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/02/Morrissey.pdf>

3) The Chicago Law-and-Economics rollback of anti-trust was not the worst thing to happen to 
America over the past half century. But we now have enough evidence to be confident that it was 
definitely a bad thing for the health of the American economy:

Fiona Scott Morton (2019): Modern U.S. Antitrust Theory & Evidence Amid Rising Concerns of Market 
Power & Its Effects: a€~The experiment of enforcing the antitrust laws a little bit less each year 
has run for 40 years, and scholars are now in a position to assess the evidencea€!. The bulk of the 
research featured in our interactive database on these key topics in competition enforcement in the 
United States finds evidence of significant problems of
underenforcement of antitrust law.

The research that addresses economic theory qualifies or rejects assumptions long made by U.S. 
courts that have limited the scope of antitrust law. And the empirical work finds evidence of the 
exercise of undue market power in many dimensions, among them price, quality, innovation, and 
marketplace exclusion. Overall, the picture is one of a divergence between judicial opinions on the 
one hand, and the rigorous use of modern economics to advance consumer
welfare on the othera€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/052819-antitrust-lit-rev.pdf>

4) I did a podcast on an excellent new book by Mike Konczal: Freedom From the Market: Americaa€™ s 
Fight to Liberate Itself from the Grip of the Invisible Hand <https://books .google 
.com/books?id=OaDLDwAAQB AJ>. I have long tended to be a believer that wealth equality plus 
sufficient attention to dealing with Peruvian externalities and with information and cognitive 
processing problems will bring us as close to material economic utopia as we can
get. Mike comes out of a very different tradition: that even under those conditions people will 
still be imprisoned by the market in a profoundly dystopian sense. He has powerful arguments on his 
side. And his book is an example of the very nice work currently being done at the Roosevelt 
Institute:

Mike Konczal, Noah Smith, & Brad DeLong: Freeing Us from the Market: a€~Konczal says that it is 
only today that a€oeglib libertariansa€D purveying a€cefantasiesa€D are trying to make us forget 
a€oethat free programs and keeping things free from the market are as American as apple piea€!a€D 
One of the best passages in the book is where he notes the connection between the Fight for $15 
minimum wage campaign and human freedom:
Service sector workers demanding a $15 minimum wage and a uniona€! have already won huge victories 
[with] ideas about how low-wage, precarious work is a form of unfreedoma€!. The Rev. William Barber 
noted that a€~it took 400 years from slavery to now to get from zero to $7.25 [an hour]. We cana€™t 
wait another 400 yearsa€™ to get to $15a€!

Ultimately, if all you can say in response to the ills of society is a€oethe market giveth, the 
market taketh away, blessed be the name of the marketa€!a€D you have very little to say indeed. 
Konczal quotes Oliver Wendell Holmesa€™ s fear and alarm that his fellow justices on the Lochner 
Supreme Court were, in their a€oewillingness to use a very specific understanding of economics to 
override law, writ[ing] a preferential understanding of economics into the
constitution itselfa€!a€D in a fundamentally illegitimate and societally-disruptive way. But a 
better maxim is: a€oeThe market was made for man, not man for the marketa€D.a€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/podcast-hexapodia-v-freeing-us-from>
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Can twitter <http://twitter.com> be a useful information utility, rather than a time sink, a 
distraction, and a source of misinformation?

I am a believer that a properly pruned twitter account can actually save you time and amplify your 
ability to learn things you want and need to know. But I am coming to the conclusion That turning 
onea€™ s twitter account into such a productive space is too much work for it to become the rule. 
Todaya€™ s Worthy Reads serve as an example. This a€ceelsewherea€D tranche is all directly and 
indirectly from the top of my twitter feed. But to get it so required
an immense amount of pruning. If you are willing to put the effort into pruning, howevera€”and then 
into repruninga€”I do believe that you will find that very valuable things are growing underneath 
all the thickets of thje misinformation thorns. The first item surfaced is the thoughtful Will 
Wilkinson, discussing how National Review is now in the business of pretending that even Mitt 
Romney is their very scary spectre of Antifa:

Will Wilkinson: Work Requirements Hurt Children: a€~[Oren] Cassa€™ s choice to cast himself as a 
champion of conservative ideals against ideologically blinkered Jacobin fanatics suggests that he 
would rather that readers of the National Review come down with a convenient spot of amnesia about 
the fact that wea€™ re talking about a bill by Mitt Romney.a€! There is thisa€! 60 percent of 
single moms are non-whitea€!. [Cassa€™ s] implication [is] that
partnered stay-at-home moms dona€™t need a disciplinary state to inculcate and reinforce 
market-related virtues, but unpartnered stay-at-home moms do.

If non-working solo parents are denied the child benefit, which kids disproportionately take the 
hit?a€! Ia€™ d like to hear more about the mechanism through which Cass believes that work 
requirements will generate upward mobility that leaves some of Americaa€™ s poorest children better 
off than theya€™ d have been if their families had been given no-strings-attached cash assistance^!.
[Cass] has told us that a€oethe Lefta€D is ignorant and impolitic. Ia€™ 11 save the question of the 
causal role of poverty in permanently mangling childrena€™ s brains and mental health for a 
separate post. Spoiler: thereaC™ s no question that it does. The hurt is literal and it can last a 
lifetimea€!

LINK: <https://modelcitizen.substack.eom/p/work-requirements-hurt-children>

2) The semiconductor manufacturing industry feels to me very much like the steel industry circa 
1900: immense capital requirements and a very few firms worldwide that acquired and managed to 
maintain a lead of several technological generations over actual and potential competitors. What I 
dearly, dearly Wish I could find right nowa€”but what is evading mea€”is a recent history of what 
has happened to Intela€™ s tick-tock strategy. How has it been stuck
at what it calls 14 nm processes for generations in semiconductor chip manufacturing time:

Christian Le Miere: a€™ Whata€™ s particularly striking about this BCG forecast of semiconductor 
manufacturing capacity is not just the increase in China, but the fact that 75% of predicted 
capacity will all be in Northeast Asia. A clear sign of Gideon Rachmana€™ s Easternisationa€!
LINK: <https://twitter.com/c_lemiere/status/13703628Q3656212485>

Distribution of global semiconductor manufacturing capacity

■ U.S. ■ Europe     Japan    South Korea     Taiwan ■ China (mainland)      Others


100%

1990           2000


3) I have long thought that running so much of the social insurance system through the Treasury, 
the IRS, and the ax code is a significant mistake. We started doing this with the EITC simply 
because Senator Russell Long was chair of the Senate Finance Committee. And we are still doing it. 
It will require a lot of work to make the CTC work the way it does in the dreams of its proponents. 
And I do not yet see any sign that anyone in the administration is taking
ownership of making this work:

Annie Lowrey: a€™In the past few days, Ia€™ ve talked to a bunch of folks who will get the monthly 
CTC cash allowances, and none had any idea the money is coming.. Ita€™ s a really complicated 
policy change (a€oea monthly advance on a newly fully refundable tax credita€D is, I mean, even my 
eyes start to cross) and I hope therea€™ s a concerted effort to increase awareness and 
participation ratesa€!. This is a good calculator I explanation! One thing
to note is that you wona€™ t get the money unless you file taxes, so super important for parents to 
do that even if their incomes are so low they dona€™ t have to 
https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/interactive/2021/child-tax-credit-calculator/:a€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/AnnieLowrey/status/1370082017036Q38149>

4) Very smart people seem to me to have the wrong intuitions with respect to how the labor market 
works, numbers of jobs, and the role of training. I believe that what we need to do is to 
simultaneously: (1) boost demand for the labor of normal peoplea€’’labor that can be effectively 
and excellently done by people who bring to it nothing more than the East African Plains Ape 
evolution-cognitive toolkita€”and (2) finding and funding much better ways for
people to get the skills and experience needed for those jobs the require lengthy training outside 
the standard evolution-cognitive toolkit. Seeking to have tech giants in some sense a€oegrow their 
owna€D is, I think, a distraction. The tech giantsa€™ demand for workers is a drop in the bucket of 
the economy as a whole. But if they could construct learning paths and certifications trusted out 
in the economy as a wholea€! it could do an immense amount of good
in rebalancing the labor market.The key is to shrink the technical-education premiuma€”and as the 
technical-education premium shrinks, low-wage jobs become higher paying jobs, and as low-wage jobs 
become higher paying jobs, they command more respect:

Zeynep Tufekci: a€™ This is marketed as a€oeGooglea€™ s plan to disrupt the college degreea€D 
<https://www.inc.com/iustin-bariso/inside-googles-plan-to-disrupt-college-degree-exclusive.html>. 
These plans come-and-go; dona€™t work (for obvious reasons); BUT if they actually commit to hiring 
the graduates of this one, that would matter. (Google itself tends to hire from a tiny number of 
elite schools). If Google, Apple, Facebook et al.a€”which hire a
lot from Harvard, Berkeley, CMU, Stanford, MIT etca€”change their own hiring practices for 
technical/engineering roles, yeah that could disrupt the college degree (unlike offering a 
certificate which is fine but isna€™t disruptive). (I started as a self-taught technical 
persona€’’tween coders of the world unitea€”got a job, paid my own way through college/degree, 
worked professionally later so Ia€™m not at all dismissive of that route but lol to disrupting the
college degree until they start hiring differently).

To finalize the point, more training is fine but therea€™ s decades of research that the (obvious) 
key problem in the US job market is scarcity of good, stable jobs across the education ladder. 
(Also always check where people who run these things send their own kids). Anyway, I really, really 
hope Google themselves and these 130 companies named actually hire the graduates of this 
programa€”and also hire more graduates of non-elite universities and other non-
college-grads, too.a€!

LINK: <https://twitter.eom/zevnep/status/1370375926350020613>

5) How long has it been since any Republican politician endorsed any unionization drive? Certainly 
this is not how Marco Rubio approaches unionization drives in the hospitality industry in Greater 
Miami. I confess that I find myself with a rather cynical take on this. Romney won, with his child 
tax credit, the approval of perhaps the last remaining slice of non-fascist Republican 
intellectuals. And Romneya€™ s child tax credit proposal was a good policy idea
as well. Rubio, I think, believes that the approval of those whom David Brooks trails after could 
be an important part of his 2024. Thus he is seeking to counter Romney, but without doing any 
policy work. And he is crossing his fingers that his plutocratic base will see this not as 
anti-plutocracy but rather as merely yet another culture-war skirmish:

Eric Levitz: a€™ Rubio is oddly honest about how contingent his support for labor is: a€oeWhen the 
conflict is between working Americans and a company whose leadership has decided to wage culture 
war against working-class values, the choice is easya€”I support the workersa€Da€!
LINK: <https://twitter.com/EricLevitz/status/1370378107866251274>:

Mike Allen: Marco Rubio Sides with Alabama Warehouse Workers in Amazon Union Battle'. a€~Rubio 
writes that one of his a€oeearliest political memories was marching the picket line with my dad in 
a Culinary Workers Union strike when he worked as a hotel bartender. The lesson I took from 
ita€”all workers deserve respecta€shas stuck with me all throughout my career,a€D Rubio writes. 
a€oeOur laws should help build more productive relationships
between labor and businesses, the vast majority of which treat their employees with dignity and 
want to work cooperatively with thema€Da€!

LINK: <https://news .yahoo .com/marco-rubio-sides-alabama-warehouse-120848054.html>

6) I confess that I do not see us as Living in an age of stifling liberal consensus. I see us as 
Living in a Gilded Age in which authoritarian nationalism is still on a powerful forward march 
worldwide. But to each their own, I guess:

John Ganz: Which Way Leftist?'. a€~The [early 1900s French] Socialists actually had mass support of 
workers in the streets, and the decision of when to use and spend that power was an essential 
question. The Socialists Blum and JaurA"sa€! managed to stake out a position between mere reformism 
and uncompromising revolutionism^!" insisting that the parliamentary republic was the institutional 
framework within which the socialist must work to achieve
their goal, he never abjured the idea of revolution and the class struggle,a€D

The left in America today isa€! weirda€!. The idea that this [Biden Administration] is some kind of 
liberal trap and the correct path is back out into the wilderness seems wronga€!.

On the other hand, I can see the argument for maintaining some kind of oppositional coherence in 
the face of a stifling liberal consensusa€!. I temperamentally and philosophically prefer Popular 
Front-isma€!. I do not particularly want to be a part of a subculturea€”I was already a teenager 
oncea€!. I do hope we can make a more decent and dignified life for people in this country in my 
lifetimea€!
LINK: <https://iohnganz.substack.eom/p/which-way-leftist>

7) Things are finally, once again, better than they were at the peak of the crisis a year ago. But 
my fear is that the relaxation of social distancing will keep us from rapidly reaping the harvest 
we ought to get from the success of the vaccination program:

Charlie Bilello: a€™ Covida€ “19 hospitalizations in the US were down 13% over the past week, the 
58th consecutive day of week-over-week declines. Now down 71% from their peak on Jan 6. Covida€“19 
deaths in the US continue to decline, now 55% below their peak on Jan 13. Deaths are a lagging 
indicator and will continue to move lower in coming weeks if hospitalizations stay down. Should see 
a suba€“l ,000 number by Aprila€!
LINK: <https://twitter.com/charliebilello/status/1370367885898567684>

Number of Covid-19 Current US Hospitalizations

(Data via Covidtracking.com, State Dashboards)


100000

80000


60000

40000

20000

59,924

28,026                     28,873

0

(Data via Covidtracking.com, Worldometers)


3,500

3,323



VV       /

@Ckar(ieBilello

/ COMPOUND

8) In 1993 the Republican Rarty, under Newt Gingrich, learned that Americaa€™ s media establishment 
would always consider illegitimate any policy that was not halfway between Republican and 
Democratic demands. That gave the Republicans every incentive to be extreme as possible, and no 
incentive whatsoever to take any care that the policies they proposed might, you know, actually 
work. It is 27 years later. The media establishment seems still to be in
this particular trap. That is to our substantial national detriment:

Greg Sargent: The Real Lesson of the Feud Between Susan Collins & Chuck Schumer: a€~Many senators 
are supposedly shocked, shocked by a feud that has erupted between their colleagues Charles E. 
Schumer and Susan Collinsa€!. Many GOP senators are treating this as a teachable moment: If Schumer 
(N.Y.) and Democrats want bipartisan support in the future, by golly, theya€™ d best treat the most 
gettable Republican with a whole lot more respect! This
is a teachable moment, but in an entirely different way: It shows yet again how confused and 
obfuscatory our discourse is around a€cebipartisanship.a€Da€!

During the debate over the $1.9 trillion relief package, you constantly heard media figures asking 
whether President Biden and Democrats could a€oedo morea€D to a€oewin bipartisan cooperationa€D 
from Republicans, as though this could have been secured by acts of personal gladhandling or other 
mystical rites that went unspecified, and that this would have been an inherently good thing. But 
the only thing Democrats could have done to win such bipartisan
cooperation was to dramatically scale down their package. And so, those who suggested that winning 
bipartisan cooperation would have been an inherent good were necessarily offering an opinion on 
policy: They were saying a much smaller package would have been a better outcome than what did 
happen, because it was bipartisana€!.

Schumer said on TV that Democrats learned their lesson from 2009 and would not chase after 
bipartisan support forever, adding that a€oeSusan Collins was part of that mis take. a€D Collins 
took great umbrage, and insisted there had been no outreach to her at all on the stimulus. She 
declared it the height of folly to a€oealienate the most bipartisan member,a€D suggesting that 
winning future cooperation would now be far harder. Numerous other GOP senators
echoed that sentiment. But therea€™ s no reason to believe any amount of outreach would have won 
over Collins. Recall that Collins and Republicans backed an amendment that would have scaled down 
the package to one-third its sizea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/03/ll/real-lesson-feud-between-susan-collins-chuck-sch
umer/>
Leave a comment


@Cfar(ieBiletlo \

COMPOUND

V

8) In 1993 the Republican Rarty, under Newt Gingrich, learned that Americaa€™ s media establishment 
would always consider illegitimate any policy that was not halfway between Republican and 
Democratic demands. That gave the Republicans every incentive to be extreme as possible, and no 
incentive whatsoever to take any care that the policies they proposed might, you know, actually 
work. It is 27 years later. The media establishment seems still to be in
this particular trap. That is to our substantial national detriment:

Greg Sargent: The Real Lesson of the Feud Between Susan Collins & Chuck Schumer: a€~Many senators 
are supposedly shocked, shocked by a feud that has erupted between their colleagues Charles E. 
Schumer and Susan Collinsa€!. Many GOP senators are treating this as a teachable moment: If Schumer 
(N.Y.) and Democrats want bipartisan support in the future, by golly, theya€™ d best treat the most 
gettable Republican with a whole lot more respect! This
is a teachable moment, but in an entirely different way: It shows yet again how confused and 
obfuscatory our discourse is around a€cebipartisanship.a€Da€!

During the debate over the $1.9 trillion relief package, you constantly heard media figures asking 
whether President Biden and Democrats could a€oedo morea€D to a€oewin bipartisan cooperationa€D 
from Republicans, as though this could have been secured by acts of personal gladhandling or other 
mystical rites that went unspecified, and that this would have been an inherently good thing. But 
the only thing Democrats could have done to win such bipartisan
cooperation was to dramatically scale down their package. And so, those who suggested that winning 
bipartisan cooperation would have been an inherent good were necessarily offering an opinion on 
policy: They were saying a much smaller package would have been a better outcome than what did 
happen, because it was bipartisana€!.

Schumer said on TV that Democrats learned their lesson from 2009 and would not chase after 
bipartisan support forever, adding that a€oeSusan Collins was part of that mis take. a€D Collins 
took great umbrage, and insisted there had been no outreach to her at all on the stimulus. She 
declared it the height of folly to a€oealienate the most bipartisan member,a€D suggesting that 
winning future cooperation would now be far harder. Numerous other GOP senators
echoed that sentiment. But therea€™ s no reason to believe any amount of outreach would have won 
over Collins. Recall that Collins and Republicans backed an amendment that would have scaled down 
the package to one-third its sizea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/03/ll/real-lesson-feud-between-susan-collins-chuck-sch
umer/>
Leave a comment

