mmhmm Interactive Video: https://share.mmhmm.app/22a2ade496c94828al70a2910550751f
https ://www.icloud.com/keynote/OIew EELHLYo 1 GVrvdtJmpqew

https ://github 
.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/econ-115-module-11.2.O-neoliberal-turn-intro-video-16.75 
.pptx

.#berkeley #highlighted #neoliberalturn #politicaleconomy #slouchingtowardsutopia #tceh #2020-11-23

I have been averaging a little under an hour for these weekly powerpoint slides-with-audio, these 
files that substitute for the Tuesday lectures that I would be giving live if this class
were live. I have been thinking that this allows me to go into greater depth and exceed that hour 
well it seems reasonable. And I have done so this time. Rather than coming in 30
minutes below the length of a standard hour and a half lecture, this weeks power points with audio 
come in 10 minutes above that standard length.

I think the reason for this is that I am uncertain about this weeka€™ s topic: the neoliberal turn 
in global north political economy after the mid-1970s and the development of a very
strong feeling in the global north that globalization was no longer a friend but an enemya€”a 
source of disruption, uncertainty, and poverty; rather than a source of prosperity,
growth, and peace.

And yet the sources of this neoliberal turn and this development of a fear of globalization are 
largely cloudy to me.

So here let me add another 15 minutes or so of introduction and summarya€’’carrying the total up to 
two hoursa€”to set out what I see, uncertainly, as the big picture of the global
northa€™s circa-1980 neoliberal turn.

Yes: I see what happened, and how people reacted, but the reaction seems disproportionate a€“ the 
effect seems massively outsized relative to the cause. Yes, there was inflation in
the 1970s, about 7% per year for a decade that doubled the price level. But if prices were rising 
because of inflation, your incomes were rising because of inflation as well. And, yes,
inflation was another source of uncertainty and disruption in a confusing world. But it was not as 
though there was a great depression on, or people were dying by the tens of
millions   in wars in genocides, or incomes had stopped growing. At least, it was not as if incomes 
had stopped growing until the consequences of the neoliberal turn made
themselves   felt, as the neoliberal term created the massive explosion in income inequality that 
has led to our second gilded age.

In the end, I take refuge in the position that the inflation of the 1970s destabilized the social 
democratic order of the mixed economy on the grounds that a system that cannot
produce stable prices appears to be a system that cannot be working. It needed to be replaced. The 
only replacement put forward was a rollback of social democracy: a shift back
toward classical semi liberalism. But that shift backward did not perform its stated goal of 
restoring order and growth. And yet the neoliberal turn persisted, as though its failure to
accomplish its goals made it only more attractive to public intellectuals and electorates.

428 words

And there was a productivity slowdown in the global north. Since 1973 output per worker as measured 
by standard statistics in the global north has average not the 3% per year of
1938 to 1973 but rather 1.5% per year. This is still very impressive. But the 30 glorious years had 
raised the bar. And so, in addition to the inflation of the 1970s, the coming of the
productivity slowdown destabilized the social democratic order. Yet somehow the failure of the 
neoliberal turn to restore rapid overall growth did not rebound to its discredit in the
global north. It was after 15 years of Reagan-Bush policies thata€”save in the absence of annoying 
inflationa€’’produced less growth and more economic disruption than the Ford-
Carter years of the inflationary 70s that Democratic president Bill Clinton was to announce: "the 
era of big government is over.a€D

146 words

And so we have the straws in the wind. Reagan, and his denunciation of "welfare queens" with the 
subtext that even those beneficiaries who were playing by the rules were
undeserving. The confidence of Trump voters that he was a bastard but that he was their bastard, 
and that he would make sure that the right unworthy people suffered. And the
puzzlement of Ezekiel Mareno who cannot believe that he is, in Donald Trump's eyes, one of the 
unworthy recipients of government welfare, and an alien and untrustworthy
Mexican  as well.

The refuge is that the boss does not know what his bureaucratic underlings are doing, and would fix 
it if he knew. The echo comes from the story of czarist Russia, where as the
cossacks rape, burn, and loot; and the villagers fleet for their lives; the villagers say: a€oeOh! 
If only the czar, if only our Little Father the czar, if only he knew what the cossacks
were doinga€”he would stop this!a€D

Well, the cossacks work for the czar. The cossacks have always worked for the czar. The czar hired 
the contacts, and the czar hired these cossacks.
191 words

But "neoliberalism" is not one thing. There is "hard" neoliberalism: restore order and make sure 
that economic incentives are properly aligned by making the rich richer so they will
become job creating agents of creative destruction and economic growth, and make the poor poorer so 
they can no longer afford to be idle slackers. There is "soft" neoliberalism,
which at least tells itself that it is aiming at achieving social democratic egalitarian ends 
through market friendly and incentive compatible means that actually work. It contrast itself
with a social democracy that had acquired too many special interest and bureaucratic barnacles. And 
there is a€oeoutside" neoliberalism: technocrats and others from the global
north fighting kleptocratic and incompetent bureaucratic governments in the global south that are 
strangling development. In some cents, this goes back to Keynes, and his claim
that the left-wing elements of his system would be more effective at securing the prosperity of the 
bosses in the saviors than the right wing policies they wanted; and also that the
right wing elements of the system would give the left wing not only greater prosperity but also 
freedom, autonomy and choice that they really wanted although they did not quite
know it.

202 words

The balance sheet on neoliberalism in the global north it was absolutely horrible for income in 
equality. How could it have been otherwise? And it was completely unsuccessful at
restoring economic growth. In fact, the absence of public investments almost slowed it was already 
much slower growth than the 30 glorious years. Under neoliberalism in the
global north, the top 0.01% became masters of the universe. The rest of the top 1% saw faster 
growth of their prosperity, but felt uneasy comparing themselves to their plutocratic
overlords. The rest of those who called themselves the upper middle class a€” the rest of the top 
10% a€” saw their incomes grow as rapidly as during the 30 glorious years. And
everyone else was or at least perceive themselves to be treading water. Plus neoliberalism created 
huge vulnerabilities that would wreak catastrophe after 2007. And yet it persisted.

144 words

For most of the countries in the global south, the idea that you would borrow market discipline and 
governance from the global north and the international institutions was not a
conspicuous success. But Chinaa€™ s and India's turns away from central planning and the 
bureaucratic license raj were extraordinary successes. Isn't that enough to justify the
neoliberal turn in the global south?

Plus there were others that did well. And to China and India the east Asian 5: Japan, Singapore, 
Hong Kong, Korea, Taiwan. Add to those the other three of the successfully
industrializing 6: Indonesia, Thailand, and Poland; and Malaysia and Bangladesh should certainly be 
added as well to this list that I got from Richard Baldwin. And faster growth
especially  in China produced resource booms, from which Australia, Brazil, Mexico, and turkey 
benefited massively. Nigeria ought to have benefited massively, but its political
economy once again got in the way. And in Venezuela it was not neoliberalism but rather movements 
that claimed to be devoted to its overthrow that produced political economic
catastrophe.

1 74 wnnlc


One position that I do not endorse but that I do want you to think about is one taken by economist 
Thomas Piketty in his capital in the 21st-century. In his view, Social democracy is
an anomaly: A plutocrat Gilded Age is the rule, even with political democracy

In a capitalist economy, you see, itt is normal for a large proportion of the wealth to be 
inherited; it is normal for wealth distribution to be highly unequal; it is normal for a
plutocratic elite to shape the economy and the polity; and it is normal for this to put a drag on 
economic growtha€”that is Pikettya€™ s argument.

To grasp the underlying logic, consider that rapid growth like 1945-1973 requires creative 
destruction. But one thing destroyed in such creative destruction is the wealth of th elast
generation^™ s plutocrats. So they are unlikely to encourage it.

Thus Pikettya€™s conclusion: We are likely to see oscillations between periods like 
1870-1914,1914-1945, and 1980-2020. The 1945-1980 social democratic era was a freak
anomaly of rapid and equitable growth, one that we are unlikely to see again.

155 words

1531 wordsa€!

https://www.bradford-delong.eom/2020/ll/1120-the-neoliberal-turn-intro-video-econ-115-f-2020.html
https://www.typepad.com/site/blogs/6a00e551f08003883400e551f080068834/post/6a00e551f0800388340263e97
al017200b/edit

