The thoughtful and insightful Eric Boehlert misses the major moment at which Rupert Murdoch put his 
press empire at the service of Joe Biden and America in ending the insane
clown show that his been the presidential reign of Donald Trump. On the evening of election day, at 
23:20 EST, Arnon Mishkin on the Fox News decision desk called Arizona and
its                                                                                11 electoral 
votes for Joe Biden. Without Arizona, Trump would need not just Georgia (which Biden won by 0.2%) 
and Wisconsin (which Biden won by 0.7%) but also at least
one of Pennsylvania (which Biden won by 1.2%) or Michigan (which Biden won by 2.8%). Calling 
Arizona for Biden put out of reach an election close enough that it could be
decided for Trump by complaisant judges and a little more voter suppression. Yet Biden won Arizona, 
in the end, by only 0.3%.

https ://www.icloud .com/keynote/OyDiAWOblLOiFnRMqy Y S AuWIQ

Fox News did not call Michigan and Wisconsin for Biden until Wednesday afternoon, and did not call 
Pennsylvania until Saturday, and did not call Georgia until the 21st. Calling
Arizona for Biden kept Fox News reporters and anchorsa€”and those who relied on Foxa€™ s 
numbersa€”from stating that Trump was on the way to victory Tuesday night and
Wednesday morning.

Arnon Mishkina€™ s thinking remains obscure. Facing pushback at Fox News Wednesday about how Trump 
might still have the votes outstanding to catch Biden, Mishkin
snarked: a€oelf a frog had wingsa€!a€D Mishkin said that he had made the call with only 20% of the 
vote outstanding. But if that outstanding vote had broken more than 1-in-60
for Trump than it in fact did, Trump would have won Arizona. a€oeToo close to call as of Tuesday 
nightaGD seems to have been the reality. Mishkina€™ s call was based on a
misjudgment of how the vote would come in. The question we will probably never now for certain is 
how he came to make that misjudgment:

Eric Boehlert: A Crack in the Noise Machine: How Murdoch Derailed Trump 
https://pressrun.media/p/how-murdoch-derailed-trump: a€~A longtime Beltway columnist recently
lowered the boom on Republicans. "The sheer nuttiness surrounding the current mess is becoming 
deeply destructive," she wrote. "There is no realistic route to victory for the
president, only to confusion and chaos and undermining"...

...If the wounded president is looking for media voices of comfort since Election Day, the last 
place he should look is Rupert Murdoch's editorial page at
the Wall Street Journal. A longtime bastion of right-wing rhetoric and propaganda, the opinion 
section that waged a hysterical war on Bill Clinton for eight
years and that remained a mostly steadfast ally of Trump, has had a clear message for him in recent 
weeks: Here's your hat, what's your hurry. That was the
directive columnist Peggy Noonan sent last week in the passages quoted above, penning a sneering 
take-down....

Noonan has hardly been alone as Journal columnists, as well as the unsigned editorials that run on 
the page, have all lined up to mock and belittle Trump's
failed effort to steal an election. Using all three of his American properties, Fox News, the New 
York Post, and the Wall Street Journal, Murdoch clearly

sent a top-down message that he did not support Trump....

GOP propaganda works best, and has proven to be so effective over the years years, when there's a 
united media front pushing the same lies and distortions.
It creates a powerful feedback loop. Ita€™ s clear that it was Murdoch who sent out the dictate and 
who for weeks has enforced the company line. None

of this stuff happens by chance. For the last three weeks he's been using them to send a message to 
Trump, 'Move on,a€™ especially the hard-right pages

of the Journal:

• "If Mr. Trump had solid evidence of massive wrongdoing, it should be taken to court by a serious 
practicing attorney. Mr. Giuliania€™ s role
as lead lawyer suggests this is political theater."

•  "His efforts so far to prove massive fraud have been as successful as O.J. Simpsona€™ s efforts 
to find the real killer."

•  "There's no good evidence of voting problems that would come close to Mr. Bidena€™ s lead of 
73,000 votes in Pennsylvania or 145,000 in
Michigan."

At the Post, the paper accused Trump of making an a€oeunfounded claim that political foes were 
trying to steal the election," while mocking his son,
Donald Trump Jr., as the a€oepanic-strickena€n author of a a€oeclueless tweet" about election 
fraud. "Ita€™ s a pervasive, unpatriotic he," Jonah

Goldberg said. "They are alleging an insane, bat guano crazy conspiracy theory."...

I don't know why he chose this moment to oppose Trump. Ita€™ s important to note the role the media 
play in our politics and how small, rare rifts

within the right-wing echo chamber can have long-term consequences.

.#noted   #2020-11-25

https://www.bradford-delong.com/2020/ll/boehlert-a-crack-in-the-noise-machine-how-murdoch-derailed-t
rumpnoted.html
https://www.tvpepad.eom/site/blogs/6a00e551f08003883400e551f080068834/post/6a00e551f0800388340263e97
ad759200b/edit


