Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:


Type your emaila€|

CONDITION: Manic!

Subscribe

SLOUCHING
TOWARD

UTOPIA

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

J. BRADFORD DELONG

AVAILABLE
FOR PREORDER


I have the galleys of Slouching Towards Utopia chttps://bit.ly/3pP3Krk> to check this MLK weekend. 
And it is a long slog: I never trained my brain to see what is in front of my eyes as opposed to 
what my brain predicts should be in front of my eyes. But as I do try to check it, going in reverse 
order from the back sentence by sentence in an attempt to see each one with truly fresh eyes and 
without preconceptions about what it must say, I find myself becoming
more and more manic.

True: I see no letters of fire that will by the logic of iron necessity inscribe themselves on the 
minds and souls of readers, and thus make it I°i„a^ I„Ip a1/^, lidJA a treasure for all time.
But it is damned good. Paragraph by paragraph, it is damned good.

Back up to the spring of 1979, my first year of college: my best friend Michael Froomkin came up 
from New Haven, where he was going to school, to Cambridge. We wound up going to my Government 106B 
political philosophy lecture. Afterwards we went up to the podium, where the lecture, the God like 
Michael Walzer was gathering his notes, to join the people asking him clarifying questions. My 
friend Michael noted a striking difference between how
Walzer dealt with the texts and what the teachers at Yale were doing. They were giving 
extraordinarily close and convoluted readings of individual sentences, as if every comma in a key 
sentence was supposed to carry deep weight, send you on a 10-minute reflection on what that comma 
might mean, and conclude that it reversed the apparent surface import of the sentence. (But, since 
you couldna€™ t do that for the whole book, you had to somehow pick out
which were the key sentences to be tortured and have their surface meaning reversed in that way.) 
Walzer, by contrast, treated each paragraph as one of a set of fumbling attempts by the author to 
put his finger on a set of concepts and ideas that they only dimly grasped.

Walzer replied that, first, we should not forget that this book, Machiavellia€™ s The Prince 
chttps://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli .2015.221835/page/n2/mode/1 up>, was hastily written as 
an audition for a job in the post-coup Medici rA©gime of Florence (and also as an attempt to make 
them realize that he was a useful tool they could use, rather than an obstacle to be 
tortured)a€”not one in which every comma was labored over to ensure that the key esoteric
message was conveyed to a small hermetic circle of cognoscenti while escaping the notice of casual 
or even careful-but-not-initiate readers.

Walzer replied that, second, he had to view writers like Machiavelli and Locke as guys sorta like 
hima€”smarter than him and probably more insightful about the worlds they were enmeshed in, but 
also at a disadvantage since Walzer had more giants to stand on the shoulders of. And he, Walzer 
said, could not help but remember as he read them how he felt when he wrote a book:

1. He started out with what seemed to be brilliant and irrefutable important insights that he could 
not quite see how to get down on paper.

2. He wrote feverishly, confident that he was riding were letters of fire that would by the logic 
of iron necessity inscribe themselves on the minds and souls of readers for all time.

3. But when the book emerged from the pressa€”no letters of fire, just black-ink chicken 
scratchings, from which only a thoughtful and generous reader could derive the insights he had 
hoped to impart, which he, Walzer, now found inadequate and beyond his full grasp.
I am not having that kind of letdown right now. Not at all.

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!
Share

First: Biological & Cultural Human Evolution

When Melissa Dell teaches the original from which I have appropriated my history of economic growth 
course, she starts with human evolution. She starts 5 million years ago or so, with the divergence 
of our lineage from the chimpanzee-bonobo lineage. But I am pretty sure that we do not know enough 
for it to be worth spending a full week or even half a week on human evolution.
Nevertheless, her reading for that introduction can be read with enormous profit:


And:

Joseph Henrich (2016): The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution, 
Domesticating Our Species, and Making Us Smarter (Princeton: Princeton University Press): Gesher 
Benot Ya'aqova€! 750,000 years agoa€!. Stone-tool manufacturing^! food processinga€! controlled 
firea€! hand axes, cleavers, blades, knives, awls, scrapers, and choppersa€! from flint, basalt, 
and limestone, tool manufacture was done
on-site, often from giant slabs carried in from a distant quarrya€!. Freshwater crabs, turtles, 
reptiles, and at least nine types of fisha€! [plus] seeds, acorns, olives, grapes, nuts, water 
chestnutsa€! the submerged prickly water lilya€!.

In the next 300,000 years after the activities at Gesher Benot Ya'aqov, Homo erectus changed 
sufficiently, including a brain expansion to 1200 cm3, to justify a new species name, Homo 
heidelbergensisa€.\ projectile weaponsa€! a variety of techniques for producing stone bladesa€! 
consistent within sites or populations buta€! vary[ing] between populations. Distinct tool 
traditions and composite tools that exploited natural glues
werena€™ t far behind.a€!.

By 750,000 years ago at Gesher Benot Ya'aqov, therea€™ s little doubt that we are dealing with a 
cultural species who hunts large game, catches big fish, maintains hearths, cooks, manufactures 
complex tools, cooperates in moving giant slabs, and gathers and processes diverse plants. The 
bottom line: cumulative cultural evolution is old in our speciesa€™ lineage, dating back at least 
hundreds of thousands of years, but probably
millions of yearsa€!

a€~Physically weak, slowa€! dependent on eating cooked food, though we dona€™ t innately know how 
to make fire or cooka€!. Our colons are too short, stomachs too small, and teeth too petite. Our 
infants are born fat and dangerously prematurea€! not so impressive when we go head-to-head in 
problem-solving tests against other apesa€!.

We are a cultural species. Probably over a million years ago, members of our evolutionary lineage 
began learning from each other in such a way that culture became cumulativea€!. Our capacities for 
learning from others are themselves finely honed products of natural selectiona€!. Cultural 
learning abilities gave rise to an interaction between an accumulating body of cultural information 
and genetic evolution that has shaped, and
continues to shape, our anatomy, physiology, and psychologya€!

SELECTIONS: 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/book-heinrich-secret-selections.pdf
>

The history of human evolution is still extraordinarily blurred. Moreover, inn my view, very, very, 
very little of a€ceEvoPsycha€D results are going to durably replicate. Whatever I would teach about 
human evolution before 50,000 years or so would, I think, probably be wrong.
Nevertheless, it is very important. So let me set out 10 theses. These are all debatable and 
disputable. But I think they are worth keeping in mind as likely (ha!) results of our evolutionary 
history, and as important underpinnings of the economic history of the past 50,000 years:

1. We are all very very very close cousins. The overwhelming proportion of all of our ancestry 
comes from one roughly-1000 person or so group 70,000 years ago. Small admixtures from other human 
groups that were then roaming the world were then added to this mix.

2. We were human long before 70,000 years ago. People from 10 or 20 times further in the past would 
in all likelihood be able to fit into our society. Homo ergaster, homo erectus, homo 
heidelbergensis, homo neanderthalis, homo denisovo, the Red Deer Cave people, and us homo 
sapiensa€”and maybe homo floresiensisa€”are all, in a very real sense, us.

3. We are cultural-learning intelligences, coevolved biologically and culturally to build up a huge 
component of our nature-manipulation and group-organization toolkits from observing others of our 
species, and thus learningthe accumulated cultural patterns of past ages.

4. We are, overwhelmingly, collectively an anthology intelligence: smart not because each of us is 
smart, but because we can and do learn from, teach, and communicate with others at a furious rate.

5. We are also a time-binding anthology intelligence: not just us around here who are now thinking, 
but also our predecessors thinking in the past. That is what gives us our smarts, and allows us to 
survive.

6. Since the invention of writing 5000 years ago, the time-binding-ness of our 
anthology-intelligence nature has been amped up by a full order of magnitude. Our knowledge from 
the past is not just embedded in present-day cultural patterns, but is also via direct 
communication from them to us, as we take durablesquiggles and from them spin-upand run on our 
wetware sub-Turing instantiations of the human minds that made the squiggles.

7. Our intelligence on an individual level is quite limited. We find it very hard to think except 
in terms of narratives: those narratives usually taking the form of cause and effect, of journeys 
forward through space, and of sin and retribution, nemesis and hubris. Thoughts that do not fall 
into those patterns are veryhard for us tohave, and very very hard for usto communicate to others.

8. Thus we should not expect our anthology intelligence to get things right. It can get things 
right in an awesome and mindbending way. But large groups of people can also get things very very 
wrong and persist in error to a remarkable degree.

9. Given how incompetent most of us must be in most of the work that our culture has the knowledge 
to have somebody do, our prosperity a€”nay, our survivala€’’depends on establishing a cooperative 
division of labor. We both divide labor and also induce ourselves to cooperate by being primed to 
form and reinforce social bonds based not on grooming each other to remove parasites (as other 
monkeys do), and not by mock-mounting each other in
para-reproductive activity (as canids do), but rather via forming gift-exchange relationships.

10. With the invention of money, all of a sudden each of our individual social gift-exchange 
networks changes from having to be a long-term close-relationship network (limited only to our 
close kin, our immediate neighbors, and our good friendsa€”and not all of those). All of a sudden 
our potential division of labor expands to encompass every single other human in the world. This 
has powerful consequences for us as an anthology intelligence devoted
to organizing our selves and manipulating nature.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Video:

David Card & al.: American Economic Association Awards Ceremony and Presidential Address 
<https://www.aeaweb .org/conference/2022/livecasts/aea-awards>

One Picture: Theodora & Her Court:


Via Wikipedia, the Empress Theodora (490-548) from the Basilica San Vitale in Ravenna, Italy, 
rendered in brilliant
mosaic (another panel depicts her husband, Justinian I). Here too, you can see the legacy of late 
Roman idealized and
stylized artwork, this time in the Byzantine tradition.

Very Briefly Noted:

• Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. Ltd. (TSM) Q4 2021 Earnings Call 
rrartscrzp^httpsT/new^ptetreetcpm/taiw^semiconductpijmimiufticti™

•  Latin Language Stack Exchange: The Last Sentence in Thue. 1.22'. a€~My history is an everlasting 
possession, not a prize composition which is heard and forgottena€! 
<https://latin.stackexchange.com/questions/13197/trying-to-translate-the-last-sentence-in-thuc-1 
-22>

• Jonathan Bernstein: Madison, Majorities and the Threat to the 
7?epMZ?Zzc<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-01-14/madison-maiorities-and-the-threat-t
o-the-republic>

•  J. Kenji LA^ez-Alt: Two-Minute Mayonnaise Recipe'. a€~Using an immersion blender, you end up 
with a cup full of creamy, perfectly emulsified, real-deal, better-than-anything-you-can-buy 
mayonnaisea€! <https://www.seriouseats.com/two-minute-mayonnaise>

•  Noah Smith: a€™ I think that my podcast co-host @delong may be overthinking it a bit when it 
comes to Chinaa€™ s developments;


Noah Smith dYDt @Noahpinion

18/Thus, I would urge @ delong and others not to convince themselves that China has somehow broken 
the mold when it comes to economic development. It fits very well into the existing mold... (end)

How Are We to Understand China’s “Standing Up” since 1978?

USOOOPPC         POP


China today: uneven
development:

1. IB people in the interior, living
like Peru...

2. 300M people along the coasts,
living like Poland...

3. 60M people in the growth poles
living like Spain:

• Shanghai

• Beijing

• Pearl River Delta

China today: most successful
development ever:

• if only because of its immense
scale: 1.4B people

• (2) & (3) are the world’s greatest
manufacturing export machine

• (much more closely

GDP per capita. 1775 to 2018

GDP per capita adjusted for price changes over time (inflation) and price differences
between countries - it is measured in international-$ in 2011 prices

LINEAR ^LOG) 0 Addcountry

Our World
in Data

United States
Taiwan
Japan

South Korea
Malaysia

Thailand
China

Vietnam

MHK-Beijing-
Shanghai

Jiangsu-
Zhejiang-
Fujian-
Guangdong-

Tianjin
Hubei-

7,08!

27500.00

15347.14

9121.00

54.00

308.00

1046.00

10,2<

|15,601


integrated into the world
economy than to the interior)

• The world’s second-largest high-
tech sector

• Hardware growth-pole
supremacy (in some aspects)
in  ZSC

Source: Maddison Project Database 2020 (Bolt and van Zanden (2020)1
OurWwkllnData.of t'economic-erovrth • CC BY

|15,531

braddelong.substack.comTrying to Grasp AMe Reality of China Today& BRIEFLY NOTED: For 2022-01-09 Su
11:10 PM r™ Jan 9,2022

3 3Likes2Re tweets

• John Ganz: What Is Trumpism?'. a€~As for a€ceTrumpisma€D as a category of politics apart from 
Trump the individual, I think we still have to observe carefully whether it is a Caesarism 
stillborn or still a€oein gestation.a€D In aid of those observations, the cases of fascism will 
remain an important contexta€!



What Is Trumpism?

Every few months it seems therea€™ s another round of the interminable a€oefascism debatea€D about 
Trump: Is it meaningful to label Trump, his movement, and the G.O.P.,a€”or at least a significant 
faction of the GOP, a€”fascist? To call it a a€cedebatea€D is perhaps a bit of a stretch. There is 
not a lot of engagement with substantive arguments; therea€™ s mostly repeateda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 13 likes A- 9 comments A- John Ganz

Paragraphs:

Samuel Hammond: Meeting Manchin in the Middle. a€~The time has come for Child Tax Credit 
advocatesa€! to accept an inconvenient truth: Joe Manchin is a sitting U.S. senator, and we are 
nota€!. ManchinaC™ s dual demands for a work requirement and making access to the credit easier for 
children raised by their grandparentsa€! are in obvious tensiona€!. Yet there are ways to square 
this circle. For example, grandparents and other caregivers on fixed
incomes could become eligible for the full credit even if the CTC retained a modest earnings test 
for able-bodied parents of working age. Manchina€™ s seemingly incompatible requests make more 
sense with added context. Of the grandparents in West Virginia who live with their grandchildren, 
54 percent are the primary guardian or caregivera€”the second-highest rate in the country and a 
disturbing byproduct of the opioid epidemic sweeping the statea€!. My
view  is that an earnings test of any kind will be unnecessarily cumbersome to administer. But at 
risk of repeating myself, my personal opinion is worth precisely nothing when it comes time for the 
Senate to vote. Considering that the alternative is no CTC expansion whatsoever, anti-poverty and 
pro-family advocates have every reason to meet Manchin in the middlea€L Unfortunatelya€! potential 
middle-ground options have not been broached. Instead, the
strategy has been to hold the line, call Manchina€™ s bluff, and mount a pressure campaign that has 
only strengthened his centrist reputationa€!. As economist Dani Rodrik puts it, a€oepolitics is 
second best, at best.a€D Ita€™ s now on Senate Democrats to meet with Manchin and, together, design 
the second-best damn CTC expansion they possibly cana€!

LINK: <https://www.niskanencenter.org/meeting-manchin-in-the-middle/>

Aaron Rupar: Fauci Accused Rand Paul of Politicizing the Pandemic for Profit. And He Had Receipts'. 
a€~the shabby performances by some of the Republican senators really stood out. In addition to Paul 
and Marshall, you had Susan Collins pursuing a confused line of questioning that suggested 
vaccination was overrated and Tommy Tuberville asking about the quack a€oecurea€D ivermectin. But 
given where the party is today, Republicans trying to turn a
pandemic thata€™ s killed nearly 850,000 into Benghazi 2.0 isna€™ t really as surprising as it 
should be. The outright ugliness of the remarks by both Paul and Marshall really stood out, though. 
Instead of making an earnest effort to inform their constituents about how best to protect 
themselves and those around them, theya€™ re pulling out all the stops to undermine the notion that 
public health experts should be listened to at all. And, tragically, people who
listen to their misinformation earnestly are already paying a pricea€!

LINK:



iblic Notice

Fauci accused Rand Paul of politicizing the pandemic for profit. And he had receipts.

Dr. Anthony Fauci knew that his longtime nemesis, Sen. Rand Paul, would be coming for him during 
Tuesdaya€™ s Senate health committee hearing. And he was much better prepared for this round of the 
information war than Paul proved to be. First, some backstory: Paul has done more than perhaps any 
other member of Congress to dema€l
Read more

a year ago A- 24 likes A- 2 comments A- Aaron Rupar

Tyler Cowen: Economist & Public Intellectual'. a€~I dona€™ t think I have very definite answers to 
your questions on inflation. The Fed is moving in the proper direction, but how can we judge 
whether they are disinflating too fast or too slowly? Where is the database on recoveries from 
pandemics? This is quite an unusual recession, as durable goods boomed, the opposite of the usual 
scenario. And it is services that proved super-cyclical, again in an
exceptional way. I think about your questions a good deal, but any answer would be a stab in the 
dark. As for boosting growth, my number one recommendation would be much more high-skilled 
immigration. And then more low-skilled immigration to take care of their kids and help run their 
errandsa€!

LINK:

Interview: Tyler Cowen, economist and public intellectual

Tyler Cowen is one of the reasons Ia€™ m blogging today. His blog with Alex Tabarrok, Marginal 
Revolution, is one of the ones that inspired me to get into blogging, and he was one of the first 
people to notice and amplify my original Noahpinion blog. Over the years, Tyler has quietly been 
one of Americaa€™ s foremost public intellectuals, repeatedly injectinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 69 likes A- 20 comments A- Noah Smith

Bret Devereaux: Rome: Decline and Fall? Part I: Words'. a€~For reasons wea€™ 11 talk about later in 
this series, the resources available for this kind of copying would hit an all-time-low during the 
period from the fifth to the seventh centuriesa€”this was expensive work for poor societies to 
engage in. And here it is worth thus stopping to note how exceptional a moment of preservation this 
period is. The literary tradition of Mediterranean antiquity represents
the oldest literary tradition to survive in an unbroken line of transmission to the present 
(alongside Chinese literature). The literary traditions of the Bronze Age (c. 3000a€‘T200 BC and 
the period directly before antiquity broadly construed) were all lost and had to be rediscovered, 
with stone and clay tablets recovered archaeologically and written languages reconstructed. The 
Greeks and Romans certainly made little effort to preserve the literature of those who
went before them! In that context, what is actually historically remarkable here is not that the 
people of Late Antiquity and the Early Middle Ages lost some booksa€! but that they saved somea€!. 
Never before had a literary tradition been saved in this waya€!. Far from destroying the literature 
of classical antiquity, it was the medieval Church itself that was the single institution most 
engaged in the preservation of ita€!

LINK: chttps://acoup .blog/2022/01/ 14/collections-rome-decline-and-fall-part-i-words/>

Yair Rosenberg: Your Bubble is Not the Culture: a€~The A.V. Club: a€oeFantastic Beasts 3 has a new 
title, new release date, same old massively disappointing writer: J.K. Rowlinga€™ s script will 
reveal The Secrets Of Dumbledore next April, if anyone can bring themselves to care.a€D Rolling 
Stone: a€oeThanks to the labors of TikTok teens, a wider audience now has to confront that we may 
have been a€~Wrong Abouta€™ Miranda and Hamilton.a€D
Polygon:

The Wizarding World canon already divides the fanbase a€! But Rowling and Warner Bros, continue to 
chug out Wizarding World content that doesna€™ t explore stories that fans are interested in.a€D

Now, herea€™ s whata€™ s actually been happening in the real worlda€!. Lin-Manuel Mirandaa€™ s 
soundtrack for the hit Disney film Encanto displaced Adelea€™ s 30 as the No. 1 album on the 
Billboard 200. At the same time, Miranda himself hit No. 1 on the Hot 100 Songwriters Charta€!. 
Back in 2020, after the film version of Hamilton was released on Disney+, the castalbum for 
themusical surged to No. 2 on the Billboardchart, five years after its
premiere. It was the highest-charting cast album since 1969. As of this writing, the album ranks as 
No. 47, and has never fallen out of the top 200 since it first appeareda€!.

As for the Wizarding Worlda€! the biggest Harry Potter store in the world opened in New York City 
to rave reviews. HBO is currently airing several specials celebrating 20 years since the first 
Harry Potter moviea€!. Harry Potter and the Cursed Child has reopened on Broadway. The persistent 
popularity of Potter probably explains why outlets whose critics insist that the Potter party is 
over keep publishing pieces about the franchisea€!. Rowling herself isdoing
just fine as well. The latest entry in her successful Cormoran Strike detective series, which she 
writes under the pseudonym Robert Galbraith, was an international best seller and moved more copies 
upon release than any prior book in the series. In May, it won Best Crime and Thriller Fiction Book 
of the Year at the British Book Awardsa€!.

What explains this discrepancy between what some critics are claiming and what consumers are 
actually enjoying? Here are three reasons: Being a critic can lead you to lose sight of the 
experience of the audiencea€L Many cultural critics live in an unrepresentative internet bubblea€!. 
Culture writers, like most people, want to justify their existence and significance^!. Cultural 
criticisma€”like any form of guidancea€”cana€™t be heard when ita€™ s entirely
disconnected from the people ita€™ s meant to reacha€I. If anything is a€oecringe,a€n ita€™ s 
culture writers telling their audiences that they should hate the things that bring them joya€!

LINK: 
<https://newsletters.theatlantic.eom/deep-shtetl/61e06b2c55e52500217add01/vour-bubble-is-not-the-cul
ture-lin-manuel-miranda-harrv-potter/>

John Maynard Keynes (1924): A Tract On Monetary Reform: a€~In truth, the gold standard is already a 
barbarous relic. All of us, from the Governor of the Bank of England downwards, are now primarily 
interested in preserving the stability of business, prices, and employment, and are not likely, 
when the choice is forced on us, deliberately to sacrifice these to the outworn dogma, which had 
its value once, of A£3 : 17 : IO 1/2 per ounce. Advocates of the
ancient standard do not observe how remote it now is from the spirit and the requirements of the 
age. A regulated non-metallic standard has slipped in unnoticed. It exists. Whilst the economists 
dozed, the academic dream of a hundred years, doffing its cap and gown, clad in paper rags, has 
crept into the real world by means of the bad fairiesa€’’always so much more potent than the 
gooda€”the wicked Ministers of Finance.

For these reasons enlightened advocates of the restoration of gold, such as Mr. Hawtrey, do not 
welcome it as the return of a a€cenaturala€D currency, and intend, quite decidedly, that it shall 
be a a€cemanageda€D onea€! a constitutional monarch, shorn of his ancient despotic powers and 
compelled to accept the advice of a Parliament of Banksa€!. He contemplatesa€! a€oeco-operation 
among central banksa€Da€! an international conventiona€!
a€oepreventing undue fluctuations in the purchasing power of gold"a€!. a€oelt is not easy,a€D he 
admits, a€oeto promote international action, and should it fail, the wisest course for the time 
being might be to concentrate on the stabilisation of sterling in terms of commodities, rather than 
tie the pound to a metal, the vagaries of which cannot be foreseen.a€D

It is natural to ask, in face of advocacy of this kind, why it is necessary to drag in gold at all. 
Mr. Hawtrey lays no stress on the obvious support for his compromise, namely the force of sentiment 
and tradition, and the preference of Englishmen for shearing a monarch of his powers rather than of 
his head. But he adduces three other reasons: (1) that gold is required as a liquid reserve for the 
settlement of international balances of indebtedness; (2) that it enables an
experiment to be made without cutting adrift from the old svstem; and (3) that the vested interests 
of gold producers must be considereda€!


LINK: <https7/^chive₂org/details/dlLenieL16773/page/n5/mode/lup>
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Beating the Drum for Slouching Towards Utopia

As you can probably guess from the first item in today's edition of Grasping Reality Newsletter, my 
number one focus for the next nine months is going to be trying to make the launch of my Slouching 
Towards Utopia chttps://bit.ly/3pP3Krk> book a wild success:


& "Slouching Towards Utopia" Is a Go...

SO PLEASE PREORDER IT!!!! Here are two early blurbs: Robert Waldmann: a€oel remember reading an 
earlier draft 30 years ago. You haven't wasted the 30 years. This book is vastly improved. It is, 
in my va€!

Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- 9 comments A- Brad DeLong

I thinka€”nay, I knowa€”that the book is very good, and speaks to topics of great importance. It is 
fully the equal, in terms of the audience it deserves, of Thomas Pikettya€™ s Capital in the 21st 
Century, of Jared Diamond's Guns, Germs, & Steel, of Robert Gordon's Rise & Fall of American 
Growth, of Eric Hobsbawm's Age of Extremes. Whether it will get the audience that those books 
received is quite unlikely, and is in the lap of Tykhe. Lots and lots of
things have to go right for even a great book to gain its proper wide audience.

So what can I do to maximize my chances? The only idea I have had yet that strikes me as very good 
is to tweet out, between now and publication day on September 6, about one sentence a day 
chttp://twitter.com/delong>a€’’and then annotate that sentence in a semi-talmudic way:



Slouching Tweetstorm:

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

But I badly need more ideas to try to raise my chances of a home run here from 0.1% up to 1 %a€!
Any suggestions?


Slouching Tweetstorm:

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

But I badly need more ideas to try to raise my chances of a home run here from 0.1% up to 1 %a€!
Any suggestions?

