Subscribe now

A Thoughtful & Critical Review of a€oeSlouchinga€n by Kevin Drum!

I am engaged and happy this morning because of a smart review of my Slouching Towards Utopia 
<bit.ly/3pP3Krk> book!


Kevin Drum: Reviews "Slouching Towards Utopia"

a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D: The actual review itself a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D: The 
actual review itself Having written a technical preface a couple of days ago, it's now time to 
write a review of Braa€!
Read more

5 months ago A- Brad DeLong

The very thoughtful and intelligent Kevin Drum has written a review of itin which he says that he 
thinks one of my principal themes is totally wrong!


Briefly, I say: Starting in 1870 it became cleara€”with human technological competence 
deployed-and-diffused worldwide (not just in the southern part of one small island) doubling every 
generationa€”that humanity was on the way to solving the problem of baking, a sufficiently large 
economic pie for everyone to potentially have enough. But finding the solution to that problem did 
not get us very far, because the problems of slicing and tasting the piea€”of
equitably distributing it, and of utilizing our wealth so humans could live, lives in which they 
were safe and secure, and healthy and happy a€’’continue to completely flummox us. And I offer 
explanations and stories about that flummoxing.

Kevin, however, says of course the problems of slicing and tasting continue to flummox us. That is 
simply the human condition:

We havea€! a thin layer of cognition that allows us to gossipa€! and solve differential 
equationsa€! [that] lives on top of millions of years of primate evolutiona€!.

• We are territorial.

• We are patriarchal.

• We are hierarchical.

• We are addicted to dominance displays.

• We are tribal.

So just as always, after 1870 we continued to have stupid warsa€! base our social structures on 
racism and tribalisma€!. be seduced by charismatic (male) leadersa€! do stupid thingsa€!.

Brada€! thinks something should have changed in 1870 and he's disappointed that it didn't 
happena€!. I, on the other hand, think that nothing special should have happened just because we 
got better at inventing things. And it didn't. We just continued on our sloppy waya€!. Still, we've 
made progress on all these things. Not a lot, but what do you expect in only a few hundred years? 
This is why, for example, I think that our current
MAGA-inflected politics is a pothole, not a roadmap for the future. We'll get over it.

As for economics in general, you all know what I think: in another 20 or 30 years we will have 
cheap, genuine artificial intelligence. That will be a breakpoint in human history and will make 
all our current arguments moot. Practically any economic disagreement you can think of simply makes 
no sense in a world dominated by robots and AI. But we should keep arguing anyway. After all, I 
might be wrong about AI.
I think that Kevin has accurately put his thumb on our disagreement: I see the Singularity in our 
past (cf. Shalizi <http://bactra.org/weblog/699,html>). Kevin sees the Singularity in our future.

I say: Up until 1870 there was no possibility of humanity baking a sufficiently large economic pie. 
Hence the foundation of politics and governments had to be an A©lite elbowing competitors out of 
the way and running a force-and-fraud exploitation game on the rest of humanity so that the A©lite 
of thugs-with-spears and their tame accountants, bureaucrats, and propagandists could have enough. 
After 1870 it was clear that things could be very different. And
yet, while they were different, they were not different enougha€”so we are at best slouching 
towards utopia.

Kevin says: The sufficiently arge economic pie will not be here until 2050. And then we will see. 
What comes after will be marvelous and strange, but not the same-old same-old of history.

He might be right. But I think that the past gap is, psychologically, greater than the future one. 
I see the bit dealhumanitya€™ s passage to a state in which for many of us we no longer spend much 
of our day thinking how hungry we are and plotting how the get more calories, and no longer see 
half our babies die before five. I see that as bigger than the leap to the Robotoverse.
Consider: we upper-middle-class Californiansa€’’Kevin Drum and Ia€”are already largely in the 
Robotoverse: we are unconstrained by material necessity in finding enough food that we are not 
hungry, enough shelter that we are not wet (or sunburned), enough clothing that we are not cold. 
Lacking access to information and entertainment is just not a thing for us.

It is true that our personal Robotoverse is not made (entirely) out of robots: large pieces of it 
are made up of poorer people than us, both nearby and elsewhere, coordinated by the global market 
economy.
Yet how is our personal experience different from what Kevin envisions will be here after 2050?

Share


Must Listen:

The best thing I have found to catch up on Muscovya€™ s attempt to dismantle Ukraine:

Ezra Klein & Andrea Kendall-Taylor: Why Russia Is Losing Steam and Ukraine Is Gaining Ground: 
a€~When Russia invaded Ukraine in February, the question most analysts were asking was not whether 
Russia would win. It was how fasta€!. swift victory didna€™t happen. And in recent weeks, the 
direction of the war has begun to tilt in Ukrainea€™ s directiona€!. Andrea Kendall-Taylor is the 
director of the trans-Atlantic
security program at the Center for a New American Security. Shea€™ s a former intelligence officer 
who, from 2015 to 2018, led strategic analysis on Russia at the National Intelligence Council. When 
we spoke, she was recently back from a trip to Ukraine. And she believes that the wara€™ s 
long-term trends favor a Ukrainian victorya€!

<https://overcast.fm/+oiPVJRHrI>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Other Things I Note:

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Duncan Black: Our Donald Problem, and Yours: a€~I get the impediments to publicly betraying The 
Donald, but that elite conservatives generallya€’’including judgesa€”don't obviously want to 
quietly push him off stage isa bit of a mystery.  Sure they love Trumpism too, but not the guy!

•  Sam Seder: a€~We have been speculating why Sean Hannity has repeatedly pressed guests to concede 
that ita€™ s criminal to transport asylum seekers around the country under knowingly false 
pretensesa€! now its cleara€! the team trump/desantis war is becoming more public..

• Dan Wang: a€~Brad @DeLong makes FDR sound like Deng Xiaoping, whose spirit was: a€oeWhatever 
grows the economy we shall declare to be socialism, and what does not we shall declare to be 
capitalisma€Da€!

• John Burn-Murdoch: Economics May Take Us to Net Zero: a€~The plummeting cost of low-carbon energy 
has already allowed many countries to decouple economic growth from emissionsa€!

•  Max Chafkin: The Sneaky Genius of Applea€™ s AirPods Empire: a€~AR/VR headsets are a small 
market by Apple standards, but Tim Cooka€™ s massive headphones division shows just how big the 
company can make a niche producta€!

•  Erik Loomis: The Long Arms of Trumpism: a€~a€oeThis week, Mr. Malpassa€™ s refusal to 
acknowledge that the burning of fossil fuels is rapidly warming the planet exposed a debate inside 
and outside of the [World Bank] institutiona€Ua€! Who could have guessed that putting a climate 
denier at the head of the World Bank would be less than optimalWonder why people are so upset by 
ita€!

•  Mrs. Dallowaya€™s: Author Drop-in: a€~Brad DeLonga€! the provocative and timely Slouching 
Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century, a book Paul Krugman described as 
a€oeA magisterial historya€l asks the right questions and teaches us a lot of crucial history along 
the waya€Ua€!

•  Ryan Avent: Sleepwalkers: a€~Are we about to make some very costly, potentially avoidable 
errors? Or have I simply failed to learn from recent experience? You be the judgea€!. it still 
needs to be said: maybe the Fed really ought to consider taking a break herea€!

• Rafael Guthmann: Ancient scientists and the economic performance of antiquity: 'Ancient economic 
history can be summarized by: Fast growth from 800 BC to 300 BC, slow growth from 300 BC to around 
1 AD, negative growth from 1 AD to the 7-8th centuries AD...
Leave a comment

AJs:

Felicia Wong: Why Is This Happening? Discussing Joe Biden and the end of Reagonomics: a€~Market 
fundamentalism, a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away, blessed be the market,a€D that's 
what Brad DeLong calls ita€! I think of the political birth of that movement in the 1970s as being 
a reaction to chaosa€! growth in people's wagesa€! outpaced by inflationa€! stagflation^!. Chaos on 
the political and cultural sidea€! post-Vietnama€! the sexual
revolution^! womena€! demandinga€! black Americans were demandinga€!. The fear for many middle 
class white Americans that lots of things were changinga€!

Tim Miller: The Republicans Selling Their Souls to Trump: a€~There is a nihilism in this that 
connects to narcissism in an especially dangerous manner, but at this point Ia€™ d say that this is 
something that really only manifests itself within the GOP. I dona€™ t believe it was always that 
way. About half the book is on how people working in the GOP became like this, but a short version 
goes like this: There was a big disconnect between what GOP party
elites wanted and what their voters wanted. So, to do well in GOP politics, you had to do a certain 
amount of pretending when it came to cultural issues. That kind of pretending becomes muscle 
memory. Then a buffoon like Trump takes over the party, and rather than fall back on whatever 
principles once got them into politics, people just keep on pretendinga€”and then they become 
resentful not at Trump, but at the people who call them out on ita€!

Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


D                   IM 4- l>z-x Ci    Z>1Z- rv ♦>♦>


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

