(06:19) <https://watch.mmhmm.app/z KqcyWGXQlWsXwOFbsRxO>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Some respected economists are talking as if the US economy is in serious inflationary trouble. But 
the current uptick in price growth is highly likely to be a largely benign consequence of the 
post-pandemic recovery.

BERKELEY a€“ In the past three years, technological advances have provided about one percentage 
point of warranted US real wage growth each year a€“ admittedly, only half the rate of earlier 
times, but still something. Yet, real wages are currently 4% below their warranted value from 
adding on the underlying fundamental productivity trend to the pre-pandemic real wage Employment 
Cost
Index (ECI) level. Does that sound like a a€cehigh-pressurea€D labor market to you?

Those who believe that the US labor market is in some sense a€cetighta€D point out that the ECI 
increased by 3.7% in the year to September a€“ well above its 3% annual growth rate in the 
pre-pandemic years of former US President Donald Trumpa€™ s administration. But, because US 
consumer prices have increased by 5.4% over the past year, the ECI-basis real wage has fallen by 
1.7% in
that period. In a high-pressure economy with a tight labor market, workers would have enough 
bargaining power to obtain real wage increases.

Nowcasting is extremely difficult, and hazardous. But the a€renowa€D that I see today is the one I 
forecasted two to three quarters ago. Yes, the recovering US economy, like a driver who suddenly 
accelerates, is leaving inflationary skid marks on the asphalt. But, as I argued in May, these 
should not concern us, because a€reburning rubber to rejoin highway traffic is not the same thing as
overheating the engine .a€D

The US is not currently in a situation where too much money is chasing too few goods, which would 
result in a surfeit of demand for labor and likely trigger an inflationary spiral. This is despite 
the fact that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its associated disruptions continue to cause a 
substantial undersupply of labor.
Today, the US economy a€™ s overall employment-to-population ratio is three percentage points below 
what we used to regard as its full-employment level. The ratios for women, African-Americans, and 
workers without a college degree are, respectively, five, 4.5, and four percentage points below 
this level.

Yet, economists whom I respect talk as if the economy is in serious inflationary trouble. Jason 
Furman, a former chairman of President Barack ObamaaC™ s Council of Economic Advisers, thinks 
a€cethe original sin was an oversized American Rescue Plan,a€D the $1.9 trillion recovery package 
that President Joe Biden signed into law in March. In FurmanaC™ s view, it would have been better
to have less aggressive policy measures and thus a slower employment and growth recovery this year, 
because Bidena€™ s plan a€ recontributed to higher output but also higher price s.a€D And according 
to the same New York Times report, former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers thinks that 
a€oeinflation now risks spiraling out of control.a€D

The inflation worriers then argue that the COVID-19 crisis has permanently damaged the supply side 
of the economy by causing a lot of early retirements, as well as lasting disruption to the 
lean-and-mean supply chains on which a good deal of productivity and prosperity had depended. 
Perhaps. But similar arguments in the early 2010s, in the aftermath of the 2008 global financial 
crisis, aimed
to justify policies that did not put the pedal to the metal and attempt rapidly to re-employ 
so-called a€cezero-marginal-producta€D workers. One consequence of this timidity was the election 
of Trump, whose rise was fueled by the rage of those who thought a€ reelite sa€D cared more about 
immigrants and minorities than they did about blue-collar workers whose economic opportunities had
never recovered to pre-2008 levels.

Lastly, some claim that, regardless of whether or not the labor market is tight, inflation a€“ 
whether driven by supply-side or demand-side factors a€“ is high and salient enough that firms and 
households will swiftly incorporate it into their expectations. Thus, the inflationary snake has to 
be scotched now, while it is small, before it grows and devours everything of value.

But so far, rising inflation has not been incorporated into any of the a€restickya€D prices in the 
economy, according to the measure constructed by the Atlanta Federal Reserve. True, the financial 
marketa€™ s current 30-year breakeven inflation rate, at 2.35%, is more than half a percentage 
point above where it settled in the second half of the 2010s. But todaya€™ s rate is similar to 
that in the
first half of the decade, and slightly below the level that would be consistent with the US Federal 
Reservea€™ s inflation target of 2% per year.

The current uptick in US inflation is highly likely to be simply rubber on the road, resulting from 
the post-pandemic recovery. There is no sign that inflation expectations have become de-anchored. 
The labor market is still weak enough that workers are unable to demand substantial increases in 
real wages. Financial markets are bias A© about the possibility of rising inflation. And a 
substantial
fiscal contraction is already in train.

Given these facts, why would anybody argue that the a€oeoriginal sina€D was the a€oeoversized 
American Rescue Plan,a€D and that tightening monetary policy starting right now is the proper way 
to expiate it? I, for one, simply cannot follow their logic.

Note: I still do not understand it: Everything I see still points to our inflation as not a durable 
and troubling spiral but simply proper and appropriate: rubber left on the road as we rejoin 
highway traffic at speed. I do not understand what many who say otherwise are thinking.



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

PROJECT SYNDICATE DRAFT: Why So Much Premature Fear of an Inflationary Spiral?

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 4 comments A- Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

