Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)The extremely sharp Sam Abbott has what I think is an excellent a€oeFast Factsa€D column on how 
much the US economy is held back by our collective failure to construct a
reasonable and effective system for childcare:

Sam Abbott: The Child Care Economy. a€~How investments in early care and education can fuel U.S. 
economic growth immediately and over the long term: Fast facts:
Insufficient child care options can prevent parents who wish to work from doing so, with mothers 
often bearing the brunt of this challenged!. High-quality early care and education
provides critical socialization and learning opportunities when the brain is developing rapidly and 
is particularly responsive to the outside environmental. Adequate funding is
necessary                                                                                 for human 
capital development. Fully funding the subsidy programs and devoting resources for state-level 
agencies to assist providers in qualifying for subsidies are two
ways in which greater public investment could increase child care availability and quality. 
Supporting child care workers is crucial for promoting quality care and human capital
development. Using public funds to support higher compensation would help stabilize the child care 
workforce, ensuring that these workers can afford to stay in their jobs.

Investing in the nationa€™ s children is one of the safest bets policymakers can make. Research on 
early care and education programs finds that $1 in spending generates $8.60 in
economic activitya€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/research-paper/the-child-care-economy/>

2) Equitable Growtha€™ s Jonathan Fisher did very well before the House Select Committee on 
Economic Disparity & Fairness in Growth in detailing Equitable Growtha€™ s
push for improving the American statistical system to be good at things other than simple national 
scale means:

Jonathan Fisher: Testimony before the House Select Committee on Economic Disparity & Fairness in 
Growth'. a€~In which direction should the federal statistical system move?
a€!. We describe four important stepsa€!. GDP 2.0: Gross Domestic Product needs an upgradea€!. 
Distributional National Accountsa€!.. The Fiscal Analysis by Income and Race,
or FAIR, Scoring Act, would direct the Congressional Budget Office to prepare distributional 
analyses by race and income for all legislation with substantial budgetary effectsa€!.
Congress should support the Census Bureau and Bureau of Labor Statistics working together to 
develop one survey that can: Measure income, consumption, and wealth. Having all
three measures in one survey would decrease academic disagreement on the proper survey or 
definitions to use. Reconcile the reporting of these measuresa€!. Link to administrative
recordsa€!. Have a small longitudinal components!. Capture differences by race, ethnicity, and 
gender. This can be done by increasing the sample size and oversampling small
subpopulationsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/testimonv-by-ionathan-fisher-before-the-house-select-committee-on-econo
mic-disparitv-and-fairness-in-growth/>

3) A very nice paper with what I regard as very strong evidence that employers typically do not 
respond, at least in the short run, to employeesa€™ outside offers. Wage bargaining
between employers and employees in real time simply does not appear to be a thing. Instead, 
employers post wages and then overwhelmingly hold the line:

Raffaele Saggio & al:. Wage Posting or Wage Bargaining? A Test Using Dual Jobholders'. a€™ This 
paper examines the behavior of dual jobholders to test a simple model of wage
bargaining and wage posting. We estimate the sensitivity of wages and separation rates to wage 
shocks in a workera€™ s secondary job to assess the degree of bargaining versus
wage posting in the labor market. We interpret the evidence within a model where workers facing 
hours constraints in their primary job may take a second, flexible-hours job for
additional income. When a secondary job offers a sufficiently high wage, a worker either bargains 
with the primary employer for a wage increase or separates. The model provides a
number of predictions that we test using matched employer-employee administrative data from 
Washington State. In the aggregate, wage bargaining appears to be a limited
determinant of wage setting. The estimated wage response to improved outside options, which we 
interpret as bargaining, is precisely estimated, but qualitatively small. Wage
posting appears to be more important than bargaining for wage determination overall, and especially 
in lower parts of the wage distribution. Observed wage bargaining takes place
mainly among workers in the highest wage quartile. For this group, improved outside options 
translate to higher wages, but not higher separation rates. In contrast, for workers in

the lowest wage quartile, wage increases in the secondary job lead to higher separation rates but 
no significant wage increase in the primary job, consistent with wage posting. We
also find evidence in support of the hours-constraint model for dual jobholding. In particular, 
work hours in the primary job do not respond to wages in the secondary job, but hours
and separations in the secondary job are sensitive to wages in the primary job due to income 
effectsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/wage-posting-or-wage-bargaining-a-test-using-dual-iobhol
ders/>

4) I have long thought that economists should be a lot more like anthropologists than we are. 
Example number 1: Gillian Tett:

Brad DeLong: Why Gillian Tetta€™ s Anthropological Take on the World Is Very Useful'. a€~let us pay 
attention this afternoon to Gillian Tett, of the tribes of the Financial Times
and of the anthropology community, author of the very recently published Anthro-Vision: How 
Anthropology Can Explain Business and Life https://www.amazon.com/Anthro-
Vision-Anthropology-Explain-Business-Life/dp/l 847942881/. Listen to her: for I believe it is her 
training in anthropology that has made her uniquely insightful journalist an analyst
throughout             her careera€!

LINK: <https://braddelong. substack.eom/p/why-gillian-tetts-anthropological>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)I continue to fail to understand claims that "team transitory" with respect to this year's news 
about inflation needs to reevaluate its position. When I listen to Jason Furman, for
example, I hear rhetorical alarm coupled with a suggestion for only a very small revision in the 
future of monetary policya€”that the Federal Reservea€™ s first interest rate hike
should probably be made next February rather than next October, leaving short-term interest rates 
about half a percentage point per year higher at the end of 2022 than the Federal
Reserve is currently penciling in. That is not a huge difference. The inflation we have seen this 
yeara€”that is just the rubber left on the road from the skidmarks that always
happens  when you try to rapidly re-join highway traffic at speed. Nothing that has happened so far 
this year has surprised me, definitely not enough to make me revise my belief that
the inflation we see is highly likely be transitory. And I am greatly encouraged by the fact that 
Wendy Edelberg of the Hamilton Project agrees:

Wendy Edelberg: What Does Current Inflation Tell Us About the Future?'. a€~Should [we] expect 
continued extraordinary inflation for core goodsa€’’everything from automobiles
to exercise matsa€”in the coming years? Three factors suggest no. First, the surge in spending on 
goods has put upward pressure on prices as suppliers have been unable to keep up
with demand. Suppliers have strong incentives to iron out issues with the supply chain to get more 
product onto shelves; in addition, the problems with the supply chain that owe
more directly to the pandemic will ebb as the pandemic is brought under control globally. Second, 
that surge in goods spending is no doubt temporary because householdsa€”as the
pandemic recedesa€”will rebalance consumer spending toward services, which has been unusually 
depresseda€!. Third, the fiscal support to households that has helped to finance
the   surge in goods spending has largely waned. In contrast to spending on consumer goods, 
spending on services remains below its pre-pandemic peak. This pattern is a significant
departure from previous business cycles where services were relatively unaffectedaCI

LINK: <https://www.hamiltonproiect.org/blog/what doescurrent.inflation tell_us_about_thefuture>

2) I do not understand whether there is some picky technical requirement that prevents the Joint 
Tax Committee and the Congressional budget office from taking a clear-eyed view
of the importance of IRS enforcement. But without taking a clear-eyed view, they do not present a 
full picture of the budget impact of the Build Back Better act, which looks highly
likely to me to be deficit reducing over the long term:

Kate Berner: a€™ CBO estimates that Build Back Better will add $367.IB to the deficit. That 
doesnaC™ t include revenue collected from tax enforcement. Treasury estimates

$479.6 revenue from tax enforcement. Soa€! $112.5B in deficit reductiona€! Naomi Jagoda: Larry 
Summers: IRS Proposal Will Generate More Revenue Than Cbo Estimate'.
a€~Larry Summers, who served in top economic policy roles during the Clinton and Obama 
administrations, said Thursday that the IRS funding proposal in DemocratsaC™ social
spending bill is likely to raise more revenue than the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is 
expected to estimate. a€oel have one central message, and that is that it is reasonable to
rely  on substantially more revenue than is included in the CBO projection from efforts to 
strengthen the IRS,a€D Summers said on a call with reporters hosted by the Center for
American Progressa€! 
<https://thehill.com/policv/finance/582138-larrv-summers-irs-proposal-will-generate-more-revenue-tha
n-cbo-estimate>


xiiiipa.//iwiiLvi.vu iiuiYaiuuk/iiivi-rv/diaiud/ ITUIT / UUIUXAJJ^OTJV/

3) This is very wise from Dan Davies: an economy that is always prevented from reaching full 
employment is an economy that grows more slowly, and redistributes income away
from labor and to capital:

Dan Davies: a€™ The current battle over a€oeTeam Transitorya€D has important implications for the 
productivity a€cepuzzlea€Da€l. If the central bank is surrounded by people
who get panicky every time growth picks up, then a) we are never going to find out what the true 
productive potential of the economy is, and b) companies will take this into
account in their investment plans. To focus on Alan Beattiea€™ s iconic example, if you know that 
there will always be surplus low-wage labour, but that demand will be
periodically restricted, why on earth would you invest in a mechanical car wash? Basically, for 
most of the posta€“2001 Great Moderation, we accidentally created an environment
tailor made to discourage entrepreneurial investment and encourage rent-accruing behaviour. Then 
wondered why productivity was stagnatinga€!

LINK: <https ://twitter .com/dsquareddi gest/status/1461677800222609419>

4) I am impressed with the dedication of the sub stack team to attempt to figure out how to improve 
the quality of the Internet side of the American public sphere. I think that they
are 100% correct in their strong condemnation of algorithmic feeds tuned to attempt to maximize 
attention. Internet companies that seek to serve their users require users to make
deliberate and considered choices about what they want to put in front of their faces:

Chris Best & Hamish McKenzie: The Internet Needs Better Rules, Not Stricter Referees: a€~People are 
taking the wrong lessons from the Facebook Papersa€!. The key to a
healthier platform is to flip the power dynamic: give the people themselves the power to choose 
what they pay attention to. Let the will of the people control their feeds, not the
other   way around. Instead of removing peoplea€™ s agency by manipulating their attention in favor 
of the most profitable and provocative content, let them seek out what they
really value. Other than in extreme cases involving violence or illicit activity, people should be 
allowed to decide for themselves whoa€™ s worth listening to, whata€™ s
trustworthy, and which direction is punching a€cedown.a€C Beyond being undesirable, relying only on 
top-down moderation is ineffective: tech companies didna€™t invent teen
insecurity                                                                                  or 
tribal resentments, and they wona€™ t fix those problems through censorship whack-a-mole. There is 
no world in which all vexing views can be banished. And if there
were, none of us should want to live in it. There will be no perfect internet, but there can be a 
better one. A healthier internet requires overhauling incentives by putting people back
in chargea€!

LINK: <https://on.substack .com/p/new-rules>

5) The very sharp Martin Ravallion says something that very much needs to be said: a€cedegrowtha€D 
is deeply flawed both in its analysis of past economic development patterns
and in its hopes for the future. Costa Rica is not a country that has remained poor and 
nevertheless upgraded its human development patterns. It is a country that has become much
richer and has invested well in human development:

Martin Ravallion: The De growth Fallacy : a€~In an example of the Degrowth Fallacy, in a radio 
interviewa€! Jason Hickel (introduced as an economist and anthropologist at the
London School of Economics) points to Costa Rica to support his claim that rich countries can 
maintain their social outcomes at lower mean income. Yes, Costa Rica has had good
social and environmental policies over many decades, and other countries can learn from that 
experience. However, the country did this in combination with economic growth.

Indeed, mean income has tripled in real terms since 1960, and the average growth rate has been 
above average for Latin America (World Bank). By combining social policies with
policies that directly supported economic growth, Costa Rica was able to attain over time good 
social outcomes for a country at its level of mean income. Costa Rica is definitely
not  an example of how good social outcomes are possible without economic growtha€!

LINK: <https://economicsandpoverty.com/2017/12/21 /the-degrowth-fallacy/>

6) I concur 100% with Scott Sumner's judgment that Paul Krugman's 1998 Brookings paper both 
revolutionized thinking about monetary policy in the 21st-century and yet is also
very often only partially understood and misunderstood. It is, I think, the most important macro 
paper of the last 40 years:

Scott Sumner: The Princeton School of Macroeconomics: a€~In the early 2000sa€! five peoplea€! at 
Princetona€! developed what we now view as the standard view of monetary
policy in the 21st century, that is policy when interest rates are really lowa€! Paul Krugman, Ben 
Bernanke, Michael Woodford, Gauti Eggertsson, and Lars Svenssona€!. The key
paper here is Paul Krugmana€™ s 1998 paper where he looked at the liquidity trap in Japana€!. I 
believe the paper is underestimated and misunderstooda€!. I view it as one of the
most important macro papers of the last 40 yearsa€!. The problem in KrugmanaC™ s view was not just 
that money and bonds are equivalent at zero interest rates. The real problem
is sort of bearish expectations of future monetary policya€!. One interpretation is that monetary 
policy still works at zero interest rates. The central bank just needs to commit to
future inflationa€!. The other interpretation^! is that central bank promises to inflate are not 
likely to be crediblea€! so you need Keynesian fiscal policya€!

LINK: 
<https://www.mercatus.org/bridge/podcasts/01112021/scott-sumner-princeton-school-macroeconomics-and-
overcoming-inflationary>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

