Subscribe now

CONDITION: Twitter on Fire!

You cannot put a Mastodon address in your profile. It is a€ reconsidered malwarea€D. (Do note that 
some programmer balked at calling it actual a€remalwarea€n when ordered to do so:

1                                                                                                   
             Edit profile

Edit profile                                     Save


Subscribe

SlouchingTowardsxUtopia
Substack

' S«UCHINt
"TOWIRinT

UTOPIA

Name

I


ueLuiiy ^aeiuiiy^indsiuuuii.suuidi

Bio

Subscribe to my Substack braddelong.substack.com! Buy "Slouching
Towards Utopia" bit.ly/3pP3Krk! Escape hatch:
mastodon.social/(g)delong

Location

Berkeley, California


LOUCHING

WARDS

TOPIA

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century
(Hardback)

Brad de Long

£30.00

Hardback

Qty:l                   £30.00

CONTINUE SHOPPING


Q 4 tl 5 W 31

tl You Retweeted

A

* D    Account update failed: Description is considered malware.     them?

It's giving rragiiity...
Lol


And Twitter Spaces is gone:

Ian D @dixonij • 6h

Elon's ego got so hurt when he was called out by journalists straight up
reporting on the story of the plane stuff that he DISABLED SPACES in
the last 3 hours.

Because of that, it's breaking Android Twitter App functionality (can't
like or retweet directly from the timeline).

© Bradley Eversley O @ForeverEversley • 10h

Holy Shit. Elon Musk just popped into a Twitter Spaces chat with a
bunch of journalists. He was called out by journalist Drew Harrell,
who he banned, for lying about posting links to his private
information, then leaves almost immediately after being pressed.


ficic io ii ic cAciiauyc

Show this thread


Judd L... O

Speaker

Ben S... 0 ElonJetO

Speaker # Speaker

Drew... 0

Speaker


Bradl... O

Listener

3:36 2M views

Dan P... 9 Caroli... O

Listener Listener

philip... 9

Listener

tl 5

Arieh Kovler O @ariehkovler • 5h

I updated my Twitter app on Android and the like/retweet bug is fixed.
However, Twitter Spaces is still missing. It has reportedly been disabled

nlnhallv aftpr Finn Muck had an pmharraccinn pvnpripnnp in a Twittpr


space with journalists he banned.

gizmodo.com

Musk Kills Twitter Audio Feature After Bizarre Talk With Journalists
It's clear Musk would rather burn Twitter to the ground than hear
people question the wisdom of his choices.

tl 63                V 136




Give a gift subscription


ONE IMAGE: Core CPI ex-Shelter:

Core CPI ex-Shelter


20%

15%

10%

5%

0%

^■Annualized ^—Year-over-year


-5%

-10%

Jan-13 Jan-14 Jan-15 Jan-16 Jan-17 Jan-18 Jan-19 Jan-20 Jan-21 Jan-22 Jan-23 Jan-24

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Peter Orszag: Central banks should beware the dangers of over-tightening: a€~Sometimes the best 
course of action is to wait and seea€! 100% correcta€\

•  Beth Kowitt: The GOP Is Playing Chicken With Trillions in Assets: A new Senate Republican report 
gives us a look inside the partya€™ s playbook for punishing asset managers and their a€celiberal 
social goalsa€\3 a€~In the clearest sign yet that a contingent of the Republican Party plans to 
make its attack on a€rewokea€D corporations a core tenet of its platform, look no further than
its latest target: asset managersaCI Now complete is the transformation of the American Republican 
Party from, as Dean Acheson put it in the 1950s, the party of the economic futurea€”the party of 
those who have something to gain from business and growtha€”to the party of the economic past, of 
those who have something to lose and fear changea€\

•  Ian Buruma: Was Trump or Brexit the Bigger Mistake? The Answer Is Clear: a€~As Americans and 
Britons are discovering, nations can recover from bad elections far more easily than from bad 
referendums. The US is moving ona€! This seems to me to be much more of a hhopeelp than an 
analysis. Certainly Ron DeSantis and the entire Republican Partyd€”both the DeSantis wing
and the Trump winga€”are betting that America is not moving ona€\.

•  David Dayen: The Easiest Criminal Indictment Ever: a€~The rapid arrest of Sam Bankman-Fried 
offers a small bit of hope that wea€™ ve turned the page on an era of no accountabilitya€!

• Ray Lombardi: Record lows on the Mississippi: How climate change is altering large riversa€!
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Over the past two decades, we finally got near consensus among non-Republican Neanderthals that 
immigrants are a source of strength for America. Yet the Republican Party controls too many veto 
points, and is completely in "pull up the laddera€D mode.:

Bloomberg Editors: The US Cana€™ t Afford to Lose Skilled Immigrants: Requiring laid-offH-lB visa 
holders to leave the country is both cruel and self-defeating: a€~Meta let 11,000 workers go a€” 
and immigrants are now racing the clock. A wave of layoffs at US technology companies has forced 
scores of skilled immigrants on temporary visas to find new jobs within 60
days or leave the country. Their predicament underscores how a flawed system is jeopardizing 
Americaa€™ s ability to attract and retain the foreign-born talent it needsa€!. Of the estimated 
580,000 current H-1B holders, more than half have had an employer petition for them to get a green 
card. Due to the systema€™ s arbitrariness and inefficiency, however, the process for
actually obtaining one lasts years; many immigrants from India a€” which contributes the largest 
share of applicants a€” can expect to wait for decadesa€!

Bill McBride: Housing, Inflation and Why the Fed Should Consider a Pause: a€~It appears the Fed is 
missing the recent sharp slowdown in household formationa€!. This a€oedramatic shifta€D in 
household formation is leading to Rents Falling Faster than "Seasonality Alone". Since rents are 
falling - and will likely continue to fall - it probably makes sense to look at inflation 
ex-shelter for
monetary policy over the next several monthsa€!. Core CPI ex-Shelter (blue), and the one month 
change annualized (red). The year-over-year change was at 5.2% in NovemberaC!. Core CPI ex-shelter 
fell at 1.5% annual rate in Novembera€! My view is inflation will ease quicker than the Fed 
currently expects and a pause in rate hikes should be considereda€!

IMHO, the right line to take with Beijing is: Absorbing Taiwan would have been impossible two 
generations ago. It would be touch-and-go now. It will be very easily two generations hencea€”if, 
in fact, the world is going your way. And if the world is not going your way, trying to absorb 
Taiwan right now would give you additional problems when you cannot handle the ones you already 
have:

Jason Hsu: What the Worlda€™ s Most Important Company Must Do I by Jason Hsu: With the outlook for 
Sino-American relations remaining grim, the globally indispensable Taiwan Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Company (TSMC) is quietly exploring its options. Stuck in the middle of the 
twenty-first centurya€™ s great-power contest, its future will depend on playing a
smart long game: a€~Often referred to as the a€reSilicon Shield,a€D Taiwan produces a staggering 
65% of the worlda€™ s semiconductors and over 90% of the highest-end chips. As such, no company is 
more singularly important to the global economy than TSMCa€!. ChinaaC™ s dependence on Taiwanese 
chips has served as a form of deterrence and protection for Taiwan,
because the Chinese government simply cannot seize the islanda€™ s highly sensitive 
chip-manufacturing facilities by force. While some observers worry that China may regard TSMC as a 
reason in itself to take Taiwan, TSMC chair Mark Liu has pointed out that a war would inevitably 
destroy TSMCa€™ s fabs or render them inoperable. Still, TSMC finds itself caught in the
middle of a great-power competition^!. China will almost certainly fall behind in the semiconductor 
race, because it lacks access to the lithography machines needed to manufacture the most advanced 
chips. Nonetheless, it is likely to dominate the market in legacy chips (those ranging from 28 to 
44 nanometers)a€!. TSMCa€™ s goal remains the same: to maintain its status as
the unrivaled industry leader. To do so, it will have to play a smart long game. That means making 
necessary sacrifices in its Chinese business, pacing itself with new investments and 
diversification overseas, and ultimately keeping its most advanced chips in Taiwana€!. Ensuring 
that Taiwana€™ s economy, trade, and technology supply chains are resilient and less dependent on
China is in Americaa€™ s vital interest. Caught in the middle of the twenty-first centurya€™ s 
great-power competition, TSMC can only hope that US leaders continue to recognize thisa€!

SNORT!:

Heather Burke: FTX Fallout: a€~A GitHub account bearing the name of former FTX executive Nishad 
Singh authored code that hid Alameda Researcha€™ s ballooning liabilities on the now-collapsed 
cryptocurrency exchange, according to internal documentation reviewed by Bloomberg News. FTX 
executive Ryan Salame told Bahamian regulators on Nov. 9 that client
assets were transferred to Alameda to a€recover financial lossesa€D at the trading firm, court 
filings show. The grim conditions FTX founder Sam Bankman-Fried is encountering in the Bahamas 
prison where hea€™ s currently being held could change his attitude on extradition to face fraud 
charges in the USa€!

The latest bunch of no-more-Trumpers will, of course, turn and run back to Trump as soon as he 
looks like he might be a winner:

Bill Lueders: Youa€™re Only Leaving Trump Now?: The ex-presidenta€™ s former allies are coming up 
with reasons to reject him, as though these werena€™ t always obvious and abundant: a€~Marc 
Thiessen has had enougha€!. Really? What has Trump done?a€! (Ita€™ s not completely clear which 
election Thiessen is referring to that caused something to snap. The one
more than two years ago? The one on November 8? Take your pick.) After praising Trumpa€™ s great 
achievement in a€rehis remaking of the American judiciary with the appointment of three outstanding 
Supreme Court justices and hundreds of lower court judges ,a€D Thiessen lamented that Trump has now 
gone and spoiled it all by saying something stupid. a€oeBut
now,a€D he wrote, a€rewith just a few bizarre social media posts, Trump has repudiated that entire 
legacy.a€D Really? Thiessen explained that he is referring to Trumpa€™ s denunciations of the 
Supreme Court when it refused to block the release of his tax returns. The court, Trump wrote on 
Truth Social, a€rehas lost its honor, prestige, and standing, & has become nothing
more than a political body, with our Country paying the price.a€D Thiessena€™ s bone to pick is 
that this sounds like something Chuck Schumer or Nancy Pelosi might say, in criticizing the court 
that Trump picked a third ofa€!. Thiessena€! conten[ds]a€! that Trump, in lambasting the court and 
then, in a separate post, calling for the a€reterminationa€D of parts of the
Constitution, had crossed a new linea€!. Thiessena€™ s indictmenta€! said the reasons for dumping 
Trump go beyond his sudden declarations of contempt for the judiciary and the Constitution and the 
rule of law. ThereaC™ s also the fact that Trump a€rehas descended into a spiral of conspiracy 
theories and personal grievances. He has surrounded himself with the political
dregs.a€D Really? This is new?a€! Are we to believe there is something remarkable or different 
about Trumpa€™ s embrace of the politics of personal grievance, after he yanked the security 
clearance of former CIA director John Brennan as punishment for his critical comments, denied House 
Speaker Nancy Pelosi the use of a military jet to visit U.S. troops in Afghanistan,
threatened to withhold pandemic assistance to electoral battleground states that moved to expand 
mail-in voting to mitigate the pandemic, or called for government crackdowns on social media 
companies that offended him? As for surrounding himself with a€rethe political dregs,a€D just who 
exactly was surrounding Trump before? Paragons of virtue like Steve Bannon,
Stephen  Miller, Sebastian Gorka, Michael Flynn, Paul Manafort, Roger Stone, and Rudy Giuliani? It 
is just not possible to go downhill from therea€!. There is only one reason among all of the many 
cited by Thiessen that Republicans are turning away from Donald Trump now: because he cannot win. 
Everything else they were perfectly willing to put up with, and they would
put                                                                                                 
                                                                            up with it againa€”if 
only they believed that he stood a chance of helping keep them in powera€!



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

