Subscribe now

FIRST: Slouching Towards a Free Market:

BOOK TALK            USCDornsife

Department of Economics


SLOUCHINC

JTK

J. BRADFORD DELONG

Slouching Towards
A Free Market

Authors:

Brad DeLong, UC Berkeley

□acob soli, use

Moderator:
Romain Ranciere, USC

Thurs,
2Oth
October


It is truly a shame that my USC Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> event was not videotaped: 
it went the best of all my events so far, in large part because I was talking to the excellent Jake 
Solla€”and we were also talking about his excellent new book: Jake Soil: Free Market: The History 
of an Idea <https://www.amazon.com/Free-Market-History-Jacob-
Soll/dp/0465049702>.

Jakea€™ s and my books are just close enough that the overlap of our concerns is near-total but 
sufficiently far apart that virtually nothing is repetitive.
But the event is now losta€! tears in the raina€!

All I have is my memory, and my notes.

So let me try to reconstruct at least some of the highlights of what was heard and said. It is in 
all cases difficult to reproduce passages word-for-word, so my method will be to make the speakers 
say what is in my opinion demanded of them at each occasion, of course adhering as closely as 
possible to the general sense of what they really said:

Selected Reconstructed Highlights:

Brad DeLong: The market economy, as that genius Friedrich von Hayek said, is one of the best 
possible mechanisms for crowdsourcing, for harnessing humansa€™ collective potential as an 
anthology intelligence. A bureaucracy turns almost all of us into mindless software bots following 
rules set down by some small committee of bureaucrats who understand only
about a third of what is going on, and are completely ignorant of the knotty edge cases. A 
central-planning system turns us all into mindless robots going through motions decreed by some 
central planner who has no clue about what is actually going on given his direct reportsa€™ 
powerful interest in telling him convenient lies. The best thumbnail description of how
chains-of-command actually work comes from SF&F author Lois McMaster Bujolda€™ s novel a€ceBrothers 
in Armsa€D, in which we read: a€oeNo, no, never send interim reports," said Miles. "Only final 
ones. Interim reports tend to elicit orders. Which you must then either obey, or spend valuable 
time and energy evading, which you could be using to solve the
problema€Da€!

Brad DeLong: But the market economy with property rights and contract obligationsa€”as long as 
those are established, and as long as market prices are consonant with social values, all of the 
decision-making is pushed out to the periphery where the information is, all of the human race is 
incentivized to take actions to increase human wealth, and so all of the brain-
and muscle-power of humanity is turned into an anthology intelligence focused like a laser beam on 
the problem of applying technology to produce necessities, conveniences, and luxuries. Friedrich 
von Hayek the idiot thought the unleashed market would do the whole joba€”or at least all the job 
that could be done.

Hayeka€™ s argument was that the market would then put technology to work. True, the market would 
not produce a€oesocial justicea€D. But Hayeka€™ s argument was to ask for social justice was to be 
disappointed: It would undermine prosperity and put us on The Road to Serfdom. The social-justice 
bureaucracy would turn into kleptocracy. And the
administration of things would turn back into not the government but the domination of men, for 
power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely. Lenin had thought that once society could 
produce enough for alla€”once you had Soviet power plus electrification^’’there would no longer be 
any point to engaging in domination. People would rotate through
administrative jobs, much as professors undertake to be department chair only reluctantly and under 
some duress, and those administrative jobs would be within the competence of everyone, for all that 
would be required would be the ability to add, subtract, multiply, divide, and a€oeissue 
appropriate receiptsa€d.

Von Hayek thought Lenin was naA"ve. Von Hayek was not wrong. And accountant Jake Soil to my left 
will tell you that a€oeissuing appropriate receiptsa€D is a remarkably subtle and complex task.

Milton Friedman might add that if you tried to achieve social justice, you might probably achieve 
something else, and that it was better to trust to the rough productivity-rewarding justice of the 
market than to a€oesocial justicea€D: Milton Friedman lived in a world in which he had been fired 
from his job at the University of Wisconsin, because a member of the
Wisconsin legislators said the Wisconsin-Madison economics department already had too many Jews.

Yes, von Hayek and Friedman agreed: a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the 
name of the marketa€D was the only sensible gospel that should ever be preacheda€!

Brad DeLong: Each generation after 1870 humans had to try to figure out how to write new 
economic-sociological-political software to run on top of the changing forces-of-production of 
hardware so that society did not crash in a context in which Schumpeterian creative-destruction was 
destroying occupations, livelihoods, and communities as it created immense
wealtha€!

Jake Soil: What DeLong is doing with great expertise for the twentieth century d€\ I was trying to 
do for an earlier periodd€\. The dichotomy, between von Hayekd€™ s just completely free libertarian 
market, and Karl Polanyia€™ s idea that you would need a society, a democratic, decent society with 
human rights for things to function. I feel like Brad is more
polite than I am about von Hayek. Reading von Hayek upsets me because I find him to be paranoid. 
His statements about the state are just not helpfula€\. If you know anything about history, you 
know that no one comes starts complaining about states until they start becoming powerful at the 
end of the 17th century. States are so delicate and hard to build. The anti­
statist mind only emerges once the state is there and stable. This seems a remarkable lack of 
sophistication on Hay eka€™ s parta€” though I understand where Hayek is coming from, coming from 
World Wars coming from totalitarianismsa€\

Jake Soil: John Maynard Keynes believed in the free market herea€”was very much scared of 
totalitarian communism and believed that in order to save capitalism, at a time when it was under 
great stress, one had to help it to full employment, because mass unemployment would pose such an 
incredible danger to democracy and to civil society and to freedom.
Therefore, the state would have to help with employment by in times of great dearth of spendinga€\

Jake Soil: Adam Smithd€\ was seen as a kind of proto-libertariana€\. But that is not the Smith that 
I know from living a lot of my life in the 17th and 18th centuriesa€\. Everyone I live with has 
been dead a really long time. So I stay up all night speaking to the dead and trying to dig in and 
find out what they thought, and it can make you a little bit crazy.

Brad DeLong: It also can make you sane. There is a letter of Niccolo Machiavellia€™ s saying that 
the only times he feels happy are after dinner when he puts on his fancy clothes and goes into his 
librarya€”to talk to the dead, and listen to them answer him. But that was because he was at the 
time terrified they were going to drag him back to Florence and torture
him again, and reading in his library distracted him from that. And he was a little nuts.

Jake Soil: You have to be a little nuts to kind of do what we do, and spend all this time with 
books.

Brad DeLong: I spent more time arguing with my dissertation advisors by myself in my shower than I 
ever spent talking to him in person.

Jake Soil: Many of our conversations are hypothetical, yes. And the more you do those hypothetical 
conversations out loud, the more your family thinks that you're insane. But that's another story 
d€\

Jake Soil: I took Adam Smithd€\ and I went backd€\. If you read enough, and if you know enough 
references, you can hear the references in Smith's bookd€\. Everything he and his mentor and very 
close friend David Hume did was done through the lens of a Roman moralist named Marcus Tullius. 
Cicero, probably the most important pagan author. In the European
tradition, until 1954, every heavily educated person would have read quite a bit of Ciceroa€\. He 
wrote about exchange, and Smith wrote about exchangea€\. But he's not the first person to look 
ford€\ an economics working in a self-perpetuating waya€\. Cicero says if exchange is done by 
like-minded people of the same classa€”he means senators, which he was
the   first in his family to becomea€”and if they only exchanged from love, that means 
a€cefriendship in a disinterested wayd€H then wealth will just be created. It's quite a remarkable 
statementd€\. You go back through economic thinkers, you will constantly find references back to 
thisd€\

Jake Soil: There is a key moment at the end of the 17th century. Louis XIV had a famous finance 
minister, Colbert, and I happen to have spent 15 years of my life in his archives listening and 
looking for things. Colbert also pops up in Adam Smith's writings. Smith hates Louis XIV. But his 
Minister, Colbertd€ ” Smith has strong mixed feelings about. Smith said that
Colbert brought in too many regulations, and favored merchants and what we would call today 
industrialists when Smith he should have supported farmers. But Smith also said that this guy 
Colbert was a good manager of governmentd€\. And I thought: Thata€™ s really interesting. I hear 
echoes of Colbert in Smith. They're supposed to be antitheticala€” Colbert


Jake Soil: Colbert over and over again stated that free markets were preferable if you can trade in 
a symmetrical way. He said: France today has been destroyed by religious and civil war, its 
industrial base is broken, it is thus unable to make good trade dealsa€”ifit trades with Holland 
today, it will be destroyed. He said: I don't think we can actually beat the Dutch
in terms of individual productivity. But if we can build a market that can trade with the Dutch and 
the English freely, if we get trust and competence, if we get a certain level of industry, and if 
we can then write acceptable trade treaties, we can do so successfully. This was visionary 
market-building. Free-market thinkers, until a certain point in the 18th century,
believed that the state had to build markets for them to be freea€\. Free markets would be made by 
a state that would help the market and what that meant could be very different things. So my book 
became this back and forth of free market-thinkers demanding market freedoms but also demanding 
state support for creating the conditions in which a market is going
to worka€\. It can even counteract sin. Everything humans did was sinful. But if people traded 
together, they would kind of sin at each other, and that would counter the sinful desire. And that 
moves into this idea that vices can become virtuesa€”that greed can produce things. And that gets 
to this kind of crowdsourcing ideaa€\

Jake Soil: I made the decision not to discuss Polanyi in my book. I now regret it. It was 
dishonesta€”I didn't want to come off as the leftist guy who thinks Polanyi is right. But I guess 
that is who I am. See: I am admitting it here. He was a brilliant guy. Lke Brad, I believe that the 
market is a key engine, is absolutely essential and important, does amazing things. But
in structuring the market the state has an enormously important rolea€”to say that the state can 
only do bad is misleading and very dangerous. You can't have a good market without a stated€\

Jake Soil: What I wanted to do is wind the clock back to the old way, and say: Look, if we're going 
to argue about free markets, about how markets work best, if we look at any situation we will see 
the state. So let's drop this pretense that we can get rid of the state and start talking about the 
state in a more sophisticated way. And lots of people don't like thisa€\.
Jake Soil: Why didna€™ 11 talk more about the 20th century? I don't have the expertise. Brad does. 
And so, for me, it was incredibly gratifying to read Brad's bookd€\

Brad DeLong: In response, let me throw out four things and you can decide which one we want to talk 
about.

(1) Quousue tandem abutere, Catalina, patentia nostra? That is the opening line of Marcus Tullius 
Cicero's most famous speech, his First Oration Against Lucius Sergius Catalina: O , Cataline! For 
how long are you going to take advantage of our patience? Cicero was not just a thinker and a 
writer, but also a rubber-meets-the-road politician, and an extraordinarily
effective one. He was, I think, the only person in two generations to be elected one of the two 
consuls of the Roman Republic without having had a consul as a father or grandfather.

(2) I seem to have more tolerance for von Hayeka€”see him as more balanced between Dr. Jekyll and 
Mr. Hyde than Jake does. Some of what von Hayek does not see comes from the fact that his Vienna is 
not one of the worlda€™ s economic-growth polls. In the Vienna of Hayeka€™ s youth governance was 
still, in large part, what it had been back in the Agrarian
Age: the major business of what state there was was to ensure that some have enough by taking from 
others. The state is then a group of thugs-with-spheres assisted by their tame accountants, 
bureaucrats and propagandists.

After 1870, and in the growth hot spots before, once you get the potential for real prosperity, 
once you get post-1870 the technological competence of the human race doubling every generation, 
you start thinking: of course we can get rid of the state; ita€™ s primarily this apparatus of 
exploitation-and-domination, of force and fraud. You get things like Lenin saying
that under Full Communism, coming real soon now, there won't be any government of men but merely 
the administration of things. We will all rotate through the ministerial administrative 
jobsa€”someone having to take the boring job of chair of the academic department for a year or so. 
After all, all the administrative jobs require is that you are able to add, subtract,
multiply, and divide and issue receipts. Now at this point Jake will say that the accountantsa€™ 
job of issuing receipts is actually a really complex and subtle one.

(3) Moving to the meat of Jakea€™ s book: Cicero was living through the transformation of Rome. It 
had been the center of a small society of largely self-sufficient aristocrats bossing the slaves 
and commoners tilling the large individual farms that they had grabbed via conquest. It was become 
the capital of a large empire ruling over a commercial economy with a
sophisticated and complex division of labor that required a dense network of exchange. How were 
things going to work. Ciceroa€™ s answer was that trade was mutually beneficial and wealth-creating 
when it was between people of equal social power and status.

Cicero was not wrong, go back to Econ 1. One thing you may have missed is that the games from 
exchange Dash in the area above the supply and below the demand curve to the left of the market 
equilibrium pointa€”is distributed depending on how desperate suppliers and demanders are for the 
deal. If people have other options and things to doa€”if you have to cut
the price a lot to get demanders to buy a little more, or if even a large increase in price only 
gets suppliers to provide a little morea€”then they will get the liona€™ s share of the surplus, 
and their counterparties will benefit very little from exchange. Those who do not want the deal 
very much have an enormous bargaining advantage, and hence much more social
power. And Colbert saw thata€”he was in a position somewhat analogous to Cicero, with Europe moving 
out of its society of serfs, knights, and lords into the gunpowder-empire world of the early modern 
years.

The Jean-Baptiste Colberts, the Alexander Hamiltons, the Adam Smiths, the David Humesa€”all are all 
trying to figure out how you have to tweak things so that it can be made to work. If you look at 
Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations, you see that it has five parts, only the first two of which are of 
great interest to economists proper. The third is economic history. The
fourth is a critique, sympathetic and unsympathetic by turns, of Colberta€™ s mercantilism and of 
Turgota€™ s physiocracy. And the fifth, by far the largest book, is about all the things government 
needs to do for the free market to actually worka€”one of the most important of which is public 
education precisely, because someone who is caught up in this division of
labor and has little property of their own is desperately going to need to be educated or else they 
will wind up stultified and living an unhappy life.

(4) Remember that von Hayek lives in the 20th century world, in which the market economy is the 
water in which we swim: what is needed to make the market work is already there, and largely 
beneath his notice. But von Hayek also comes from Eastern Europe, where governance is still 
primarily domination-and-exploitation. Hence he reaches his answer, but his
answer is unhelpful in many ways.

We face a much sharper problem than did Cicero or did Colbert and Smith. Colbert and Smith live 
around 1700, in the gunpowder-empire age between the feudal society of 1000 and the steampower 
society of 1870, in a time of great growth and development. There was a lot of technological change 
and associated econo-social-political change from 1000 to 1870.

Since 1870, howver we've had that much technological change as was seen over 1000-1870 in every 
single generation: from the steam power economy, to the second industrial revolution economy, to 
the mass production economy, to the distributed mass consumption economy, to the global value chain 
economy. And now we're well on our way to the info biotech
economy. The problems of actually figuring out how you organize things so that the market society 
does not crash are coming at us much faster and are more urgent. Before 1870it was very likely that 
your life was a lot like that of at least one of your grandparents. Well, since 1870, it has been 
unlikely that's the case.

There are four things to talk abouta€!

Jake Soil: Brad's book is the story of the force of this new technologically-driven market and its 
constant stumbles and slouches: its capacity to create create great wealth, but this constant need 
to go back to the state. I do think there's an intellectual history tension. Brad is very Hegelian: 
each time a free market, neoliberal, libertarian, economic ideal arrives, he
shows that actually it has been semi-disastrous, and cannot and will not continue. He shows very 
clearly how a fully state-run economy just doesn't workd€”it didn't work in Russia, or in China, 
until China starts really opening up. Isabella Weber is going to be speaking in Novembera€”wea€™ re 
going to be doing an event togethera€” about how China avoided
shock therapy, the history of free market thinkers going into China, and China's interest in 
certain aspects of free-market thought and how to put that under an authoritarian state. The 
remarkably realistic vision of history that the Chinese have may come from many of the Chinese 
elite,having more perhasps of a French than an Anglo-Saxon education. Ita€™ s a
remarkable storyd€\

Jake Soil: Looking for a perfect systema€”that is extremely dangerous. Slouching, tripping, 
negotiating, there's always going to be a give and take, there's always going to be this kind of 
fall or tripping. I get where Hayek is coming fromd€” there is that discussion of the Prussian 
state. I tried to be fair, but it's it's very hard. It's very harda€\

Jake Soil: Usually free-market meansa€”and this is meant in the 18th centurya€” getting rid of 
taxes and any other impediments affecting the richest. In the 18th century, that meant enlightened 
aristocratic farmers and landowners. Early free-market French thinkers and Adam Smith believed that 
these farmers could unlock lock the wealth of nature, if they were just
allowed to soa€”this is an old Roman nature cult that expands with Newtonianism and the discovery 
of the New World. I try and tell the story. It's an ancient crazy culta€”which might be one reason 
we're still stuck with it nowa€”this idea that just letting the richest people produce and commune 
with some natural force. It doesna€™ t seem to work. Yet it still seems
to  be in people's consciousness, to the point that the British economy was just crashed by one of 
these concepts. It seems crazy.

Brad DeLong: It is the very distant descendant of Cato the Elder: take care of your farm and your 
slaves and then all will be well. This descends down to Margaret Thatcher's, we need to lower the 
taxes on the job creators, and all will be well. In my book I quote Eric Hobsbawma€”the greatest 
communist historian, maybe the greatest historians of the 20th century.
He was also someone who in the early 1930s was a teenage Jew living in Berlin with Nazis marching 
outside calling for the immediate murder of himself and his family. And so he made certain 
political commitments he never would revisita€”to the end of his days you could get him talking 
about how Stalin was underappreciated. Yet even Hobsbawm would say of
Britain in the 1970s that he unions were too powerfula€’’exerted their social power to raise their 
wealth not by increasing production, but instead by inconveniencing the publica€”and so the good 
ship a€oeSocial Democracya€D needed a thorough neoliberal scrub by Margaret Thatcher.

However, it is now a generation and a half later. Liz Truss shows up with the Margaret Thatcher 
playbook. Truss says: Let's do this again. But, lo and behold, the economy underlying economy is 
different. We haven't had 30 years of Labor Party intellectual dominance, building up the 
infrastructure of the British economy .Her chancellor put forward the plana€”and
financial markets want no part of it, crash judge that these policies simply do not fit the 
requirements imposed by the level of the current technological forces of production.

Jake Soil: Even back in the daya€”it was a little difficult for me to watch some interviews with 
Thatcher, wtaching free-market leaders explaining why the free market didn't work. That goes all 
the way back to the 18th century: if we had just been allowed more power, if we hadn't been 
thwarted by people who didn't believe in the free market, our free-market reforms
would have worked.

Brad DeLong: Oh, it goes back much, much earlier than that. Consider Jeremiah and company. The 
kings of Judah are desperately trying to make alliances with Egypt to the south to protect 
themselves from the Assyrians coming down from the north like the wolf on the fold. The kingdom of 
Israela€”the northern kingdoma€”has already been conquered, and its
people, or at least its A©lite, had been deported to Nineveh. Now the Assyrians are coming back. 
Pharaoh says, quite reasonably, that Egyptian forces need the protection of the gods of Egypt, and 
so there need to be shrines in Jerusalem. Jeremiah says: No! You must not tolerate the Egyptian 
gods! You must cleave to YHWH and YHWH alone! Jeremiah is listened
to.                                                                                                 
                                                                     In the end, it is 
Nebuchadnezzar of Babylon who conquers Jerusalem and deports the A©lite of Jerusalem to Babylon. 
And the response of Jeremiaha€™ s successors is that even though we spurned the Egyptian Alliance, 
in the end, we did not worship YHWH hard enough. Our policies did not fail the people. The people 
failed the policies.

Jake Soil: This pattern of thought went into Christianity: Give your wealth and all of your 
pleasure away to either the poor or to god of free will, and you will get the treasure of the 
Kingdom. If you do that, it will work out even here on earth. The narrative is deeply embedded in 
the western tradition. You can show its long genealogy. It is why, in these European and
post-European countries, there is this clinging to this dream. I wanted to call my book: 
a€cehistory of a dreama€d Laura called it: a€oethe history of an idead€L21 can't argue with Laura. 
But it was a dream. People are actually telling me no one believes this anymore. But it was my 
classmate from Cambridge, Kwasi Kwarteng, who stood up and threw out the
whole thing as policy in what was almost an evangelical momenta€\

Brad DeLong: John Maynard Keynes and his successors and disciples did think that they had unraveled 
the Gordian Knot in the post-WWII generation: progressive taxes on the rich, a large social safety 
net to provide for the poor and the unemployed, Pigovian taxes and subsidies to deal with 
externalities, and the commitment to full employment. In a market
economy the only rights that are respected are property rights. If you don't own valuable property, 
you don't have a social voice or social power. But under full employment even raw individual labor 
is a valuable commodity, and so everyone as some social power. Plus Keynes thought that the policy 
of full employment would require one of low interest rates. And if
interest rates are very low, then either plutocrats reinvest their earnings to maintain their 
wealth share or they spend down their capital, and so lose their social power. Thus the low 
interest-rate and high public-investment policies to maintain full employment solve the twin 
problems of giving social power to the not-rich and curbing the excessive social-power of the
rich. Thus very judicious and very light-handed central planning and government interference, 
regulation, structuring of the market could actually get us to where we wanted to go. But this fell 
apart in the late 1970s, with the coming of Reagan and Thatcher, and its inability to maintain 
durable political majorities in elections. And so we are now still searching for
something elsea€!

Brad DeLong: My book doesn't have a a€oewhat we do next to make the 21st century greata€D chapter. 
It does not have such a chapter because my coAfuthor Steve Cohen convinced me that any history book 
that ends with such a chapter undermines its authority because the what-we-should-do-next chapter 
looks ridiculous six months after the book's publication.
So I'm looking forward to writing the what-should-we-do-next? chapter in the next few months, and 
then rewriting or replacing it with a new version every two years, and I should be able to make 
this one of my successful business lines for a generation.

The first thing to grasp is that reaching back into the past for models is almost certainly doomed. 
Any institutional configuration that even semi-worked in the past is unlikely to work today, 
because things are different. We don't have the 35% of the labor force in manufacturing, with 20% 
of the labor force in essentially semi-robotic mass-production assembly-line jobs
that we had back in 1948, that supported the strong union movement and the egalitarian push for 
social democracy that worked thena€”that forced even Dwight Eisenhower, a very, very conservative 
person by nature, to govern by saying: I am going to be a much better prudent, more efficient, and 
more effective manager of the New Deal than the Democrats will be,

in large part because I'm not in bed with their particular interest groups, and I can focus 
government spending on things we needa€’’interstate highways, a space program, a strong military to 
fight the Cold War, rather than on things that democratic interest groups kind of happened to want.

How does that apply to us right now? It's probably no surprise, but I think that Biden is moving in 
the right directiona€”massively investing more in the communities of America that are currently not 
attractive places for people to have jobs. We need to do this because attractive places like LA are 
doing all they can to prevent the building of large amounts of extra
housing. So for the first time in American history, people have not been moving from places where 
wages are low to places where wages are high, because they can't afford to buy houses here. And it 
is not as bad here as in San Francisco.

The supply-side progressive agenda is the perhaps the best one for America going forward right now. 
But that also needs to be paired with some attempt to get the world as a whole back into the 
framework where we agree we are all headed for a future of greater peace, greater prosperity, and 
also greater public voice and discussion. That last seems to be the very
hardest. We have the Grand Prince of Muscovy thinking that the way to persuade Ukrainians that they 
are a Russian ethnicity not by sending the Bolshoi Ballet to perform, not by sending orchestras to 
play the works of Mussorgsky, not I would be sending out poets to read the works of Pushkin in 
Ukrainian cities out loud, but by sending killer robots to blast people
from the skies. This is the world we havea€!

Jake Soil: Id€™ m gonna be the voice of early modern historyd€”perhaps of reaction. One playbook 
from the past works: education, and public education, and public higher education. Wea€™ve had 
deindustrialization in the Midwest. I spent some of my life there. You see not just a disinvestment 
in manufacturing but a disinvestment from what were grand public


universities. inat oia piayoooK, oj grana amoitious eaucanon ai an levels aoes create weaitn ana a 
quality oj nje ana a aesire to invest, mat couia turn tnings arouna.

Brad DeLong: The Republican Party platform! The Republican Party platform of 1863: free labor, 
settling the frontiera€”the technological frontiera€”and land-grant colleges.

Jake Soil: The land-grant colleges were incredibly successful, created vast amounts of American 
wealth. And the Americans of the Midwest took no interest in them, and are now throwing them away. 
It is startling to me, seeing the wealth of these institutions and seeing Americans literally 
discount them in every sense of the term. So I think there's a, there's an older
playbook, which has to be renewed now. We are not going to be able to find prosperity without 
global cooperation. And I believe education is absolutely essential to this at all levels. One last 
point, within all this technology is culturea€” ballet and poets and all these things, they really 
do still play a huge role. Think about Japan, and the strange way Japan produces
massive global culture that we're not even always aware of. These things work and make places 
attractive, and make us able to cooperate and work together. Cultural interaction between humans 
around the world is so important: key to avoiding war and creating this understanding that we're 
going to have to havea€\

Jake Soil: We did have these small pockets of remarkable wealth creationa€ "Tuscany in the late 
Middle Ages, the Dutch Republic in in the early Renaissance, places with remarkable levels of 
literacy, perhaps 75% of Tuscans in 1375. Remarkable levels of Holland literacy mixed with a very 
specific form of tolerance. Literacy and tolerance will give you a capacity to
manage the changes that come at you with much more ease. That might sound naA~ve and super 
old-fashioneda€\

Brad DeLong: I think Keynes would say, and I know I would agree, that there's a difference between 
very low interest rates that are produced by a shortage of safe assets in an economy and very low 
interest rates that are produced by an expansionary full-employment monetary policy, which carries 
with it a high level of investment and hence a relatively low rate of
profit. With a low rate of profit you have higher wages. The trap you're worrying about is one that 
the world economy has been in for most of the past 20 years, but the cause is a significant 
shortage of safe assets and hence a wide gap between the rate of interest that you earn on safe 
bonds like those issued by the US Treasury on the one hand, and the rate of profit and
thus return on a diversified unit-beta equity portfolio yield on the other. Most of the problems 
are a result of that wide gap, and not because of the low interest rates themselvesa€!

Brad DeLong: Therea€™ s lots of stuff that might have been in my book on the cutting room floor. I 
am not yet organized to be able to claim to have a director's cut. But in the published version, 
immigration shows up in a major way only twice. First, it shows up as the thing that makes the 
United States a€oethe furnace where the future is being forgeda€D in the
20th century, as the United States brings in huge numbers of people from around the world and makes 
them Americans. Second is the role played by migration in the development of underdevelopment. If 
you come from Asia, you're not allowed into places like Canada, like Australia, like Argentina, 
like the United Statesa€”unless you're willing to go to Angel Island,
spend a year there in quarantine, and maybe be sent back to China afterwards. Thus the enormous 
migration flow from Asia is directed into various tropical countries. Consider Malaysia: Chinese 
workers brought in from the Pearl River Delta, British capital, and Brazilian biotechnology because 
the British have grabbed rubber plants from the Brazilian Amazon,
shipped them to Kew Gardens, and then shipped them to Malaysia and found that in Malaysia rubber 
grows like a weed because its pests and parasites are an ocean away. Hence the Brazilian rubber 
industry is decimated by Malaysian competition. That story, over and over again, structures the 
world into a developed global north and an underdeveloped and poor
global southa€”one which is too poor to have a large enough middle class to support the development 
of its own indigenous manufacturing and engineering to any great degreea€!

Brad DeLong: A number of things make the world since since 2010 different from the world before. 
From 1870 to 2010 humanitya€™ s technological competence doubles every generation with 
Schumpeterian, creative destruction creating immense wealth while destroying entire occupations and 
industries and livelihoods and communities. The task is to manage this
processa€”to keep solving the problem of baking a sufficiently-large economic pie from disrupting 
our ability to slice and taste, to distribute and utilize our wealth, so that people feel safe and 
secure and are healthy and happy. Over 1870-2010 we make great strides at solving the problem of 
baking, but the problems of slicing and tasting flummox us.

Since 2010 we have had a marked slowing of the rate of technological progress. I blame this on 
Reagan and Thatcher, on the coming of neoliberalism, both in terms of governments™ s much lower 
willingness to invest in the future, the increasing shift towards corporate short-termism with the 
destruction of industrial research labs, and the U.S. has abandoned its
role as semi-benevolent hegemon. Plus there is the emergence of new civilization-shaking problems: 
nuclear proliferation reaches critical mass, neofascism has surged, and not even oil companies can 
pay enough to keep an active stable of global-warming deniers in their employ any more. This year 
the monsoon was 300 miles south of where it is supposed to bea€”a
lot more rain flooding Pakistan and a drying-up Yangtze River. 3.5 billion people live in the six 
great river valleys plus the monsoon regions of Asia .They are not rich enough to simply pack up 
and move to Vancouver and get jobs there.

Dealing with global warming and dealing with killer robots armed with nuclear weaponsa€’’those are 
big problems the world is going to face starting now that it did not before 2010a€!

Brad DeLong: I am not going to lecture you. People who want me to lecture them should read the 
book, or maybe listen to the audiobook as recorded by the amazing Alan Aquinoa€”who is much more 
convincing at presenting my arguments than I am. Remember Mel Brooks. The now very old TV show 
a€oeThe Dick Van Dyke Showa€D was a thinly fictionalized
account of Mel Brooks's experiences, for Sid Caesar. They made a pilot starring Mel Brooks. It was 
absolutely awful. They concluded that Dick Van Dyke could be a convincing and good Mel Brooks on 
TV, but Mel Brooks could nota€!

Brad DeLong: There is far more about wines than anyone with only one liver can learna€”even about 
French wines, even about that subset of French wines that come from lands that were once part of 
the dowry of Eleanor of Aquitainea€!
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions

Visit the Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality chat
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

