Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth

1) Our series, focusinga€”ha! ha!a€”on experts who you should be reading and listening to, but 
probably are not yet is, this time, tells you why you should be paying attention to
the extremely sharp Francisca Antman, MA3nica GarcAa-PA©rez, Mark Hugo LA3pez, G. Cristina Mora, 
and Eileen V. Segarra AlmA©stica:

Aixa AlemA;n-DAaz, Christian Edlagan, & Maria Monroe: Expert Focus: Latino Leaders in Economics, & 
a Call for More Data & Research About
Latinos & Hispanics'. a€~Equitable Growth is committed to building a community of scholars working 
to understand how inequality affects broadly shared
growth and stability. To that end, we have created the monthly series, a€ reExpert Focus.a€D This 
series highlights scholars in the Equitable Growth
network and beyond who are at the frontier of social science research. In honor of Hispanic 
Heritage Month, this installment of Expert Focus highlights

Latino leaders in economics, the need for more, and more accurate, data about Hispanics and 
Latinos, and research that applies the intersectionality of race,
ethnicity, and gender from among Equitable Growtha€™ s academic community and beyond.... Francisca 
Antman... MA3nica GarcAa-PA©rez. Mark

Hugo LA3pez... G. Cristina Mora. Eileen V. Segarra AlmA©sticaa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/expert-focus-latino-leaders-in-economics-and-a-call-for-more-data-and-r
esearch-about-latinos-and-hispanics/>

2) I remember, long ago, wise Fed staffer David Wilcox telling me that he had realized that 
nowcasting was both the most difficult and most important part of his job. This looks to
be an excellent forthcoming event on the current state-of-the-art here:

Equitable Growth: Presents: Opportunities & challenges of Real-Time Economic Measurement'. a€~The 
coronavirus recession led to a crop of economics
working papers trying to understand the effects of the pandemic in real time. This research 
responded to a pressing policy need: Policymakers were
prepared    to spend hundreds of billions of dollars to staunch the losses of the pandemic, with 
relatively little knowledge of how to effectively target the
money. Work by economists looked at poverty during the pandemic, how people were using stimulus 
checks, the impacts of enhanced Unemployment
Insurance, and much more. The incredibly short turnaround time of much of this research was 
unprecedented for the profession. The severity of the
COVID-19 crisis, the availability of administrative data sources, and new statistical tools 
combined to produce an enormous amount of nearly real-time
data                                                                        on the economic health 
of U.S. families. This event convenes experts on the analysis and application of real-time data to 
discuss what we learned over
the past 18 months. Though future crises may not cause the precipitous economic gyrations that the 
coronavirus did, the lessons economists are learning
now may help us respond more effectively to future recessions, guiding policymakersa€™ response to 
the next recession by using empirical results from
the current one. Speakers: Austin Clemens, Director of Economic Measurement Policy, Washington 
Center for Equitable Growth. Erica Groshen, Senior
Economics Advisor, Cornell University. Jeehoon Han, Assistant Professor, Zhejiang University. Dana 
Peterson, Chief Economist, The Conference
BoardaCI

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/event/equitable-growth-presents-opportunities-and-challenges-of-real-ti
me-economic-measurement/>

3) The coming of the plague increased the already high a€ redouble shiftaCD pressures that our 
society imposes on women, especially mothers. Yet to date there has been
insufficient thought and very little action with respect to how governments should shift their 
activities to deal with and offset these additional pressures. This struck me as the best
set                                                                                  of meditations 
on these issues I have yet seen:

Kate Bahn & al.: Shaping the Future of Work: A Conversation about Women & Work Post-Covid: a€~The 
events of 2020 have turned workplaces upside
down. The pandemic has intensified challenges that women already face. Working mothers have always 
worked a a€redouble shifta€Da€”a full day of
work, followed by hours spent caring for children and doing household labor. During the COVID 
pandemic, the supports that made this possiblea€”
including school and childcarea€’’suddenly disappeared. As a result of these dynamics, more than 
one in four women are contemplating downshifting
their  careers or leaving the workforce completely. This is an emergency for corporate America. 
Companies risk losing women in leadershipa€”and future
women leadersa€”and unwinding years of painstaking progress toward gender diversity. The crisis 
also represents an opportunity. If companies make
significant investments in building a more flexible and empathetic workplace they can retain the 
employees most affected by todaya€™ s crises and nurture
a  culture in which women have equal opportunity to achieve their potential over the long terma€!

LINK: <https://www.docsessions.org/shapingthefutureofworkaconversationaboutwomenandworkpostcovid>

4) Things with respect to unemployment insurance that we ought to have done a generation ago or, if 
not two:

Alix Gould-Werth: 'Today an amazing contingent of lawmakers introduced a house companion to... 
Wyden... Brown. [and] Bennet['s] UI Improvement

Act. It tackles fundamental flaws in Unemployment Insurance that cause disparities in access.... 
The bill... says states must offer 26 weeks of benefits...
fixes monetary eligibility criteria so low-wage workers are more likely to qualify... makes workers 
looking for part-time jobs eligible. [and] requires

employers to tell separating workers about UI. These fixes are evidence-based and make important 
strides to address racial disparities in UI access....
Shorter benefit durations mean that workers are less likely to match with the right jobs. 
[Currently] you need to make enough while working to qualify

for UIa€’’disadvantaging those who make less. Did you know that even if you held a job part-time 
before you were laid off, searching for part-time work

makes you ineligible for UI in many states?.a€! When I talked to real humans about why they didna€™ 
t access UI, there was a strikingly simple
explanation: Many disadvantaged workers just didna€™ t know that they qualified...

LINK: <https://twitter.com/alixgouldwerth/status/1447988172940529667>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere

1) I get very confused when people do any form of utility- or social welfare-based calculation in 
an environment in which preferences are shifting. How does one benchmark the
different preference maps against each other? Nevertheless, this nevertheless, this is an extremely 
interesting take on how high and growing market power have shifted the benefits
from reductions in marginal cost away from consumers and toward producer interests:

Hendrik Doepper, Alex MacKay, Nate H. Miller, & Joel Stiebale: Rising Markups & the Role of 
Consumer Preferences: '[We] examine whether
product-level markups are increasing over time. We estimate IO-style models with flexible consumer 
preferences, allowing us to look at potential drivers of
change  in both supply and demand. Using data in over 120 consumer product categories, we find that 
markups increase by over 25 percent from 2006 to

2019. However, real prices barely increase over the perioda€”the biggest source of increased 
markups is falling marginal costs. Falling marginal costs do

not translate one-for-one to lower prices because the markets are not perfectly competitive. 
Further, consumers are becoming less price sensitive. Due to

changing preferences, consumer welfare increased from 2006 to 2019, despite higher prices in 2019. 
If preferences had not changed, consumer surplus
would have fallen by 3.5 percent. Thus, accounting for preferences is essential to interpret the 
effects of changing markups. Other factors we examine
include changes in perceived quality and product-level concentration. These factors are not 
correlated with changes in markups over time. We do find a
positive correlation between changes in markups and concentration at the level of the parent 
companya€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/amackay/status/1448633921235664906>

2) The London Economist has an excellent interview with two of our three Nobel Prize winners this 
yeara€”David Card and Josh Angrist. If you want to know why we economists
respect them so much and are cheering their Nobel Prizes so loudly, follow the link:

Joshua Angrist, Ryan Avent, David Card, & Rachana Shanbhogue : A Real-World Revolution in 
Economics: a€~THIS YEARa€™ s Nobel prize


analysis of real-world data. How their work has brought economics closer to real lifea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/nobelpod2021?utmcampaign=editorial-social&utmmedium=social-organic&utm_so
urce=twitter>

3) The organization American Compass, its leader Oren Cass who is cheering for this piece, and its 
author Michael Linda€”they have now joined my list of people whose writings
are properly classified as attempted cognitive denial-of-service attacks. To attempt to draw a 
distinction between social assistance, which is a government function, and social
insurance, which is not a government function but is insteada€! something elsea€! 
unspecifieda€”well, that may well be the dumbest and least honest thing I have seen in months:

Michael Lind: The Government Should Keep Its Hands Off Your Medicare'. a€~There are two kinds of 
people: those who want politicians to a€cekeep
your government hands off my Medicare,a€D and those who think thata€™ s the dumbest thing theya€™ 
ve ever heard. When an angry constituent made
the declaration at a town hall meeting convened by Rep. Bob Inglis during the 2009 health care 
debate, pundits across the political spectrum seized on it to
symbolize the lamentable ignorance of ordinary people in general and populist conservatives in 
particular. On the right, George Mason economist Tyler
Cowen called the remark, a€oeThe funniest sentence I read today.a€D On the left, Slatea€™ s Timothy 
Noah announced his initiative a€oeto combat the
pernicious and big-babyish meme that Medicare lies beyond government control and must remain so.a€D 
With its supercilious mockery, the overclass
intelligentsia revealed an inability to distinguish between social assistance and social 
insurance^}

LINK: <https://americancompass.org/essays/the-government-should-keep-its-hands-off-your-medicare/>

4) I have never been sure in any particular case how to interpret the failure of the Washington 
Post or the New York Times or others of their ilk to properly link. Is it their reporters
toadying to the powerful by not handing their readers the tools to detect lies they have 
stenographically transmitted with straight faces? Or is it simplya€”simplya€”trying to
deprive sources of information they regard as competitors of their deserved share of oxygen. In 
neither case is it at all a good look:

Adam Serwer: Justice Alito Proved My Point by Attacking Me'. a€~The longtime SCOTUS reporters for 
outlets such as The New York Times and The
Washington Post [Robert Barnes and Mike Berardino] did not even link to my piece that Alito was 
mischaracterizing so that their readers could make their
own judgments; His Honora€™ s word would do. And yet here is [Adam Lipton of] the Times: "He 
addressed the recent decisions in unusual detail,
rejecting, for instance, what he said was the 'false and inflammatory claim that we nullified Roe 
v. Wade' in early September by allowing a Texas law that
bans most abortions after six weeks to come into effect. 'We did no such thing, and we said so 
expressly in our order', he said, quoting from it. Indeed, the
majority in the 5-to-4 ruling said it based its decision on procedural grounds. The effect of the 
ruling, however, has been to deny abortions to most

women in Texas. In dissent, Justice Elena Kagan wrote that the majoritya€™ s unsigned order 
'illustrates just how far the courta€™ s "shadow docket"
decisions may depart from the usual principles of appellate process.'" This is the closest a 
Supreme Court reporter for a major outlet gets to saying,
a€oe Although the justice insisted the liquid was rain, chemical analysis shows the composition to 
be identical to urine.a€D. Many observers surmised

that the majority was happy to leave it in place for now, because it does not think women should 
have the constitutional right to decide whether to carry a
pregnancy to term, and therefore does not consider circumstances in Texas to be a matter of 
significant concerna€!

LINK: 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/10/alito-supreme-court-texas-abortion/62Q339/>

5) This is, I think, massively, massively overstated. But there is something real and, I think, 
very important underlying it:

Chris Herd: 'What I've learnt talking to 2,500+ companies about remote work. HQa€™ s are finished: 
companies will cut their commercial office space

by 50-70%. They will allow every worker to work from home 2-4 days a week, and come into the office 
1-2 days a week. Fully distributed: ~30% of the
companies we talk to are getting rid of the office entirely and going remote-first. Companies doing 
this have seen their workers decentralize rapidly, leaving
expensive cities to be closer to family. Access talent: The first reason they are going 
remote-first is simple a€“ it lets them hire more talented people.

Rather than hiring the best person in a 30-mile radius of the office, they can hire the best person 
in the world for every role. Cut costs: The second reason
they are going remote-first is because it lets them be far more cost-efficient. Rather than 
spending $20,000/worker/year on office space they can provide the
best remote setup on the planet for $2,000/worker/year. Remote burnout: The productivity inside the 
companies wea€™ ve spoken to has gone through the
roof. Their biggest concern is that workers burnout because they are working too hard. They are 
actively exploring ways to combat this. Remote onsites:
60%+ of companies we talk to are already thinking about ways to use time together physically to 
improve culture. The most popular we hear is flying the
team into remote locations for ~week. Portugal, Spain, Puerto Rico seem to be the most popular. 
Personal choice: the smartest people I know personally are
all planning to work remotely this decade. The most exciting companies I know personally all plan 
to hire remotely this decade. ~90% of the workforces
wea€™ ve spoken to never want to be in an office again full-time. Async by default: is the thing 
that organizations are struggling with most. The majority
of companies have replicated the office remotely and it is causing strains that are beginning to 
show. Personal injury: These are exploding. Companies
havena€™ t moved quickly enough to prevent them and back, neck and repetitive strain injuries are 
becoming a huge problem.  Quality of life: even more

importantly companies are realizing that they dona€™ t need to expect workers to waste 2 hours a 
day commuting to sit in an office chair for 8 hours.
Almost every company we talk to believes that their workers will be happier as a result of remote 
worka€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/chris_herd/status/1446522708670521358>

6) This is better than 99% of the things that crossed my screen on inflation these days. Remember: 
you cannot rejoin the highway at speed without leaving rubber on the road, and
so you should not be alarmed when you do soa€”unless, of course, you really do not want to rejoin 
the highway at speed at all:

Claudia Sahm: Inflation is Not the Emergency. a€~Fast forward to today, and surging prices are 
behind us. Thata€™ s a step back to normal. Monthly
inflationa€”a better indicator of current conditions than year of yeara€”peaked in June 2021. In 
September, inflation excluding food and energy, was back
near    its pre-Covid average. Total inflation is higher, but food and energy prices tend to be 
more volatile and, as result, often tell us less about where
inflation  is headed. Supply chains and commodity prices remain a thorn in the side of consumers 
and businesses. As with jobs, progress is progress, even
when ita€™ s slower than we want. Demand matters for inflation too. This year spring demand surged. 
In fact, in April and May of 2021, the highest
percent                                                                     of consumers, on net, 
said it as a good time to buy big-ticket durables since the crisis began. That coincided with the 
surge in inflation. Now that
measure of demand is lower than the depths of the recession. Again, ita€™ s hard to see a spiral 
inflation taking hold when consumers are willing to wait it
out until inflation settles down, as they expect it will.... Inflation is not an emergency, but 
getting the pandemic under control is.  Covid has turned out to

be wave of after wave of Category 5 hurricanes laying siege to the United States and the world. 
Inflation is NOT spiraling out of control. It is coming

down. Whether a€cetransitorya€D is six months or twelve is NOT an emergency. Ita€™ s a pain in the 
ass for the Fed. The pandemic is an emergency.
The heated debates in Congress about infrastructure, climate change, the child tax credit, health 
care, and affordable housing are extremely important too.
Focus, peoplea€!

LINK: <https://stavathomemacro.substack.eom/p/inflation-is-not-the-emergency>

7) this is, I think, the best single thing to read about the Card, Angrist, Imbens Economics Nobel 
Prize:

Noah Smith: The Econ Nobel We Were All Waiting for. a€~To predict who will win the Econ Nobel. list 
the most influential people people in the field

who havena€™ t won it yet.... Assume... micro theorists wona€™ t win... two years in a row. The 
ones whose influence is the oldest are the most likely to

win. For years, this method led lots of peoplea€’’including mea€”to predict a Nobel for David Card. 
His 1994 paper with Alan Krueger on the minimum

wage was a thunderbolt.... Since then, Card has been at the forefront of empirical labor.... 
Angrist and Imbensa€™ impact... though also hugh. came

later. I wouldna€™ t have been surprised had they won the prize in later years. But Card was 
clearly overdue. Perhaps the reason it took this long was

that Carda€™ s conclusions in his famous minimum wage paper were so hard for many in the field to 
swallow. At the time, Card and Kruegera€™ s

finding seemed revolutionary and heretical. In fact, other researchers had probably been finding 
the same thing, but were afraid to publish their results,
simply because of their terror of offending the orthodoxy. In the 1990s, economics was still a 
fairly conservative field as academic fields go, and some

economists probably still saw their role as that of a bulwark against socialism. In fact, 
economists who lean to the political right still say Card and
Kruegera€™ s result cana€™t possibly be true, even though ita€™ s been replicated by a massive 
number of follow-up studies.... Peter St. Onge. I guess

when youa€™ ve lived in an echo chamber of propaganda, empirical evidence feels like propaganda!. 
But it wasna€™t just the conservative opposition

that discouraged this sort of work. It was the perception that the work would be seized upon by 
liberal activists. Herea€™ s what Card said in a 2016


interview. a€oel dona€™ t go around saying you should raise the minimum wagea€”yet advocates point 
to my work to say they should raise minimum

wages. Thata€™ s one reason why I dona€™ t work on that topic anymore, because everyone just 
assumes Ia€™ m advocating for raising the minimum
wage, and therefore everything I do will be discredited.a€D a€oelta€™ s the same with 
immigration,a€D he continues. a€oeThere is no point in me
writing another paper on that, because everyone just assumes that I must be advocating raising 
immigration.&€□. Wat Card wanted to do wasna€™ t to

push minimum wage or expanded immigration a€” it was much bigger than that. He wanted to make the 
field of economics more scientific. The

importance of Card and Krueger (1994)... is. that economics consists of a set of falsifiable claims 
about the world we live in, rather than simply a set of

thought experiments.... The genius of Carda€™ s worka€”and of Angrista€™ s and Imbensa€™ work. 
These economists devised clever ways to find

comparisons... for natural experiments and policy experiments... a€cequasi-experimentala€D methods. 
the core of what economists have called the

a€oecredibility revolutiona€D in empirical economics. Far from simply evangelizing the credibility 
revolution, Angrist pushed it forward, developing

new statistical techniques for measuring causal effects a€” often in cooperation with Imbens, as 
well as the late Alan Kruegera€”and applying these new
methods to questions in education, health, and other areas. Imbens, for his part, has been nothing 
short of virtuosic in his quest for the development of ever-
more-accurate ways of teasing out causal effects.... When evidence is credible, it means that 
theory must bend to evidencea€™ s command. [While]

many of the most striking results to come out of the credibility revolution so far are things that 
bolster the case for government intervention. this is not a

property of the Universe; there was simply a backlog of popular theories that concluded that the 
free market was the best, and so studies showing otherwise
got lots of attention. That doesna€™ t mean the facts have a liberal bias.... And thata€™ s fine. 
If you ignore reality in the name of politics for too long,

eventually youa€™ re going to find yourself shouting orders that nature refuses to obeya€!
LINK: chttps://noahpinion.substack.com/p/the-econ-nobel-we-were-all-waiting>

8) Outside my wheelhouse, but vitally important. It is entirely possible that our democracy 
depended on Mike Pence doing his job on January 6. And perhaps I am overly alarmed.
Perhaps there are prliamentary procedures that I am not aware of for overruling and even replacing 
the chair of a joint session of Congress. But nobody has ever told me what those
procedures are. Can one appeal a ruling to the members, and if so does each senator get one or get 
4.35 votes?:

Robert Costa: 'One episode on Jan. 5 that deserves more attention: Trump issued a statement late at 
night speaking for Pence, hours before the next day's
certification. Trump declared he and Pence were in "total agreement that the [VP] has the power to 
act." Of course, they were not. "This breaks protocol,"
Pence  chief Marc Short said tersely in phone call with Trump adviser Jason Miller, who was at the 
Willard with Giuliani and Bannon, among others. Miller
refused to retract a word. Why this matters: the Trump-Pence Oval meeting on Jan. 5 was not the end 
of it. Even when Pence flatly refused to do what
Trump wanted, Trump soon decided to issue a public statement defining the vice president's power 
and position on the election. And even when Pence was
at home for dinner on January 5, the pressure campaign continued. Let's not forget: Giuliani was 
hoping to come over there and have his own one-on-one
talk with the VP... a follow up to Trump's Oval showdown with Pence. Three main plays at Pence on 
night Jan. 5: 1-Trump pushes him in Oval, but fails. 2-
Statement then stuns him, his aides by declaring Pence in agreement with Trump. 3-Giuliani pushes 
for one last 1-on-l push at VP residence, but Pence's
advisers stop it from happening. Boris "Epshteyn told [Pence adviser Marty] Obst Giuliani would be 
happy to come over to Pence's residence and have a
discussion. For Obst, the suggestion felt straight out of a bad mafia movie"a€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/costareports/status/1447663750832664576>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

