Subscribe now

This is the ur-textfor our thinking about how technology drives economy and social relationsa€”and 
thus both create and limit possibilities for everything else:


The materialist conception of history starts from the proposition that the production of the means 
to support human life and, next to production, the exchange of things produced, is the basis of all 
social structure; that in every society that has appeared in history, the manner in which wealth is 
distributed and society divided into classes or orders is dependent upon what is produced, how it 
is produced, and how the products are exchanged.
From this point of view, the final causes of all social changes and political revolutions are to be 
sought, not in men's brains, not in men's better insights into eternal truth and justice, but in 
changes in the modes of production and exchange. They are to be sought, not in the philosophy, but 
in the economics of each particular epoch. The growing perception that existing social institutions 
are unreasonable and unjust, that reason has become
unreason, and right wrong [1], is only proof that in the modes of production and exchange changes 
have silently taken place with which the social order, adapted to earlier economic conditions, is 
no longer in keeping. From this it also follows that the means of getting rid of the incongruities 
that have been brought to light must also be present, in a more or less developed condition, within 
the changed modes of production themselves.

These means are not to be invented by deduction from fundamental principles, but are to be 
discovered in the stubborn facts of the existing system of production.
What is, then, the position of modern Socialism in this connection?

The present situation of society a€” this is now pretty generally conceded a€” is the creation of 
the ruling class of today, of the bourgeoisie. The mode of production peculiar to the bourgeoisie, 
known, since Marx, as the capitalist mode of production, was incompatible with the feudal system, 
with the privileges it conferred upon individuals, entire social ranks and local corporations, as 
well as with the hereditary ties of subordination
which constituted the framework of its social organization. The bourgeoisie broke up the feudal 
system and built upon its ruins the capitalist order of society, the kingdom of free competition, 
of personal liberty, of the equality, before the law, of all commodity owners, of all the rest of 
the capitalist blessings. Thenceforward, the capitalist mode of production could develop in 
freedom. Since steam, machinery, and the making of machines
by machinery transformed the older manufacture into modern industry, the productive forces, evolved 
under the guidance of the bourgeoisie, developed with a rapidity and in a degree unheard of before. 
But just as the older manufacture, in its time, and handicraft, becoming more developed under its 
influence, had come into collision with the feudal trammels of the guilds, so now modern industry, 
in its complete development, comes into
collision with the bounds within which the capitalist mode of production holds it confined. The new 
productive forces have already outgrown the capitalistic mode of using them. And this conflict 
between productive forces and modes of production is not a conflict engendered in the mind of man, 
like that between original sin and divine justice. It exists, in fact, objectively, outside us, 
independently of the will and actions even of the men
that have brought it on. Modern Socialism is nothing but the reflex, in thought, of this conflict 
in fact; its ideal reflection in the minds, first, of the class directly suffering under it, the 
working class.

Now, in what does this conflict consist?

Before capitalist production a€” i.e., in the Middle Ages a€” the system of petty industry obtained 
generally, based upon the private property of the laborers in their means of production; in the 
country, the agriculture of the small peasant, freeman, or serf; in the towns, the handicrafts 
organized in guilds. The instruments of labor a€” land, agricultural implements, the workshop, the 
tool a€” were the instruments of labor of single
individuals, adapted for the use of one worker, and, therefore, of necessity, small, dwarfish, 
circumscribed. But, for this very reason, they belonged as a rule to the producer himself. To 
concentrate these scattered, limited means of production, to enlarge them, to turn them into the 
powerful levers of production of the present day a€” this was precisely the historic role of 
capitalist production and of its upholder, the bourgeoisie. In the
fourth  section of Capital, Marx has explained in detail how since the 15th century this has been 
historically worked out through the three phases of simple co-operation, manufacture, and modern 
industry. But the bourgeoisie, as is shown there, could not transform these puny means of 
production into mighty productive forces without transforming them, at the same time, from means of 
production of the individual into social means of
production only workable by a collectivity of men. The spinning wheel, the handloom, the 
blacksmith's hammer, were replaced by the spinning-machine, the power-loom, the steam-hammer; the 
individual workshop, by the factory implying the co-operation of hundreds and thousands of workmen. 
In like manner, production itself changed from a series of individual into a series of social acts, 
and the production from individual to social
products. The yarn, the cloth, the metal articles that now come out of the factory were the joint 
product of many workers, through whose hands they had successively to pass before they were ready. 
No one person could say of them: "I made that; this is my product."

But where, in a given society, the fundamental form of production is that spontaneous division of 
labor which creeps in gradually and not upon any preconceived plan, there the products take on the 
form of commodities, whose mutual exchange, buying and selling, enable the individual producers to 
satisfy their manifold wants. And this was the case in the Middle Ages. The peasant, e.g., sold to 
the artisan agricultural products and
bought from him the products of handicraft. Into this society of individual producers, of commodity 
producers, the new mode of production thrust itself. In the midst of the old division of labor, 
grown up spontaneously and upon no definite plan, which had governed the whole of society, now 
arose division of labor upon a definite plan, as organized in the factory; side by side with 
individual production appeared social production. The
products of both were sold in the same market, and, therefore, at prices at least approximately 
equal. But organization upon a definite plan was stronger than spontaneous division of labor. The 
factories working with the combined social forces of a collectivity of individuals produced their 
commodities far more cheaply than the individual small producers. Individual producers succumbed in 
one department after another. Socialized
production revolutionized all the old methods of production. But its revolutionary character was, 
at the same time, so little recognized that it was, on the contrary, introduced as a means of 
increasing and developing the production of commodities. When it arose, it found ready-made, and 
made liberal use of, certain machinery for the production and exchange of commodities: merchants' 
capital, handicraft, wage-labor. Socialized
production  thus introducing itself as a new form of the production of commodities, it was a matter 
of course that under it the old forms of appropriation remained in full swing, and were applied to 
its products as well.

In the medieval stage of evolution of the production of commodities, the question as to the owner 
of the product of labor could not arise. The individual producer, as a rule, had, from raw material 
belonging to himself, and generally his own handiwork, produced it with his own tools, by the labor 
of his own hands or of his family. There was no need for him to appropriate the new product. It 
belonged wholly to him, as a matter of course.
His property in the product was, therefore, based upon his own labor. Even where external help was 
used, this was, as a rule, of little importance, and very generally was compensated by something 
other than wages. The apprentices and journeymen of the guilds worked less for board and wages than 
for education, in order that they might become master craftsmen themselves.

Then came the concentration of the means of production and of the producers in large workshops and 
manufactories, their transformation into actual socialized means of production and socialized 
producers. But the socialized producers and means of production and their products were still 
treated, after this change, just as they had been before a€” i.e., as the means of production and 
the products of individuals. Hitherto, the owner of the
instruments of labor had himself appropriated the product, because, as a rule, it was his own 
product and the assistance of others was the exception. Now, the owner of the instruments of labor 
always appropriated to himself the product, although it was no longer his product but exclusively 
the product of the labor of others. Thus, the products now produced socially were not appropriated 
by those who had actually set in motion the means
of production and actually produced the commodities, but by the capitalists. The means of 
production, and production itself, had become in essence socialized. But they were subjected to a 
form of appropriation which presupposes the private production of individuals, under which, 
therefore, every one owns his own product and brings it to market. The mode of production is 
subjected to this form of appropriation, although it abolishes
the conditions upon which the latter rests. [2]

This contradiction, which gives to the new mode of production its capitalistic character, contains 
the germ of the whole of the social antagonisms of today. The greater the mastery obtained by the 
new mode of production over all important fields of production and in all manufacturing countries, 
the more it reduced individual production to an insignificant residuum, the more clearly was 
brought out the incompatibility of socialized
production with capitalistic appropriation.

The first capitalists found, as we have said, alongside of other forms of labor, wage-labor 
ready-made for them on the market. But it was exceptional, complementary, accessory, transitory 
wage-labor. The agricultural laborer, though, upon occasion, he hired himself out by the day, had a 
few acres of his own land on which he could at all events live at a pinch. The guilds were so 
organized that the journeyman of today became the master
of tomorrow. But all this changed, as soon as the means of production became socialized and 
concentrated in the hands of capitalists. The means of production, as well as the product, of the 
individual producer became more and more worthless; there was nothing left for him but to turn 
wage-worker under the capitalist. Wage-labor, aforetime the exception and accessory, now became the 
rule and basis of all production; aforetime
complementary, it now became the sole remaining function of the worker. The wage-worker for a time 
became a wage-worker for life. The number of these permanent was further enormously increased by 
the breaking-up of the feudal system that occurred at the same time, by the disbanding of the 
retainers of the feudal lords, the eviction of the peasants from their homesteads, etc. The 
separation was made complete between the means
of   production concentrated in the hands of the capitalists, on the one side, and the producers, 
possessing nothing but their labor-power, on the other. The contradiction between socialized 
production and capitalistic appropriation manifested itself as the antagonism of proletariat and 
bourgeoisie.

We have seen that the capitalistic mode of production thrust its way into a society of 
commodity-producers, of individual producers, whose social bond was the exchange of their products. 
But every society based upon the production of commodities has this peculiarity: that the producers 
have lost control over their own social inter-relations. Each man produces for himself with such 
means of production as he may happen to have, and for
such exchange as he may require to satisfy his remaining wants. No one knows how much of his 
particular article is coming on the market, nor how much of it will be wanted. No one knows whether 
his individual product will meet an actual demand, whether he will be able to make good his costs 
of production or even to sell his commodity at all. Anarchy reigns in socialized production.

But the production of commodities, like every other form of production, has it peculiar, inherent 
laws inseparable from it; and these laws work, despite anarchy, in and through anarchy. They reveal 
themselves in the only persistent form of social inter-relations a€” i.e., in exchange a€” and here 
they affect the individual producers as compulsory laws of competition. They are, at first, unknown 
to these producers themselves, and have to
be discovered by them gradually and as the result of experience. They work themselves out, 
therefore, independently of the producers, and in antagonism to them, as inexorable natural laws of 
their particular form of production. The product governs the producers.

In mediaeval society, especially in the earlier centuries, production was essentially directed 
toward satisfying the wants of the individual. It satisfied, in the main, only the wants of the 
producer and his family. Where relations of personal dependence existed, as in the country, it also 
helped to satisfy the wants of the feudal lord. In all this there was, therefore, no exchange; the 
products, consequently, did not assume the character of
commodities. The family of the peasant produced almost everything they wanted: clothes and 
furniture, as well as the means of subsistence. Only when it began to produce more than was 
sufficient to supply its own wants and the payments in kind to the feudal lords, only then did it 
also produce commodities. This surplus, thrown into socialized exchange and offered for sale, 
became commodities.

The artisan in the towns, it is true, had from the first to produce for exchange. But they, also, 
themselves supplied the greatest part of their individual wants. They had gardens and plots of 
land. They turned their cattle out into the communal forest, which, also, yielded them timber and 
firing. The women spun flax, wool, and so forth. Production for the purpose of exchange, production 
of commodities, was only in its infancy. Hence,
exchange was restricted, the market narrow, the methods of production stable; there was local 
exclusiveness without, local unity within; the mark in the country; in the town, the guild.

But with the extension of the production of commodities, and especially with the introduction of 
the capitalist mode of production, the laws of commoditv-production, hitherto latent, came into 
action more openlv and with greater force. The old bonds were loosened, the old exclusive limits 
broken through, the producers were more and more turned into independent, isolated producers of 
commodities. It became apparent that the


production of society at large was ruled by absence of plan, by accident, by anarchy; and this 
anarchy grew to greater and greater height. But the chief means by aid of which the capitalist mode 
of production intensified this anarchy of socialized production was the exact opposite of anarchy. 
It was the increasing organization of production, upon a social basis, in every individual 
productive establishment. By this, the old, peaceful, stable
condition of things was ended. Wherever this organization of production was introduced into a 
branch of industry, it brooked no other method of production by its side. The field of labor became 
a battle-ground. The great geographical discoveries, and the colonization following them, 
multiplied markets and quickened the transformation of handicraft into manufacture. The war did not 
simply break out between the individual producers of
particular localities. The local struggles begat, in their turn, national conflicts, the commercial 
wars of the 17th and 18th centuries.

Finally, modern industry and the opening of the world-market made the struggle universal, and at 
the same time gave it an unheard-of virulence. Advantages in natural or artificial conditions of 
production now decide the existence or non-existence of individual capitalists, as well as of whole 
industries and countries. He that falls is remorselessly cast aside. It is the Darwinian struggle 
of the individual for existence transferred from Nature
to society with intensified violence. The conditions of existence natural to the animal appear as 
the final term of human development. The contradiction between socialized production and 
capitalistic appropriation now presents itself as an antagonism between the organization of 
production in the individual workshop and the anarchy of production in society generally.

The capitalistic mode of production moves in these two forms of the antagonism immanent to it from 
its very origin. It is never able to get out of that "vicious circle" which Fourier had already 
discovered. What Fourier could not, indeed, see in his time is that this circle is gradually 
narrowing; that the movement becomes more and more a spiral, and must come to an end, like the 
movement of planets, by collision with the centre. It is the
compelling force of anarchy in the production of society at large that more and more completely 
turns the great majority of men into proletarians; and it is the masses of the proletariat again 
who will finally put an end to anarchy in production. It is the compelling force of anarchy in 
social production that turns the limitless perfectibility of machinery under modern industry into a 
compulsory law by which every individual industrial
capitalist must perfect his machinery more and more, under penalty of ruin.

But the perfecting of machinery is making human labor superfluous. If the introduction and increase 
of machinery means the displacement of millions of manual by a few machine-workers, improvement in 
machinery means the displacement of more and more of the machine-workers themselves. It means, in 
the last instance, the production of a number of available wage workers in excess of the average 
needs of capital, the formation of
a complete industrial reserve army, as I called it in 1845 [3 J, available at the times when 
industry is working at high pressure, to be cast out upon the street when the inevitable crash 
comes, a constant dead weight upon the limbs of the working-class in its struggle for existence 
with capital, a regulator for keeping of wages down to the low level that suits the interests of 
capital.

Thus it comes about, to quote Marx, that machinery becomes the most powerful weapon in the war of 
capital against the working-class; that the instruments of labor constantly tear the means of 
subsistence out of the hands of the laborer; that they very product of the worker is turned into an 
instrument for his subjugation.
Thus it comes about that the economizing of the instruments of labor becomes at the same time, from 
the outset, the most reckless waste of labor-power, and robbery based upon the normal conditions 
under which labor functions; that machinery,

"the most powerful instrument for shortening labor time, becomes the most unfailing means for 
placing every moment of the laborer's time and that of his family at the disposal of the capitalist 
for the purpose of expanding the value of his capital." (Capital, English edition, p. 406)

Thus it comes about that the overwork of some becomes the preliminary condition for the idleness of 
others, and that modern industry, which hunts after new consumers over the whole world, forces the 
consumption of the masses at home down to a starvation minimum, and in doing thus destroys its own 
home market.

"The law that always equilibrates the relative surplus- population, or industrial reserve army, to 
the extent and energy of accumulation, this law rivets the laborer to capital more firmly than the 
wedges of Vulcan did Prometheus to the rock. It establishes an accumulation of misery, 
corresponding with the accumulation of capital. Accumulation of wealthat one pole is, therefore, at 
the same time accumulation of misery, agonyof toil,
slavery, ignorance, brutality, mental degradation, at the opposite pole, i.e., on the side of the 
class that produces its own product in the form of capital (Marx's Capital, p. 661)

And to expect any other division of the products from the capitalist mode of production is the same 
as expecting the electrodes of a battery not to decompose acidulated water, not to liberate oxygen 
at the positive, hydrogen at the negative pole, so long as they are connected with the battery.

We have seen that the ever-increasing perfectibility of modern machinery is, by the anarchy of 
social production, turned into a compulsory law that forces the individual industrial capitalist 
always to improve his machinery, always to increase its productive force. The bare possibility of 
extending the field of production is transformed for him into a similarly compulsorylaw. The 
enormous expansive force of modern industry,compared
with which that of gases is mere child's play, appears to us now as a necessity for expansion, both 
qualitative and quantative, that laughs at all resistance. Such resistance is offered by 
consumption, by sales, by the markets for the products of modern industry. But the capacity for 
extension, extensive and intensive, of the markets is primarily governed by quite different laws 
that work much less energetically. The extension of the markets
cannot keep pace with the extension of production. The collision becomes inevitable, and as this 
cannot produce any real solution so long as it does not break in pieces the capitalist mode of 
production, the collisions become periodic. Capitalist production has begotten another "vicious 
circle".

As a matter of fact, since 1825, when the first general crisis broke out, the whole industrial and 
commercial world, production and exchange among all civilized peoples and their more or less 
barbaric hangers-on, are thrown out of joint about once every 10 years. Commerce is at a 
stand-still, the markets are glutted, productsaccumulate, as multitudinous as theyare unsaleable, 
hard cash disappears, credit vanishes, factoriesare closed, the
mass of the workers are in want of the means of subsistence, because they have produced too much of 
the means of subsistence; bankruptcy follows upon bankruptcy, execution upon execution. The 
stagnation lasts for years; productive forces and products are wasted and destroyed wholesale, 
until the accumulated mass of commodities finally filter off, more or less depreciated in value, 
until production and exchange gradually begin to
move again. Little by little, the pace quickens. It becomes a trot. The industrial trot breaks into 
a canter, the canter in turn grows into the headlong gallop of a perfect steeplechase of industry, 
commercial credit, and speculation, which finally, after breakneck leaps, ends where it began a€” 
in the ditch of a crisis. And so over and over again. We have now, since the year 1825, gone 
through this five times, and at the present moment (1877),
we are going through it for the sixth time. And the character of these crises is so clearly defined 
that Fourier hit all of them off when he described the first "crise plethorique", a crisis from 
plethora.

In these crises, the contradiction between socialized production and capitalist appropriation ends 
in a violent explosion. The circulation of commodities is, for the time being, stopped. Money, the 
means of circulation, becomes a hindrance to circulation. All the laws of production and 
circulation of commodities are turned upside down. The economiccollision has reached itsapogee. The 
mode of production is in rebellion against the mode
of exchange.

The fact that the socialized organization of production within the factory has developed so far 
that it has become incompatible with the anarchy of production in society, which exists side by 
side with and dominates it, is brought home to the capitalist themselves by the violent 
concentration of capital that occurs during crises, through the ruin of many large, and a still 
greater number of small, capitalists. The whole mechanism of the
capitalist mode of production breaks down under the pressure of the productive forces, its own 
creations. It is no longer able to turn all this mass of means of production into capital. They lie 
fallow, and for that very reason the industrial reserve army must also lie fallow. Means of 
production, means of subsistence, available laborers, all the elements of production and of general 
wealth, are present in abundance. But "abundance becomes
the source of distress and want" (Fourier), because it is the very thing that prevents the 
transformation of the means of production and subsistence into capital. For in capitalistic 
society, the means of production can only function when they have undergone a preliminary 
transformation into capital, into the means of exploiting human labor-power. The necessity of this 
transformation into capital of the means of production and subsistence
stands like a ghost between these and the workers. It alone prevents the coming together of the 
material and personal levers of production; it alone forbids the means of production to function, 
the workers to work and live. On the one hand, therefore, the capitalistic mode of production 
stands convicted of its own incapacity to further direct these productive forces. On the other, 
these productive forces themselves, with increasing energy,
press forward to the removal of the existing contradiction, to the abolition of their quality as 
capital, to the practical recognition of their character as social production forces.

This rebellion of the productive forces, as they grow more and more powerful, against their quality 
as capital, this stronger and stronger command that their social character shall be recognized, 
forces the capital class itself to treat them more and more as social productive forces, so far as 
this is possible under capitalist conditions. The period of industrial high pressure, with its 
unbounded inflation of credit, not lessthanthe crash itself, by
the collapse of great capitalist establishments, tends to bring about that form of the 
socialization of great masses of the means of production which we meet with in the different kinds 
of joint-stock companies. Many of these means of production and of distribution are, from the 
outset, so colossal that, like the railways, they exclude all other forms of capitalistic 
expansion. At a further stage of evolution, this form also becomes insufficient.
The producers on a large scale in a particular branch of an industry in a particular country unite 
in a "Trust", a union for the purpose of regulating production. They determine the total amount to 
be produced, parcel it out among themselves, and thus enforce the selling price fixed beforehand. 
But trusts of this kind, as soon as business becomes bad, are generally liable to break up, and on 
this very account compel a yet greater
concentration                                                                                       
                                                                                                    
            of association. The whole of a particular industry is turned into one gigantic 
joint-stock company; internal competition gives place to the internal monopoly of this one company. 
This has happened in 1890 with the English alkali production, which is now, after the fusion of 48 
large works, in the hands of one company, conducted upon a single plan, and witha capital of 
6,000,000 pounds.

In the trusts, freedom of competition changes into its very opposite a€” into monopoly; and the 
production without any definite plan of capitalistic society capitulates to the production upon a 
definite plan of the invading socialistic society. Certainly, this is so far still to the benefit 
and advantage of the capitalists. But, in this case, the exploitation is so palpable, that it must 
break down. No nation will put up with production conducted by
trusts, with so barefaced an exploitation of the community by a small band of dividend-mongers.

In any case, with trusts or without, the official representative of capitalist society a€” the 
state a€” will ultimately have to undertake the direction of production. [4] This necessity for 
conversion into State property is felt first in the great institutions for intercourse and 
communication a€” the post office, the telegraphs, the railways.

If the crises demonstrate the incapacity of the bourgeoisie for managing any longer modern 
productive forces, the transformation of the great establishments for production and distribution 
into joint-stock companies, trusts, and State property, show how unnecessary the bourgeoisie are 
for that purpose. All the social functions of the capitalist has no further social function than 
that of pocketing dividends, tearing off coupons, and
gambling on the Stock Exchange, where the different capitalists despoil one another of their 
capital. At first, the capitalistic mode of production forces out the workers. Now, it forces out 
the capitalists, and reduces them, just as it reduced the workers, to the ranks of the 
surplus-population, although not immediately into those of the industrial reserve army.

But, the transformation a€” either into joint-stock companies and trusts, or into State-ownership 
a€” does not do away with the capitalistic nature of the productive forces. In the joint-stock 
companies and trusts, this is obvious. And the modern State, again, is only the organization that 
bourgeois society takes on in order to support the external conditions of the capitalist mode of 
production against the encroachments as well of the
workers as of individual capitalists. The modern state, no matter what its form, is essentially a 
capitalist machine a€” the state of the capitalists, the ideal personification of the total 
national capital. The more it proceeds to the taking over of productive forces, the more does it 
actually become the national capitalist, the more citizens does it exploit. The workers remain 
wage-workers a€” proletarians. The capitalist relation is not done
away with. It is, rather, brought to a head. But, brought to a head, it topples over. 
State-ownership of the productive forces is not the solution of the conflict, but concealed within 
it are the technical conditions that form the elements of that solution.

This solution can only consist in the practical recognition of the social nature of the modern 
forces of production, and therefore in the harmonizing with the socialized character of the means 
of production. And this can only come about by society openly and directly taking possession of the 
productive forces which have outgrown all control, except that of society as a whole. The social 
character of the means of production and of the
products today reacts against the producers, periodically disrupts all production and exchange, 
acts only like a law of Nature working blindly, forcibly, destructively. But,with the taking over 
by society of the productive forces, the social character of the means of production and of the 
products will be utilized by the producers with a perfect understanding of its nature, and instead 
of being a source of disturbance and periodical collapse,
will become the most powerful lever of production itself.

Active social forces work exactly like natural forces: blindly, forcibly, destructively, so long as 
we do not understand, and reckon with, them. But, when once we understand them, when once we grasp 
their action, their direction, their effects, it depends only upon ourselves to subject them more 
and more to our own will, and, by means of them, to reach our own ends. And this holds quite 
especially of the mighty productive forces of
today. As long as we obstinately refuse to understand the nature and the character of these social 
means of action a€” and this understanding goes against the grain of the capitalist mode of 
production, and its defenders a€” so long these forces are at work in spite of us, in opposition to 
us, so long they master us, as we have shown above in detail.

But when once their nature is understood, they can, in the hands of the producers working together, 
be transformed from master demons into willing servants. The difference is as that between the 
destructive force of electricity in the lightning in the storm, and electricity under command in 
the telegraph and the voltaic arc; the difference between a conflagration, and fire working in the 
service of man. With this recognition, at last, of the
real nature of the productive forces of today, the social anarchy of production gives place to a 
social regulation of production upon a definite plan, according to the needs of the community and 
of each individual. Then the capitalist mode of appropriation, in which the product enslaves first 
the producer, and then the appropriator, is replaced by the mode of appropriation of the products 
that is based upon the nature of the modern means of
production; upon the one hand, direct social appropriation, as means to the maintenance and 
extension of production a€” on the other, direct individual appropriation, as means of subsistence 
and of enjoyment.

Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more completely transforms the great majority of 
the population into proletarians, it creates the power which, under penalty of its own destruction, 
is forced to accomplish this revolution. Whilst it forces on more and more of the transformation of 
the vast means of production, already socialized, into State property, it shows itself the way to 
accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat
seizes political power and turns the means of production into State property.

But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes all class distinction and class 
antagonisms, abolishes also the State as State. Society, thus far, based upon class antagonisms, 
had need of the State. That is, of an organization of the particular class which was, pro tempore, 
the exploiting class, an organization for the purpose of preventing any interference from without 
with the existing conditions of production, and, therefore,
especially, for the purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited classes in the condition of 
oppression corresponding with the given mode of production (slavery, serfdom, wage-labor). The 
State was the official representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together into a 
visible embodiment. But, it was this only in so far as it was the State of that class which itself 
represented, for the time being, society as a whole:

in ancient times, the State of slaveowning citizens;
in the Middle Ages, the feudal lords;

in our own times, the bourgeoisie.

When, at last, it becomes the real representative of the whole of society, it renders itself 
unnecessary. As soon as there is no longer any social class to be held in subjection; as soon as 
class rule, and the individual struggle for existence based upon our present anarchy in production, 
with the collisions and excesses arising from these, are removed, nothing more remains to be 
repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no longer
necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really constitutes itself the representative 
of the whole of society a€” the taking possession of the means of production in the name of society 
a€” this is, at the same time, its last independent act as a State. State interference in social 
relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies out of itself; the 
government of persons is replaced by the administration of
things,  and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is not "abolished". It dies out. 
This gives the measure of the value of the phrase: "a free State", both as to its justifiable use 
at times by agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific insufficiency; and also of the demands of 
the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the State out of hand.

Since the historical appearance of the capitalist mode of production, the appropriation by society 
of all the means of production has often been dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by individuals, as 
well as by sects, as the ideal of the future. But it could become possible, could become a 
historical necessity, only when the actual conditions for its realization were there. Like every 
other social advance, it becomes practicable, not by men
understanding that the existence of classes is in contradiction to justice, equality, etc., not by 
the mere willingness to abolish these classes, but by virtue of certain new economic conditions. 
The separation of society into an exploiting and an exploited class, a ruling and an oppressed 
class, was the necessary consequences of the deficient and restricted development of production in 
former times. So long as the total social labor only yields
a   produce which but slightly exceeds that barely necessary for the existence of all; so long, 
therefore, as labor engages all or almost all the time of the great majority of the members of 
society a€” so long, of necessity, this society is divided into classes. Side by side with the 
great majority, exclusively bond slaves to labor, arises a class freed from directly productive 
labor, which looks after the general affairs of society: the direction of
labor, State business, law, science, art, etc. It is, therefore, the law of division of labor that 
lies at the basis of the division into classes. But this does not prevent this division into 
classes from being carried out by means of violence and robbery, trickery and fraud, it does not 
prevent the ruling class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating its power at the expense 
of the working-class, from turning its social leadership into an
intensified exploitation of the masses.

But if, upon this showing, division into classes has a certain historical justification, it has 
this only for a given period, only under given social conditions. It was based upon the 
insufficiency of production. It will be swept away by the complete development of modern productive 
forces. And, in fact, the abolition of classes in society presupposes a degree of historical 
evolution at which the existence, not simply of this or that particular
ruling class, but of any ruling class at all, and, therefore, the existence of class distinction 
itself, has become a obsolete anachronism. It presupposes, therefore, the development of production 
carried out to a degree at which appropriation of the means of production and of the products, and, 
with this, of political domination, of the monopoly of culture, and of intellectual leadership by a 
particular class of society, has become not only
superfluous but economically, politically, intellectually, a hindrance to development.


will become the most powerful lever of production itself.

Active social forces work exactly like natural forces: blindly, forcibly, destructively, so long as 
we do not understand, and reckon with, them. But, when once we understand them, when once we grasp 
their action, their direction, their effects, it depends only upon ourselves to subject them more 
and more to our own will, and, by means of them, to reach our own ends. And this holds quite 
especially of the mighty productive forces of
today. As long as we obstinately refuse to understand the nature and the character of these social 
means of action a€” and this understanding goes against the grain of the capitalist mode of 
production, and its defenders a€” so long these forces are at work in spite of us, in opposition to 
us, so long they master us, as we have shown above in detail.

But when once their nature is understood, they can, in the hands of the producers working together, 
be transformed from master demons into willing servants. The difference is as that between the 
destructive force of electricity in the lightning in the storm, and electricity under command in 
the telegraph and the voltaic arc; the difference between a conflagration, and fire working in the 
service of man. With this recognition, at last, of the
real nature of the productive forces of today, the social anarchy of production gives place to a 
social regulation of production upon a definite plan, according to the needs of the community and 
of each individual. Then the capitalist mode of appropriation, in which the product enslaves first 
the producer, and then the appropriator, is replaced by the mode of appropriation of the products 
that is based upon the nature of the modern means of
production; upon the one hand, direct social appropriation, as means to the maintenance and 
extension of production a€” on the other, direct individual appropriation, as means of subsistence 
and of enjoyment.

Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more completely transforms the great majority of 
the population into proletarians, it creates the power which, under penalty of its own destruction, 
is forced to accomplish this revolution. Whilst it forces on more and more of the transformation of 
the vast means of production, already socialized, into State property, it shows itself the way to 
accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat
seizes political power and turns the means of production into State property.

But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes all class distinction and class 
antagonisms, abolishes also the State as State. Society, thus far, based upon class antagonisms, 
had need of the State. That is, of an organization of the particular class which was, pro tempore, 
the exploiting class, an organization for the purpose of preventing any interference from without 
with the existing conditions of production, and, therefore,
especially, for the purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited classes in the condition of 
oppression corresponding with the given mode of production (slavery, serfdom, wage-labor). The 
State was the official representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together into a 
visible embodiment. But, it was this only in so far as it was the State of that class which itself 
represented, for the time being, society as a whole:

in ancient times, the State of slaveowning citizens;
in the Middle Ages, the feudal lords;

in our own times, the bourgeoisie.

When, at last, it becomes the real representative of the whole of society, it renders itself 
unnecessary. As soon as there is no longer any social class to be held in subjection; as soon as 
class rule, and the individual struggle for existence based upon our present anarchy in production, 
with the collisions and excesses arising from these, are removed, nothing more remains to be 
repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no longer
necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really constitutes itself the representative 
of the whole of society a€” the taking possession of the means of production in the name of society 
a€” this is, at the same time, its last independent act as a State. State interference in social 
relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies out of itself; the 
government of persons is replaced by the administration of
things,  and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is not "abolished". It dies out. 
This gives the measure of the value of the phrase: "a free State", both as to its justifiable use 
at times by agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific insufficiency; and also of the demands of 
the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the State out of hand.

Since the historical appearance of the capitalist mode of production, the appropriation by society 
of all the means of production has often been dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by individuals, as 
well as by sects, as the ideal of the future. But it could become possible, could become a 
historical necessity, only when the actual conditions for its realization were there. Like every 
other social advance, it becomes practicable, not by men
understanding that the existence of classes is in contradiction to justice, equality, etc., not by 
the mere willingness to abolish these classes, but by virtue of certain new economic conditions. 
The separation of society into an exploiting and an exploited class, a ruling and an oppressed 
class, was the necessary consequences of the deficient and restricted development of production in 
former times. So long as the total social labor only yields
a   produce which but slightly exceeds that barely necessary for the existence of all; so long, 
therefore, as labor engages all or almost all the time of the great majority of the members of 
society a€” so long, of necessity, this society is divided into classes. Side by side with the 
great majority, exclusively bond slaves to labor, arises a class freed from directly productive 
labor, which looks after the general affairs of society: the direction of
labor, State business, law, science, art, etc. It is, therefore, the law of division of labor that 
lies at the basis of the division into classes. But this does not prevent this division into 
classes from being carried out by means of violence and robbery, trickery and fraud, it does not 
prevent the ruling class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating its power at the expense 
of the working-class, from turning its social leadership into an
intensified exploitation of the masses.

But if, upon this showing, division into classes has a certain historical justification, it has 
this only for a given period, only under given social conditions. It was based upon the 
insufficiency of production. It will be swept away by the complete development of modern productive 
forces. And, in fact, the abolition of classes in society presupposes a degree of historical 
evolution at which the existence, not simply of this or that particular
ruling class, but of any ruling class at all, and, therefore, the existence of class distinction 
itself, has become a obsolete anachronism. It presupposes, therefore, the development of production 
carried out to a degree at which appropriation of the means of production and of the products, and, 
with this, of political domination, of the monopoly of culture, and of intellectual leadership by a 
particular class of society, has become not only
superfluous but economically, politically, intellectually, a hindrance to development.

This point is now reached. Their political and intellectual bankruptcy is scarcely any longer a 
secret to the bourgeoisie themselves. Their economic bankruptcy recurs regularly every 10 years. In 
every crisis, society is suffocated beneath the weight of its own productive forces and products, 
which it cannot use, and stands helpless, face-to-face with the absurd contradiction that the 
producers have nothing to consume, because consumers
are wanting. The expansive force of the means of production bursts the bonds that the capitalist 
mode of production had imposed upon them. Their deliverance from these bonds is the one 
precondition for an unbroken, constantly-accelerated development of the productive forces, and 
therewith for a practically unlimited increase of production itself. Nor is this all. The 
socialized appropriation of the means of production does away, not
only with the present artificial restrictions upon production, but also with the positive waste and 
devastation of productive forces and products that are at the present time the inevitable 
concomitants of production, and that reach their height in the crises. Further, it sets free for 
the community at large a mass of means of production and of products, by doing away with the 
senseless extravagance of the ruling classes of today, and their
political representatives. The possibility of securing for every member of society, by means of 
socialized production, an existence not only fully sufficient materially, and becoming day-by-day 
more full, but an existence guaranteeing to all the free development and exercise of their physical 
and mental faculties a€” this possibility is now, for the first time, here, but it is here. [5]

With the seizing of the means of production by society, production of commodities is done away 
with, and, simultaneously, the mastery of the product over the producer. Anarchy in social 
production is replaced by systematic, definite organization. The struggle for individual existence 
disappears. Then, for the first time, man, in a certain sense, is finally marked off from the rest 
of the animal kingdom, and emerges from mere animal
conditions of existence into really human ones. The whole sphere of the conditions of fife which 
environ man, and which have hitherto ruled man, now comes under the dominion and control of man, 
who for the first time becomes the real, conscious lord of nature, because he has now become master 
of his own social organization. The laws of his own social action, hitherto standing face-to-face 
with man as laws of Nature foreign to, and
dominating him, will then be used with full understanding, and so mastered by him. Man's own social 
organization, hitherto confronting him as a necessity imposed by Nature and history, now becomes 
the result of his own free action. The extraneous objective forces that have, hitherto, governed 
history,pass under the control of man himself. Only from that time will man himself, more and more 
consciously, make his own history a€”
only   from that time will the social causes set in movement by him have, in the main and in a 
constantly growing measure, the results intended by him. It is the ascent of man from the kingdom 
of necessity to the kingdom of freedom.

Let us briefly sum up our sketch of historical evolution.

I. Mediaeval Society a€” Individual production on a small scale. Means of production adapted for 
individual use; hence primitive, ungainly, petty, dwarfed in action. Production for immediate 
consumption, either of the producer himself or his feudal lord. Only where an excess of production 
over this consumption occurs is such excess offered for sale, enters into exchange. Production of 
commodities, therefore, only in its infancy. But
already it contains within itself, in embryo, anarchy in the production of society at large.

n. Capitalist Revolution a€” transformation of industry, at first be means of simple cooperation 
and manufacture. Concentration of the means of production, hitherto scattered, into great 
workshops. As a consequence, their transformation from individual to social means of production a€” 
a transformation which does not, on the whole, affect the form of exchange. The old forms of 
appropriation remain in force. The capitalist appears.
In his capacity as owner of the means of production, he also appropriates the products and turns 
them into commodities. Production has become a social act. Exchange and appropriation continue to 
be individual acts, the acts of individuals. The social product is appropriated by the individual 
capitalist. Fundamental contradiction, whence arise all the contradictions in which our present-day 
society moves, and which modern industry
brings to light.

A. Severance of the producer from the means of production. Condemnation of the worker to wage-labor 
for life. Antagonism between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie.

B. Growing predominance and increasing effectiveness of the laws governing the production of 
commodities. Unbridled competition. Contradiction between socialized organization in the individual 
factory and social anarchy in the production as a whole.

C. On the one hand, perfecting of machinery, made by competition compulsory for each individual 
manufacturer, and complemented by a constantly growing displacement of laborers. Industrial 
reserve-army. On the other hand, unlimited extension of production, also compulsory under 
competition, for every manufacturer. On both sides, unheard-of development of productive forces, 
excess of supply over demand, over-production and
products a€” excess there, of laborers, without employment and without means of existence. But 
these two levers of production and of social well-being are unable to work together, because the 
capitalist form of production prevents the productive forces from working and the products from 
circulating, unless they are first turned into capital a€” which their very superabundance 
prevents. The contradiction has grown into an absurdity.
The mode of production rises in rebellion against the form of exchange.

D. Partial recognition of the social character of the productive forces forced upon the capitalists 
themselves. Taking over of the great institutions for production and communication, first by 
joint-stock companies, later in by trusts, then by the State. The bourgeoisie demonstrated to be a 
superfluous class. All its social functions are now performed by salaried employees.

HL Proletarian Revolution a€” Solution of the contradictions. The proletariat seizes the public 
power, and by means of this transforms the socialized means of production, slipping from the hands 
of the bourgeoisie, into public property. By this act, the proletariat frees the means of 
production from the character of capital they have thus far borne, and gives their socialized 
character complete freedom to work itself out. Socialized
production upon a predetermined plan becomes henceforth possible. The development of production 
makes the existence of different classes of society thenceforth an anachronism. In proportion as 
anarchy in social production vanishes, the political authority of the State dies out. Man, at last 
the master of his own form of social organization, becomes at the same time the lord over Nature, 
his own master a€” free.

To accomplish this act of universal emancipation is the historical mission of the modern 
proletariat. To thoroughly comprehend the historical conditions and thus the very nature of this 
act, to impart to the now oppressed proletarian class a full knowledge of the conditions and of the 
meaning of the momentous act it is called upon to accomplish, this is the task of the theoretical 
expression of the proletarian movement, scientific Socialism.

Notes

1. Mephistopheles in Goethe's Faust

2. It is hardly necessary in this connection to point out that, even if the form of appropriation 
remains the same, the character of the appropriation is just as much revolutionized as production 
is by the changes described above. It is, of course, a very different matter whether I appropriate 
to myself my own product or that of another. Note in passing that wage-labor, which contains the 
whole capitalist mode of production in embryo, is very
ancient; in a sporadic, scattered form, it existed for centuries alongside slave-labor. But the 
embryo could duly develop into the capitalistic mode of production only when the necessary 
historical pre-conditions had been furnished.

3. "The Conditions of the Working-Class in England" a€” Sonnenschein & Co., p.84.

4. 1 say "have to". For only when the means of production and distribution have actually outgrown 
the form of management by joint-stock companies, and when, therefore, the taking them over by the 
State has become economically inevitable, only then a€” even if it is the State of today that 
effects this a€” is there an economic advance, the attainment of another step preliminary to the 
taking over of all productive forces by society
itself. But of late, since Bismarck went in for State-ownership of industrial establishments, a 
kind of spurious Socialism has arisen, degenerating, now and again, into something of flunkyism, 
that without more ado declares all State-ownership, even of the Bismarkian sort, to be socialistic. 
Certainly, if the taking over by the State of the tobacco industry is socialistic, then Napoleon 
and Metternich must be numbered among the founders of
Socialism.

If the Belgian State, for quite ordinary political and financial reasons, itself constructed its 
chief railway lines; if Bismarck, not under any economic compulsion, took over for the State the 
chief Prussian lines, simply to be the better able to have them in hand in case of war, to bring up 
the railway employees as voting cattle for the Government, and especially to create for himself a 
new source of income independent of parliamentary votes
a€” this was, in no sense, a socialistic measure, directly or indirectly, consciously or 
unconsciously. Otherwise, the Royal Maritime Company, the Royal porcelain manufacture, and even the 
regimental tailor of the army would also be socialistic institutions, or even, as was seriously 
proposed by a sly dog in Frederick William Ill's reign, the taking over by the State of the 
brothels.

5. A few figures may serve to give an approximate idea of the enormous expansive force of the 
modern means of production, even under capitalist pressure. According to Mr. Giffen, the total 
wealth of Great Britain and Ireland amounted, in round numbers in
1814 to A£ 2,200,000,000,

1865 to A£ 6,100,000,000,

1875 to A£ 8,500,000,000.

As an instance of the squandering of means of production and of products during a crisis, the total 
loss in the German iron industry alone, in the crisis of 1873-78, was given at the second German 
Industrial Congress (Berlin, February 21,1878), as 22,750,000 pounds.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


will become the most powerful lever of production itself.

Active social forces work exactly like natural forces: blindly, forcibly, destructively, so long as 
we do not understand, and reckon with, them. But, when once we understand them, when once we grasp 
their action, their direction, their effects, it depends only upon ourselves to subject them more 
and more to our own will, and, by means of them, to reach our own ends. And this holds quite 
especially of the mighty productive forces of
today. As long as we obstinately refuse to understand the nature and the character of these social 
means of action a€” and this understanding goes against the grain of the capitalist mode of 
production, and its defenders a€” so long these forces are at work in spite of us, in opposition to 
us, so long they master us, as we have shown above in detail.

But when once their nature is understood, they can, in the hands of the producers working together, 
be transformed from master demons into willing servants. The difference is as that between the 
destructive force of electricity in the lightning in the storm, and electricity under command in 
the telegraph and the voltaic arc; the difference between a conflagration, and fire working in the 
service of man. With this recognition, at last, of the
real nature of the productive forces of today, the social anarchy of production gives place to a 
social regulation of production upon a definite plan, according to the needs of the community and 
of each individual. Then the capitalist mode of appropriation, in which the product enslaves first 
the producer, and then the appropriator, is replaced by the mode of appropriation of the products 
that is based upon the nature of the modern means of
production; upon the one hand, direct social appropriation, as means to the maintenance and 
extension of production a€” on the other, direct individual appropriation, as means of subsistence 
and of enjoyment.

Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more completely transforms the great majority of 
the population into proletarians, it creates the power which, under penalty of its own destruction, 
is forced to accomplish this revolution. Whilst it forces on more and more of the transformation of 
the vast means of production, already socialized, into State property, it shows itself the way to 
accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat
seizes political power and turns the means of production into State property.

But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes all class distinction and class 
antagonisms, abolishes also the State as State. Society, thus far, based upon class antagonisms, 
had need of the State. That is, of an organization of the particular class which was, pro tempore, 
the exploiting class, an organization for the purpose of preventing any interference from without 
with the existing conditions of production, and, therefore,
especially, for the purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited classes in the condition of 
oppression corresponding with the given mode of production (slavery, serfdom, wage-labor). The 
State was the official representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together into a 
visible embodiment. But, it was this only in so far as it was the State of that class which itself 
represented, for the time being, society as a whole:

in ancient times, the State of slaveowning citizens;
in the Middle Ages, the feudal lords;

in our own times, the bourgeoisie.

When, at last, it becomes the real representative of the whole of society, it renders itself 
unnecessary. As soon as there is no longer any social class to be held in subjection; as soon as 
class rule, and the individual struggle for existence based upon our present anarchy in production, 
with the collisions and excesses arising from these, are removed, nothing more remains to be 
repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no longer
necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really constitutes itself the representative 
of the whole of society a€” the taking possession of the means of production in the name of society 
a€” this is, at the same time, its last independent act as a State. State interference in social 
relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies out of itself; the 
government of persons is replaced by the administration of
things,  and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is not "abolished". It dies out. 
This gives the measure of the value of the phrase: "a free State", both as to its justifiable use 
at times by agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific insufficiency; and also of the demands of 
the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the State out of hand.

Since the historical appearance of the capitalist mode of production, the appropriation by society 
of all the means of production has often been dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by individuals, as 
well as by sects, as the ideal of the future. But it could become possible, could become a 
historical necessity, only when the actual conditions for its realization were there. Like every 
other social advance, it becomes practicable, not by men
understanding that the existence of classes is in contradiction to justice, equality, etc., not by 
the mere willingness to abolish these classes, but by virtue of certain new economic conditions. 
The separation of society into an exploiting and an exploited class, a ruling and an oppressed 
class, was the necessary consequences of the deficient and restricted development of production in 
former times. So long as the total social labor only yields
a   produce which but slightly exceeds that barely necessary for the existence of all; so long, 
therefore, as labor engages all or almost all the time of the great majority of the members of 
society a€” so long, of necessity, this society is divided into classes. Side by side with the 
great majority, exclusively bond slaves to labor, arises a class freed from directly productive 
labor, which looks after the general affairs of society: the direction of
labor, State business, law, science, art, etc. It is, therefore, the law of division of labor that 
lies at the basis of the division into classes. But this does not prevent this division into 
classes from being carried out by means of violence and robbery, trickery and fraud, it does not 
prevent the ruling class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating its power at the expense 
of the working-class, from turning its social leadership into an
intensified exploitation of the masses.

But if, upon this showing, division into classes has a certain historical justification, it has 
this only for a given period, only under given social conditions. It was based upon the 
insufficiency of production. It will be swept away by the complete development of modern productive 
forces. And, in fact, the abolition of classes in society presupposes a degree of historical 
evolution at which the existence, not simply of this or that particular
ruling class, but of any ruling class at all, and, therefore, the existence of class distinction 
itself, has become a obsolete anachronism. It presupposes, therefore, the development of production 
carried out to a degree at which appropriation of the means of production and of the products, and, 
with this, of political domination, of the monopoly of culture, and of intellectual leadership by a 
particular class of society, has become not only
superfluous but economically, politically, intellectually, a hindrance to development.

This point is now reached. Their political and intellectual bankruptcy is scarcely any longer a 
secret to the bourgeoisie themselves. Their economic bankruptcy recurs regularly every 10 years. In 
every crisis, society is suffocated beneath the weight of its own productive forces and products, 
which it cannot use, and stands helpless, face-to-face with the absurd contradiction that the 
producers have nothing to consume, because consumers
are wanting. The expansive force of the means of production bursts the bonds that the capitalist 
mode of production had imposed upon them. Their deliverance from these bonds is the one 
precondition for an unbroken, constantly-accelerated development of the productive forces, and 
therewith for a practically unlimited increase of production itself. Nor is this all. The 
socialized appropriation of the means of production does away, not
only with the present artificial restrictions upon production, but also with the positive waste and 
devastation of productive forces and products that are at the present time the inevitable 
concomitants of production, and that reach their height in the crises. Further, it sets free for 
the community at large a mass of means of production and of products, by doing away with the 
senseless extravagance of the ruling classes of today, and their
political representatives. The possibility of securing for every member of society, by means of 
socialized production, an existence not only fully sufficient materially, and becoming day-by-day 
more full, but an existence guaranteeing to all the free development and exercise of their physical 
and mental faculties a€” this possibility is now, for the first time, here, but it is here. [5]

With the seizing of the means of production by society, production of commodities is done away 
with, and, simultaneously, the mastery of the product over the producer. Anarchy in social 
production is replaced by systematic, definite organization. The struggle for individual existence 
disappears. Then, for the first time, man, in a certain sense, is finally marked off from the rest 
of the animal kingdom, and emerges from mere animal
conditions of existence into really human ones. The whole sphere of the conditions of fife which 
environ man, and which have hitherto ruled man, now comes under the dominion and control of man, 
who for the first time becomes the real, conscious lord of nature, because he has now become master 
of his own social organization. The laws of his own social action, hitherto standing face-to-face 
with man as laws of Nature foreign to, and
dominating him, will then be used with full understanding, and so mastered by him. Man's own social 
organization, hitherto confronting him as a necessity imposed by Nature and history, now becomes 
the result of his own free action. The extraneous objective forces that have, hitherto, governed 
history,pass under the control of man himself. Only from that time will man himself, more and more 
consciously, make his own history a€”
only   from that time will the social causes set in movement by him have, in the main and in a 
constantly growing measure, the results intended by him. It is the ascent of man from the kingdom 
of necessity to the kingdom of freedom.

Let us briefly sum up our sketch of historical evolution.

I. Mediaeval Society a€” Individual production on a small scale. Means of production adapted for 
individual use; hence primitive, ungainly, petty, dwarfed in action. Production for immediate 
consumption, either of the producer himself or his feudal lord. Only where an excess of production 
over this consumption occurs is such excess offered for sale, enters into exchange. Production of 
commodities, therefore, only in its infancy. But
already it contains within itself, in embryo, anarchy in the production of society at large.

n. Capitalist Revolution a€” transformation of industry, at first be means of simple cooperation 
and manufacture. Concentration of the means of production, hitherto scattered, into great 
workshops. As a consequence, their transformation from individual to social means of production a€” 
a transformation which does not, on the whole, affect the form of exchange. The old forms of 
appropriation remain in force. The capitalist appears.
In his capacity as owner of the means of production, he also appropriates the products and turns 
them into commodities. Production has become a social act. Exchange and appropriation continue to 
be individual acts, the acts of individuals. The social product is appropriated by the individual 
capitalist. Fundamental contradiction, whence arise all the contradictions in which our present-day 
society moves, and which modern industry
brings to light.

A. Severance of the producer from the means of production. Condemnation of the worker to wage-labor 
for life. Antagonism between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie.

B. Growing predominance and increasing effectiveness of the laws governing the production of 
commodities. Unbridled competition. Contradiction between socialized organization in the individual 
factory and social anarchy in the production as a whole.

C. On the one hand, perfecting of machinery, made by competition compulsory for each individual 
manufacturer, and complemented by a constantly growing displacement of laborers. Industrial 
reserve-army. On the other hand, unlimited extension of production, also compulsory under 
competition, for every manufacturer. On both sides, unheard-of development of productive forces, 
excess of supply over demand, over-production and
products a€” excess there, of laborers, without employment and without means of existence. But 
these two levers of production and of social well-being are unable to work together, because the 
capitalist form of production prevents the productive forces from working and the products from 
circulating, unless they are first turned into capital a€” which their very superabundance 
prevents. The contradiction has grown into an absurdity.
The mode of production rises in rebellion against the form of exchange.

D. Partial recognition of the social character of the productive forces forced upon the capitalists 
themselves. Taking over of the great institutions for production and communication, first by 
joint-stock companies, later in by trusts, then by the State. The bourgeoisie demonstrated to be a 
superfluous class. All its social functions are now performed by salaried employees.

HL Proletarian Revolution a€” Solution of the contradictions. The proletariat seizes the public 
power, and by means of this transforms the socialized means of production, slipping from the hands 
of the bourgeoisie, into public property. By this act, the proletariat frees the means of 
production from the character of capital they have thus far borne, and gives their socialized 
character complete freedom to work itself out. Socialized
production upon a predetermined plan becomes henceforth possible. The development of production 
makes the existence of different classes of society thenceforth an anachronism. In proportion as 
anarchy in social production vanishes, the political authority of the State dies out. Man, at last 
the master of his own form of social organization, becomes at the same time the lord over Nature, 
his own master a€” free.

To accomplish this act of universal emancipation is the historical mission of the modern 
proletariat. To thoroughly comprehend the historical conditions and thus the very nature of this 
act, to impart to the now oppressed proletarian class a full knowledge of the conditions and of the 
meaning of the momentous act it is called upon to accomplish, this is the task of the theoretical 
expression of the proletarian movement, scientific Socialism.

Notes

1. Mephistopheles in Goethe's Faust

2. It is hardly necessary in this connection to point out that, even if the form of appropriation 
remains the same, the character of the appropriation is just as much revolutionized as production 
is by the changes described above. It is, of course, a very different matter whether I appropriate 
to myself my own product or that of another. Note in passing that wage-labor, which contains the 
whole capitalist mode of production in embryo, is very
ancient; in a sporadic, scattered form, it existed for centuries alongside slave-labor. But the 
embryo could duly develop into the capitalistic mode of production only when the necessary 
historical pre-conditions had been furnished.

3. "The Conditions of the Working-Class in England" a€” Sonnenschein & Co., p.84.

4.1 say "have to". For only when the means of production and distribution have actually outgrown 
the form of management by joint-stock companies, and when, therefore, the taking them over by the 
State has become economically inevitable, only then a€” even if it is the State of today that 
effects this a€” is there an economic advance, the attainment of another step preliminary to the 
taking over of all productive forces by society
itself. But of late, since Bismarck went in for State-ownership of industrial establishments, a 
kind of spurious Socialism has arisen, degenerating, now and again, into something of flunkyism, 
that without more ado declares all State-ownership, even of the Bismarkian sort, to be socialistic. 
Certainly, if the taking over by the State of the tobacco industry is socialistic, then Napoleon 
and Metternich must be numbered among the founders of
Socialism.

If the Belgian State, for quite ordinary political and financial reasons, itself constructed its 
chief railway lines; if Bismarck, not under any economic compulsion, took over for the State the 
chief Prussian lines, simply to be the better able to have them in hand in case of war, to bring up 
the railway employees as voting cattle for the Government, and especially to create for himself a 
new source of income independent of parliamentary votes
a€” this was, in no sense, a socialistic measure, directly or indirectly, consciously or 
unconsciously. Otherwise, the Royal Maritime Company, the Royal porcelain manufacture, and even the 
regimental tailor of the army would also be socialistic institutions, or even, as was seriously 
proposed by a sly dog in Frederick William Ill's reign, the taking over by the State of the 
brothels.

5. A few figures may serve to give an approximate idea of the enormous expansive force of the 
modern means of production, even under capitalist pressure. According to Mr. Giffen, the total 
wealth of Great Britain and Ireland amounted, in round numbers in
1814 to A£ 2,200,000,000,

1865 to A£ 6,100,000,000,

1875 to A£ 8,500,000,000.

As an instance of the squandering of means of production and of products during a crisis, the total 
loss in the German iron industry alone, in the crisis of 1873-78, was given at the second German 
Industrial Congress (Berlin, February 21,1878), as 22,750,000 pounds.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Whilst the capitalist mode of production more and more completely transforms the great majority of 
the population into proletarians, it creates the power which, under penalty of its own destruction, 
is forced to accomplish this revolution. Whilst it forces on more and more of the transformation of 
the vast means of production, already socialized, into State property, it shows itself the way to 
accomplishing this revolution. The proletariat
seizes political power and turns the means of production into State property.

But, in doing this, it abolishes itself as proletariat, abolishes all class distinction and class 
antagonisms, abolishes also the State as State. Society, thus far, based upon class antagonisms, 
had need of the State. That is, of an organization of the particular class which was, pro tempore, 
the exploiting class, an organization for the purpose of preventing any interference from without 
with the existing conditions of production, and, therefore,
especially, for the purpose of forcibly keeping the exploited classes in the condition of 
oppression corresponding with the given mode of production (slavery, serfdom, wage-labor). The 
State was the official representative of society as a whole; the gathering of it together into a 
visible embodiment. But, it was this only in so far as it was the State of that class which itself 
represented, for the time being, society as a whole:

in ancient times, the State of slaveowning citizens;
in the Middle Ages, the feudal lords;

in our own times, the bourgeoisie.

When, at last, it becomes the real representative of the whole of society, it renders itself 
unnecessary. As soon as there is no longer any social class to be held in subjection; as soon as 
class rule, and the individual struggle for existence based upon our present anarchy in production, 
with the collisions and excesses arising from these, are removed, nothing more remains to be 
repressed, and a special repressive force, a State, is no longer
necessary. The first act by virtue of which the State really constitutes itself the representative 
of the whole of society a€” the taking possession of the means of production in the name of society 
a€” this is, at the same time, its last independent act as a State. State interference in social 
relations becomes, in one domain after another, superfluous, and then dies out of itself; the 
government of persons is replaced by the administration of
things,  and by the conduct of processes of production. The State is not "abolished". It dies out. 
This gives the measure of the value of the phrase: "a free State", both as to its justifiable use 
at times by agitators, and as to its ultimate scientific insufficiency; and also of the demands of 
the so-called anarchists for the abolition of the State out of hand.

Since the historical appearance of the capitalist mode of production, the appropriation by society 
of all the means of production has often been dreamed of, more or less vaguely, by individuals, as 
well as by sects, as the ideal of the future. But it could become possible, could become a 
historical necessity, only when the actual conditions for its realization were there. Like every 
other social advance, it becomes practicable, not by men
understanding that the existence of classes is in contradiction to justice, equality, etc., not by 
the mere willingness to abolish these classes, but by virtue of certain new economic conditions. 
The separation of society into an exploiting and an exploited class, a ruling and an oppressed 
class, was the necessary consequences of the deficient and restricted development of production in 
former times. So long as the total social labor only yields
a   produce which but slightly exceeds that barely necessary for the existence of all; so long, 
therefore, as labor engages all or almost all the time of the great majority of the members of 
society a€” so long, of necessity, this society is divided into classes. Side by side with the 
great majority, exclusively bond slaves to labor, arises a class freed from directly productive 
labor, which looks after the general affairs of society: the direction of
labor, State business, law, science, art, etc. It is, therefore, the law of division of labor that 
lies at the basis of the division into classes. But this does not prevent this division into 
classes from being carried out by means of violence and robbery, trickery and fraud, it does not 
prevent the ruling class, once having the upper hand, from consolidating its power at the expense 
of the working-class, from turning its social leadership into an
intensified exploitation of the masses.

But if, upon this showing, division into classes has a certain historical justification, it has 
this only for a given period, only under given social conditions. It was based upon the 
insufficiency of production. It will be swept away by the complete development of modern productive 
forces. And, in fact, the abolition of classes in society presupposes a degree of historical 
evolution at which the existence, not simply of this or that particular
ruling class, but of any ruling class at all, and, therefore, the existence of class distinction 
itself, has become a obsolete anachronism. It presupposes, therefore, the development of production 
carried out to a degree at which appropriation of the means of production and of the products, and, 
with this, of political domination, of the monopoly of culture, and of intellectual leadership by a 
particular class of society, has become not only
superfluous but economically, politically, intellectually, a hindrance to development.

This point is now reached. Their political and intellectual bankruptcy is scarcely any longer a 
secret to the bourgeoisie themselves. Their economic bankruptcy recurs regularly every 10 years. In 
every crisis, society is suffocated beneath the weight of its own productive forces and products, 
which it cannot use, and stands helpless, face-to-face with the absurd contradiction that the 
producers have nothing to consume, because consumers
are wanting. The expansive force of the means of production bursts the bonds that the capitalist 
mode of production had imposed upon them. Their deliverance from these bonds is the one 
precondition for an unbroken, constantly-accelerated development of the productive forces, and 
therewith for a practically unlimited increase of production itself. Nor is this all. The 
socialized appropriation of the means of production does away, not
only with the present artificial restrictions upon production, but also with the positive waste and 
devastation of productive forces and products that are at the present time the inevitable 
concomitants of production, and that reach their height in the crises. Further, it sets free for 
the community at large a mass of means of production and of products, by doing away with the 
senseless extravagance of the ruling classes of today, and their
political representatives. The possibility of securing for every member of society, by means of 
socialized production, an existence not only fully sufficient materially, and becoming day-by-day 
more full, but an existence guaranteeing to all the free development and exercise of their physical 
and mental faculties a€” this possibility is now, for the first time, here, but it is here. [5]

With the seizing of the means of production by society, production of commodities is done away 
with, and, simultaneously, the mastery of the product over the producer. Anarchy in social 
production is replaced by systematic, definite organization. The struggle for individual existence 
disappears. Then, for the first time, man, in a certain sense, is finally marked off from the rest 
of the animal kingdom, and emerges from mere animal
conditions of existence into really human ones. The whole sphere of the conditions of fife which 
environ man, and which have hitherto ruled man, now comes under the dominion and control of man, 
who for the first time becomes the real, conscious lord of nature, because he has now become master 
of his own social organization. The laws of his own social action, hitherto standing face-to-face 
with man as laws of Nature foreign to, and
dominating him, will then be used with full understanding, and so mastered by him. Man's own social 
organization, hitherto confronting him as a necessity imposed by Nature and history, now becomes 
the result of his own free action. The extraneous objective forces that have, hitherto, governed 
history,pass under the control of man himself. Only from that time will man himself, more and more 
consciously, make his own history a€”
only   from that time will the social causes set in movement by him have, in the main and in a 
constantly growing measure, the results intended by him. It is the ascent of man from the kingdom 
of necessity to the kingdom of freedom.

Let us briefly sum up our sketch of historical evolution.

I. Mediaeval Society a€” Individual production on a small scale. Means of production adapted for 
individual use; hence primitive, ungainly, petty, dwarfed in action. Production for immediate 
consumption, either of the producer himself or his feudal lord. Only where an excess of production 
over this consumption occurs is such excess offered for sale, enters into exchange. Production of 
commodities, therefore, only in its infancy. But
already it contains within itself, in embryo, anarchy in the production of society at large.

n. Capitalist Revolution a€” transformation of industry, at first be means of simple cooperation 
and manufacture. Concentration of the means of production, hitherto scattered, into great 
workshops. As a consequence, their transformation from individual to social means of production a€” 
a transformation which does not, on the whole, affect the form of exchange. The old forms of 
appropriation remain in force. The capitalist appears.
In his capacity as owner of the means of production, he also appropriates the products and turns 
them into commodities. Production has become a social act. Exchange and appropriation continue to 
be individual acts, the acts of individuals. The social product is appropriated by the individual 
capitalist. Fundamental contradiction, whence arise all the contradictions in which our present-day 
society moves, and which modern industry
brings to light.

A. Severance of the producer from the means of production. Condemnation of the worker to wage-labor 
for life. Antagonism between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie.

B. Growing predominance and increasing effectiveness of the laws governing the production of 
commodities. Unbridled competition. Contradiction between socialized organization in the individual 
factory and social anarchy in the production as a whole.

C. On the one hand, perfecting of machinery, made by competition compulsory for each individual 
manufacturer, and complemented by a constantly growing displacement of laborers. Industrial 
reserve-army. On the other hand, unlimited extension of production, also compulsory under 
competition, for every manufacturer. On both sides, unheard-of development of productive forces, 
excess of supply over demand, over-production and
products a€” excess there, of laborers, without employment and without means of existence. But 
these two levers of production and of social well-being are unable to work together, because the 
capitalist form of production prevents the productive forces from working and the products from 
circulating, unless they are first turned into capital a€” which their very superabundance 
prevents. The contradiction has grown into an absurdity.
The mode of production rises in rebellion against the form of exchange.

D. Partial recognition of the social character of the productive forces forced upon the capitalists 
themselves. Taking over of the great institutions for production and communication, first by 
joint-stock companies, later in by trusts, then by the State. The bourgeoisie demonstrated to be a 
superfluous class. All its social functions are now performed by salaried employees.

HL Proletarian Revolution a€” Solution of the contradictions. The proletariat seizes the public 
power, and by means of this transforms the socialized means of production, slipping from the hands 
of the bourgeoisie, into public property. By this act, the proletariat frees the means of 
production from the character of capital they have thus far borne, and gives their socialized 
character complete freedom to work itself out. Socialized
production upon a predetermined plan becomes henceforth possible. The development of production 
makes the existence of different classes of society thenceforth an anachronism. In proportion as 
anarchy in social production vanishes, the political authority of the State dies out. Man, at last 
the master of his own form of social organization, becomes at the same time the lord over Nature, 
his own master a€” free.

To accomplish this act of universal emancipation is the historical mission of the modern 
proletariat. To thoroughly comprehend the historical conditions and thus the very nature of this 
act, to impart to the now oppressed proletarian class a full knowledge of the conditions and of the 
meaning of the momentous act it is called upon to accomplish, this is the task of the theoretical 
expression of the proletarian movement, scientific Socialism.

Notes

1. Mephistopheles in Goethe's Faust

2. It is hardly necessary in this connection to point out that, even if the form of appropriation 
remains the same, the character of the appropriation is just as much revolutionized as production 
is by the changes described above. It is, of course, a very different matter whether I appropriate 
to myself my own product or that of another. Note in passing that wage-labor, which contains the 
whole capitalist mode of production in embryo, is very
ancient; in a sporadic, scattered form, it existed for centuries alongside slave-labor. But the 
embryo could duly develop into the capitalistic mode of production only when the necessary 
historical pre-conditions had been furnished.

3. "The Conditions of the Working-Class in England" a€” Sonnenschein & Co., p.84.

4.1 say "have to". For only when the means of production and distribution have actually outgrown 
the form of management by joint-stock companies, and when, therefore, the taking them over by the 
State has become economically inevitable, only then a€” even if it is the State of today that 
effects this a€” is there an economic advance, the attainment of another step preliminary to the 
taking over of all productive forces by society

itself. But of late, since Bismarck went in for State-ownership of industrial establishments, a 
kind of spurious Socialism has arisen, degenerating, now and again, into something of flunkyism, 
that without more ado declares all State-ownership, even of the Bismarkian sort, to be socialistic. 
Certainly, if the taking over by the State of the tobacco industry is socialistic, then Napoleon 
and Metternich must be numbered among the founders of
Socialism.

If the Belgian State, for quite ordinary political and financial reasons, itself constructed its 
chief railway lines; if Bismarck, not under any economic compulsion, took over for the State the 
chief Prussian lines, simply to be the better able to have them in hand in case of war, to bring up 
the railway employees as voting cattle for the Government, and especially to create for himself a 
new source of income independent of parliamentary votes
a€” this was, in no sense, a socialistic measure, directly or indirectly, consciously or 
unconsciously. Otherwise, the Royal Maritime Company, the Royal porcelain manufacture, and even the 
regimental tailor of the army would also be socialistic institutions, or even, as was seriously 
proposed by a sly dog in Frederick William Ill's reign, the taking over by the State of the 
brothels.

5. A few figures may serve to give an approximate idea of the enormous expansive force of the 
modern means of production, even under capitalist pressure. According to Mr. Giffen, the total 
wealth of Great Britain and Ireland amounted, in round numbers in
1814 to A£ 2,200,000,000,

1865 to A£ 6,100,000,000,

1875 to A£ 8,500,000,000.

As an instance of the squandering of means of production and of products during a crisis, the total 
loss in the German iron industry alone, in the crisis of 1873-78, was given at the second German 
Industrial Congress (Berlin, February 21,1878), as 22,750,000 pounds.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

