Subscribe now

FIRST: Where Is My Political Party?

Why is there no democratic party infrastructure? Why is there only a network of semi-grifter 
consultants sending me panicked fundraising emails of which they get an excessive cut?

Micah Sifry: Messaging Wona€™ t Save Democrats; Community Might. a€~Lux and his colleagues founda€! 
populist economics: tax the rich, hammer corporations for price gouging and profiteering, bring 
jobs home, help small businesses against corporate monopolies are all themes that resonate and also 
offer an answer to voter concerns about rising inflationa€!. These voters are sick of a€oepartisan 
bickeringa€n and not receptive to
political messages from either parta€!. This rings true to me. Politics as it is practiced today, 
in the form of messaging wars on television and online, is just too far from most peoplea€™ s 
livesa€!. a€oeCandidates and party committees should be spending time doing things like sponsoring 
community events like [Ohio Senator] Sherrod Browna€™ s a€~movie nights,a€™ which he does in the 
old movie theaters of Ohioa€™ s mid-sized
towns, where the theme is to build community spirit and togetherness. Or they could set up events 
that were community health clinics where people come in and get health care assistance that they 
couldna€™ t otherwise afford. Or Chautauqua style events, where musicians, community theater 
performers, poets, and community organizations spend a day in a community.a€D Even better, Ia€™ d 
add, instead of opening campaign offices
for   a few weeks, stocking them with fresh-faced volunteers from out of town, and then closing as 
soon as the election is over, Democrats could invest in year-round community centers like the union 
halls of old, where people gathered to socialize, have a beer and talk politics. Unfortunately, Lux 
is a rarity among his colleagues. I dona€™ t think Democrats are likely to shift the tens of 
millions of dollars they now have slotted for
expensive ad campaigns this fall into community fairs or mutual aid programs. They a€™ re going to 
keep doing what theya€™ ve always done and pray for a different resulta€!

LINK: <https://micahsifry.medium.com/messaging-wont-save-democrats-community-might-7d802154b433>

The communications Ia€”Ia€”get from people who position themselves as members of the Democratic 
Party are, typically, things like this:

A-pp WOW WOW WOW || TEAM AEC <info@abolishtheelectoralcollegepac.org>                  ••• 9:03am
to brad.delong@gmail.com <delong@econ.berkeley.edu>

WOW WOW WOW: Robert Reich is leading the charge to
ABOLISH the Electoral College -

U

We must abolish

the Electoral College."

ROCH

AGREE OR DISAGREE:

“THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE SHOULD BE ABOLISHED”

YES! I AGREE WITH
ROBERT REICH! »

NO! I DO NOT AGREE WITH
ROBERT REICH! »

UNSURE »

RESPONSE MISSING!

•• PUUOX SUMMIT YOUR RK3PCMSX BY ll:S» PM TO XMSUR1C TMOIATIOW ACCURACY ••

In 2016, the Electoral College did its job: it put an anti-democracy radical into
office without popular support.

And it nearly did it again in 2020. Donald Trump was INCHES from being re*
elected!

LUCKILY. pro*democracy Democrats like Robert Reich are leading the charge
to abolish the Electoral College!

BUT: we have ZERO idea what Democrats in Missouri think, so wo
selected YOU to represent 6*113 for this urgent Hash poll, CLICK HERE
OR BELOW TO BEGIN:

AGREE OR DISAGREE:


A fundraising emaila€”and I screen all of these out. But there is one set I dona€™ t: once I missed 
an email from the excellent Ohio Senator Sherrod Brown because I had screened out @ 
sherrodbrown.com (and if my brother had not warned me that the excellent Colorado Senator Michael 
Bennet was looking to talk to me, I would have missed one from him as well. But what does Sherrod 
Brown send me? This:

Sherrod Brown

info@sherrodbrown.com

A Not notifying *  Delivering to Imbox          Autofile in...


All threads with Sherrod Brown C

gg I'm personally asking for your help, James O881

Sherrod Brown - before the end of the day With the Supreme Court about to hand down decisions on 
ever...

gB Virtually tied C®SB

Team Sherrod - in the OH-SEN race Ohio's Senate race is VIRTUALLY TIED. If we're going to make sure 
pe...

Tammy Duckworth C.®SB

Sherrod Brown - We can't afford to lose this race » Chicago Tribune: "Seven GOP Candidates Vie to 
Fac...

( + Write

Jun 14

Jun 14

Jun 13


SB  we i leeu LU idiK duuui iNevdUd, Udi i les w" ”

Sherrod Brown - We can't afford to lose this one. » Polls show my friend Senator Catherine Cortez 
Masto...

SB  Thank you, James C"SB

Sherrod Brown - for being part of our movement Thank you to everyone who made contributions last 
month...

My final ask CCS

Sherrod Brown - before the deadline This month, we celebrated a lot of exciting primary wins in 
Ohio. We ...

SB  Short email <“>88

Team Sherrod - after the long weekend We're coming off a long weekend and if your inbox is anything 
like...

the holiday weekend “>

Sherrod Brown - We can't slow down. Our grassroots organization depends on it. The end-of-month 
dea...

The Pennsylvania Senate race C®SB

Sherrod Brown - This race is crucial. » Yahoo News: "Fetterman wins Democratic nomination for 
Senate...

North Carolina Senate race €>“88

Sherrod Brown - I'll start with the good news... I have good and bad news about the North Carolina 
Senat...

gB The OH-SEN race is neck and neck OSB

. Team Sherrod - Vance is wrong for Ohio. Here's something you can do about it. » Polls show Tim 
Ryan a...

Jun 10

Jun 1

May 31

May 31

May 29

May 23

May 22

May 21

BB About Roe OSB                                                                                    
       Mav17


Sherrod Brown - Progress doesn't roll in on the wheels of inevitability. It happens because we make 
it hap...

gB I need your help to stop J.D. Vance O88

Sherrod Brown - Ohio is 1 of the 10 seats most likely to flip Ohio's Senate race is one of 10 that 
are most li...

eo Donald Trump. Marjorie Taylor Greene. Josh Hawley. Matt Gaetz. Dark-money g... SB

SherrodBrown.com - The OH-SEN race is taking shape. Cleveland.com: "J.D. Vance wins GOP primary 
for...

May 16

May 15

Thisa€l does not make me feel close to the party. But there is no way for me to order much more 
like this:

We wanted to share with you a letter that the President is sending today to the CEOs of the largest 
refining companies in the United States.
The letter is attached.

We have three main goals with sending the letter:

• To further reinforce that the increase in gas prices in recent months has two main causes: first 
and most importantly, disruptions to
global oil markets caused by Putin's aggression in Ukraine, and second, record profit margins for 
refiners that substantially reduced
capacity during the pandemic—and who have not brought capacity back online despite a resurgence in 
demand.

• To send a market signal that, as part of his top economic priority of addressing inflation, the 
President is focused on doing everything
he can to boost energy supply in the near-term and is open to using all appropriate tools and 
emergency authorities to accomplish


xl • I -rl i i _ 1                      J •                    1 •                 _ • I xl ♦       
         -7 1 nnd n xl r- i A

? x _ i i r* • I

1 xJ Til L?x _                       I



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Image:

The top 10 global wheat exporters of 2021/2022

Millions of metric tons of wheat exported in trade years 2021/2022 and 2022/2023.

> 2021/2022 1 2022/2023

40     39


Russia European Australia United Ukraine Argentina Canada India Kazakhstan Turkey
Union    States

Data is from the most recent edition of the USDA's Wheat Outlook report series, released in May 
2022.

Chart: Milan Singh for Slow Boring • Source: US Department of Agriculture • Created with 
Datawrapper

Very Briefly Noted:

• W. Stanley Jevons (1865): The Coal Question <https://archive.org/details/in.ernet 
.dli.2015.224624/page/n36/mode/1 up?view=theater>

•  Alex Shephard: The January 6 Committee Is Telling a More Honest Story About Trump Than the Media 
Has:a€.™ The larger story ita€™ s telling about Trumpa€™ s plot to steal the election is much more 
important than supplying a steady diet of fresh scoopsa€l 
<https://newrepubhc.com/article/166819/ianuarv-6-committee-media-scoops>

• Stephen Holmes & Ivan Krastev: The Light That Failed: Why the West Is Losing the Fight for 
Democracy <https://www.amazon.com/Light-That-Failed-Losing-Democracy-ebook/dp/B07VWLlV3Z/>

• Francis Fukuyama: Liberalism & Its Discontents 
<https://www.amazon.com/Liberalism-Its-Discontents-Francis-Fukuyama-ebook/dp/B09DBDMGMR/>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

*      Pattie • Tho       Rm/J TtaT     thinlrc thArA ic a VArv <rnnd nhannA th nt C’hina will <TAt 
naiKrht in tkiA midrllA-innnmA tran I am nnt CIITA what th A mirlrll A.inpnmp tran ic hilt whatAVAr 
it ic T acrrAA with himS^! Ac th A C'hinACA AAnnnmv dnwc charnlv in th A pnmina x/Aarc thic will hA 
intAmrAtArl hv manv tn mAan that PAiiincr rlirlna^™ f rAarl pnnnnh IVfiltnn PriArlman whprpac in fa 
nt th A nrnhlAm ac T CAA it ic that WA all HiHna^?™ f rAarl


enough Albert Hirschmana€! LINK:

Michael Pettis @michaelxpettis

1/7 The very smart Brad DeLong (whose new book I am eager to read) thinks there is a very good 
chance that China will get caught in the middle-income trap. I am not sure what the middle-income 
trap is, but whatever it is, I agree with him. @ delong

braddelong .sub stack .comChinaa€™ s Likely Trajectory in Xi Jinpinga€™ s Third Term, &BRIEFLY 
NOTED: For 2022-06-03 Fr
4:21 PM r™ Jun 6,2022

306Likes77Retweets
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription


Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

