
I do like the way that Stable Diffusion has put Pentocostal tongues of fire as the pennants on the 
Mayflower. Of course, it has no idea what it has done, or what doing that might meana€!

Subscribe now

FOCUS: a€oeAzey Knew Azey Were Pilgrimes, & Looked Not Much on Azose things, But Lift Up Azeir Hyes 
to A%e heavens, Azeir Dearest Cuntriea€!a€D

From Great-Great-Great-Great-Great-Great-Great-Great-Great-Grandfather William:

William Bradford: History of Plimoth Plantation: a€~At length, after much travell and these debats, 
all things were got ready and provided. A smale ship was bought, & fitted in Holand, which was 
intended as to serve to help to transport them, so to stay in A34e cuntrie and atend upon fishing 
and shuch other affairs as might be for AMe good
& benefite of A^e colonie when they came ther. Another was hired at London, of burden about 9. 
score; and all other things gott in readines.

So being ready to departe, AMey had a day of solleme humiliation, their pastor taking his texte 
from Ezra 8. 21. And A?Aer at KAe river, by Ahava, I proclaimed a fast, that we might humble 
ourselves before our God, and seeke of him a right way for us, and for our children, and for all 
our substance. Upon which he spente a good parte of
A34e day very profitably, and suitable to their presente occasion. Aze rest of the time was spente 
in powering out prairs to A34e Lord with great fervencie, mixed with abundance of tears.

And A34e time being come that A34ey must departe, AMey were accompanied with most of their brethren 
out of A34e citie, unto a towne sundrie miles of called Delfes-Haven, wher the ship lay ready to 
receive them. So A34ey lefte A%t goodly & pleasante citie, which had been A34er resting place near 
12. years; but they knew they were
pilgrimes, & looked not much on those things, but lift up their eyes to A3%e heavens, A^eir dearest 
cuntrie, and quieted AMeir spirits.

When A34ey came to A34e place AMey found A34e ship and all things ready; and shuch of AMeir freinds 
as could not come wiA% AMem followed after A34em, and sundrie also came from Amsterdame to see 
A34em shipte and to takeAMheir leave of A34em. Azt night was spent wiA34 litle sleepe by A3%e most, 
but wiA34 freindly
entertainmente & Christian discourse and other reall expressions of true Christian love. Aze next 
day, the wind being faire, A34ey wente aborde, and AMeir freinds with them, where truly dolfull was 
A34e sight of A34t sade and mournfull parting; to see what sighs and sobbs and praires did sound 
amongst AMem, what tears did gush from every
eye,    & pithy speeches peirst each harte; A%t sundry of A3%e Dutch strangers A%t stood on A34e 
key as spectators, could not refraine from tears. Yet comfortable & sweete it was to see shuch 
lively and true expressions of clear & unfained love.

But A34e tide (which stays for no man) caling them away A%t were thus loath to departe, A^eir 
Reved: pastor falling downe on his knees, (and A34ey all with him,) wiA34 watrie cheeks comended 
A%em wiA34 most fervente praiers to A34e Lord and his blessing. And A34en wiA% mutuall imbrases and 
many tears, A34ey tooke their leaves
one of an oAMer; which proved to be A3%e last leave to many of AMem...

Share

MUST-READ: Where Will Twitter Get A%e Antibodies to Protect Itself from Elon?

A good hypothesis for why MuskkeraC™ s spectacular ongoing flameout:

Number One Cat Winner: a€~I was an intern at SpaceX years ago, back it when it was a much smaller 
company a€” after Elon got hair plugs, but before his cult of personality was in full swing. I have 
some insight to offer here. Back when I was at SpaceX, Elon was basically a child king. He was an 
important figurehead who provided the
company with the money, power, and PR, but he didna€™ t have the knowledge or (frankly) maturity to 
handle day-to-day decision making and everyone knew that. He was surrounded by people whose job 
was, essentially, to manipulate him into making good decisions. Managing Elon was a huge part of 
the company culture. Even I, as a
lowly intern, would hear people talking about it openly in meetings. People knew how to present 
ideas in a way that would resonate with him, they knew how to creatively reinterpret (or ignore) 
his many insane demands, and they even knew how to a€oestage managea€D parts of the physical office 
space so that it would appeal to Elon. The
funniest example of a€oestage managementa€D I can remember is this dude on the IT security team. He 
had a script running in a terminal on one of his monitors that would output random garbage, 
Matrix-style, so that it always looked like he was doing Important Computer Things to anyone who 
walked by his desk. Second funniest was all
the people I saw playing WoW at their desks after ~5pm, who did it in the office just to give the 
appearance that they were working late.

People were willing to do that at SpaceX because Elon was giving them the money (and hype) to get 
into outer space, a mission people cared deeply about. The company also grew with and around Elon. 
There were layers of management between individual employees and Elon, and those managers were 
experienced managers o/Elon. Again,
I cannot stress enough how much of the company culture was oriented around managing this one guy.

Twitter has neither of those things going for it. There is no company culture or internal structure 
around the problem of managing Elon Musk, and I think for the first time wea€™re seeing what 
happens when people actually take that man seriously and at face value. Worse, theya€™ re doing 
this little experiment after this man has had
decades of success at companies that dedicate significant resources to protecting themselves from 
him, and hea€™ s too narcissistic to realize ita€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Bryce Elder: Further Reading: a€~A day will comea€’’probably a very distant day, but a day will 
come nonethelessa€”when you will be able to go an entire hour without having to think about Sam 
Bankman-Fried. Today, alas, will not be that daya€!

•  Theodore Schleifer: The Lost Gospel of S.B.F.: a€~S.B .F. aides once talked openly about a 
50-year campaign for influence that would transform the state of American politics and policya€!

•  TEBI: "Eight key takeaways from 20 years of SPIVA data: a€~Gross of fees, most active managers 
underperform most of the timea€!. Most institutional managers underperform most of the timea€!. 
When good performance does occur, it tends not to persist. Above-average past performance does not 
predict above-average future performance^!

•  David Roberts: a€'T'm increasingly of the mind that if you want to understand the (bizarre or 
seemingly irrational) behavior of powerful people, you have to figure out the character of their 
epistemic bubble. Who do they listen to? What do they hear?a€!

•  Anil Dash: a€~It's impossible to overstate how much the big tech CEOs and VCs are being 
radicalized by living within their own bubble. The level of paranoia and contrived victimization is 
off the charts, and they increasingly only consume media that they have funded, created by 
acolytesa€!

•  Dylan Matthews: How one man quietly stitched the American safety net over four decades: 
a€~Robert Greenstein isna€™ t a household name. But his career lobbying for the poor has changed 
the lives of millions of Americansa€!

•  Jerusalem Demsas: Housing Breaks Peoplea€™ s Brains: a€~Supply skepticism and shortage denialism 
are pushing against the actual solution to the housing crisis: building enough homesa€!

• Louis Ashworth: FTX: The Wallet Inspection...

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

AJs:

Tevi Troy: a€~For Profita€™ Review: From Medicis to Modern Corporations: a€~It is sometimes hard to 
know how corporations make any money. People with firsthand experience of them will tell you that 
they are bloated and overstaffed, with too many meetings and too few actionable decisions despite 
all the discussion. The truth isa€! the Fortune 500 had
aggregate sales of $37.8 trillion in 2021a€!. Making a product or providing a service that is 
bought by millions of people, if not billionsa€”and then selling it again and againa€”is a 
difficult one but amazingly profitable when it works. It is, appropriately, at the heart of William 
Magnusona€™ s For Profit: A History of Corporations^}. The history of business
matters. As Mr. Magnuson writes, corporations a€cehave always and ever exerted an outsize influence 
on world eventsa€Da€!

Need Advice: How are people buying these 10M+ houses?: a€~Feeling frustrated after years of hard 
work: I'm mid 30s male in Bay Area, Eng Director at FAANG. Was just starting to make good salary 
but stock has tanked and both net worth (down to ~2.5M) and income is severely down for me (bunch 
of my NW was still invested in my company and tech).
Meanwhile, I'm looking around the Bay Area and there are so many 10M+ houses, each of them being 
fantastic and very desirable. I've been a top 1% student and now a top 1%, high performing 
professional all my life. I've been hard working, bold, driven for as along as I can remember but 
now worry that I'll never be able to afford a house like these. I'm not even
sure    if I'm on the right patha€”don't know if even Senior Directors or VPs at FAANG can afford 
these even though they are so few in number and they are the very best compensated people in the 
world. Who are the people that are affording these mega rich homes and how are there so many of 
them (given there are so many of these lavish houses across the US)? I
would assume some of these are owned by businessmen and business families but are there so many 
successful big businesses in the world that they can account for ownership of all these lavish 
houses? I thought the chances of running a successful big business was just as rare as being big in 
any other field. Just feeling down and wondering if I'm on the wrong
patha€!

Zach Beauchamp: How the righta€™ s radical thinkers are coping with the midterms: a€~a€oePolitical 
horse-race types are predicting a GOP blowout in todaya€™ s midterm elections, and if it comes to 
pass, Democrats wona€™ t have much to blame beyond their own insanity,a€D Sohrab Ahmari, a leading 
New Right figure, wrote in an Election Day piece for
The American Conservative magazinea€! a€oedrag queen story hour,a€D masking in schoolsa€! 
a€oegender ideologuesa€da€! permissive immigration^!. a€oeThere is only so much of it the nation 
could tolerate,a€D Ahmari predicted. Two days later, after the voters rendered a different verdict, 
Ahmari penned a piece in the New York Times blaming the defeat
on the GOPa€™ s failure to embrace true populism: blasting the party for a€oeginning up outrage 
over a€~wokea€™ sensitivity trainings in the workplacea€D while remaining a€oeindifferent to issues 
like wages and workplace power.a€D Ahmaria€™ s pivot reflects the difficult spot that the New Right 
finds itselfa€!

Pallab Ghosh: Gold coin proves 'fake' Roman emperor was real: An ancient gold coin proves that a 
third century Roman emperor written out of history as a fictional character really did exist, 
scientists say: The face of Sponsian the first, who was purged from history by experts in the 
nineteenth century. Researchers have now established that he was a lost Roman
emperor. The coin bearing the name of Sponsian and his portrait was found more than 300 years ago 
in Transylvania, once a far-flung outpost of the Roman empire. Believed to be a fake, it had been 
locked away in a museum cupboard. Now scientists say scratch marks visible under a microscope prove 
that it was in circulation 2,000 years ago. Prof Paul Pearson
University College London, who led the research, told BBC News that he was astonished by the 
discoverya€!

Leave a comment


Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

