
Seven Paragraphs:

Francis Fukuyama: What Trump Showed Us About America: a€~The single most confounding thing about 
the Trump era is that we still do not really understand why more than 70 million Americans voted 
for Donald
Trump, and why there remains a smaller core of fanatical supporters who will believe anything he 
say sa€’’most recently, that he won the election but that it is being stolen through voter fraud. 
Over the past several years, a
legion                                                                                              
        of explanations for the Trump phenomenon have been put forwarda€”that it is a backlash 
against the inequalities created by globalization, that it represents the fear of white voters 
fearing a loss of power and prestige,
that is has been generated by social media companies, that it reflects a huge social divide between 
people living in big cities and those in smaller communities, that it is based on level of 
education, and so on. All of these
factors are probably true to some extent, but none of them adequately explains the fear and 
loathing evident on the right in America today. There is a qualitative change in the nature of 
partisanship that conventional
explanations fail to capture, reflected in poll data showing that a majority of Republican voters 
believe some version of QAnon theories about Democrats drinking childrena€™ s blood. Nor have I 
seen a good explanation for
why so many conservatives can see such an imperfect vessel as Trump as the object of cultlike 
worship, or fear the Democrats as the embodiment of Satan. At the end of Trumpa€™ s term, what Ia€™ 
ve learned is that I
really dona€™ t understand America well at alla€! LINK: 
<https://www.politico.com/news/magazine/2Q2Q/ll/19/roundup-what-trump-showed-us-about-america-435762
>

Friedrich A. von Hayek (1988): The Fatal Conceit: a€~I certainly reject every anthropomorphic, 
personal, or animistic interpretation of the term [god].a€! The conception of a man-like or 
mind-like acting being appears to
me rather the product of an arrogant overestimation of the capacities of a man-like minda€!. 
Perhaps what many people mean in speaking of God is just a personification of that tradition of 
morals or values that keeps their
community alive. The source of order that religion ascribes to a human-like divinitya€”the map or 
guide that will show a part successfully how to move within a wholea€”as we now learn to see to be 
not outside the physical
world  but one of its characteristics, one far too complex for any of its parts possibly to form an 
a€~imagea€™ or a€~picturea€™ of ita€!. Perhaps most people can conceive of abstract tradition only 
as a personal Will. If so,
will they not be inclined to find this will in a€~societya€™ in an age in which more overt 
supernaturalisms are ruled out as superstitions? On that question may rest the survival of our 
civilizationa€!

Karl Marx: Theories of Surplus-Value, Chapter 17: The Childish Babble of a Say: a€~Incidentally, 
those economists are no better, who (like John Stuart Mill) want to explain the crises by these 
simple possibilities of crisis
contained in the metamorphosis of commoditiesa€”such as the separation between purchase and sale. 
These factors which explain the possibility of crises, by no means explain their actual occurrence. 
They do not explain
why   the phases of the process come into such conflict that their inner unity can only assert 
itself through a crisis, through a violent process. This separation appears in the crisis; it is 
the elementary form of the crisis. To
explain the crisis on the basis of this, its elementary form, is to explain the existence of the 
crisis by describing its most abstract form, that is to say, to explain the crisis by the crisis. 
a€oeRicardo says: a€oeNo man produces,
but with a view to consume or sell, and he never sells, but with an intention to purchase some 
other commodity, which may be immediately useful to him, or which may contribute to future 
production. By producing, then, he
necessarily becomes either the consumer of his own goods, or the purchaser and consumer of the 
goods of some person. It is not to be supposed that be should, for any length of time, be 
ill-informed of the commodities

which he can most advantageously produce, to attain the object which he has in view, namely, the 
possession of other goods; and, therefore, it is not probable that he will continually produce a 
commodity for which there is no
demanda€D [l.c., pp. 339a€“40].a€D This is the childish babble of a Say, but it is not worthy of 
Ricardoa€! LINK: <https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1863/theories-surplus-value/ch 
17.htm>

Noah Smith: Welcome to Noahpinion: The Substack!: a€~Feels Good to be Blogging Again: a€~I started 
when I was a graduate student, continued during my years as an assistant professor, and then kept 
the blog going
intermittently after I started writing professionally for Bloomberg Opiniona€\ refine my 
thoughtsa€! develop a voicea€! connect with other[s]a€!. Over the past few years, though, my 
blogging dwindled, as I shifted more
and   more of my commentary to Twitter. Ita€™ s time to go back. Ia€™ m definitely not giving up my 
awesome job at Bloomberga€L But therea€™ s lots of stuff I want to write that I cana€™ t put in 
those op-ed columns,
and that stuff will all go herea€!. Twitter has become a dumpster fire of contentiousness, 
performativity, negativity, stupidity, and misinformation, and one solution is to go back to 
blogging. Blogs give readers time to digest
and think about ideas, without being interrupted by random shouters with little context and lots of 
agenda. And they allow writers to insert nuance and elaboration^! LINK: 
<https://noahpinion.substack.corn/p/welcome-to-
noahpinion-the-substack>

John Gruber: The Rotting of the American Mind: a€~Kevin Dowd revealed himself to be well on his way 
to Kookville: a€oeThe Democrats remain mystified by the loyalty of Trumpa€™ s base. It is rock 
solid because half
the country was tired of being patronized and lied to and worse, taken for granteda€!a€D Yes, yes, 
Trumpa€™ s base remains united behind him because theya€™rea€! tired of being lied to. Thata€™ s 
it. Ita€™ s certainly
not that theya€™re tired of being told truths they do not want to hear: a€oeA word of caution to 
Fox News: Your not-so-subtle shift leftward is a mistake. You are one of a kind. Watching the quick 
abdication of Bret Baier
and Martha MacCallum following the election (joining an already hostile Chris Wallace) was like 
finding out my wife was cheating.a€D This treachery that Kevin Dowd equates to his wife cheating on 
him was
acknowledging that Joe Biden soundly beat Donald Trump in the election. Thata€™ s not a leftward 
shift. Ita€™ s a statement of fact. A truth, inconvenient or nota€! LINK: 
<https://daringfireball.net/>

Bertrand Russell (1921): The Practice & Theory of Bolshevism: a€~The method by which Moscow aims at 
establishing Communism is a pioneer methoda€!. I do not believe that by this method a stable or 
desirable form of
Communism can be establisheda€!. I think these elements of failure are less attributable to faults 
of detail than to an impatient philosophy, which aims at creating a new world without sufficient 
preparation in the opinions and
feelings of ordinary men and womena€!. A fundamental economic reconstruction, bringing with it very 
far-reaching changes in ways of thinking and feeling, in philosophy and art and private relations, 
seems absolutely
necessary if industrialism is to become the servant of man instead of his master. In all this, I am 
at one with the Bolsheviks; politically, I criticize them only when their methods seem to involve a 
departure from their own
ideals. There is, however, another aspect of Bolshevism from which I differ more fundamentally. 
Bolshevism isa€! a religion, with elaborate dogmas and inspired scriptures. When Lenin wishes to 
prove some proposition, he
does so, if possible, by quoting texts from Marx and Engels. A full-fledged Communist is not merely 
a man who believes that land anda€! entertainsa€! elaborate and dogmatic beliefsa€! militant 
certainty about objectively
doubtful mattersa€!. I believe the scientific outlook to be immeasurably important to the human 
race. If a more just economic system were only attainable by closing mena€™ s minds against free 
inquiry, and plunging them
back into the intellectual prison of the middle ages, I should consider the price too higha€! LINK: 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/book-russell-1921-bolshevism.pdf>

WheatNOil: mRNA Vaccines: a€~The mRNA vaccinesa€! brilliant at a science levela€!. Scientists 
looked at the CO VID virus and saw a protein on the outside of the virus that looked like a good 
candidate to launch an
immune attack againsta€! the virusa€! uses that protein to get into your cellsa€! makes the 
virusa€! more of an assholea€!. So scientists took the blueprint for the asshole protein on CO VID 
and made an mRNA version of it.
Literally just the instructions on how to make that protein. These instructions a€oearea€D the 
vaccinea€I. You cana€™ t get infected with COVID from the vaccine. You just get these instructions. 
Your cells see these
instructions and say a€oesure, Ia€™ 11 make thisa€D. So your cells make a bunch of the asshole 
protein. You immune system sees this new protein youa€™re producing and immediately says 
a€oewhata€! the fa€”a€! is
this?a€D                                                                                            
         And it starts attacking the proteina€!. Your memory cells a€~remembera€™ the asshole 
protein. They remember exactly how to destroy it. By the way, your body breaks down the mRNA 
instructions that you got
with the vaccine pretty quickly too. Thata€™ s normal. You dona€™ t need a bunch of instructions 
hanging around forever. Your body breaks those down and gets rid of them. So youa€™ ve broken down 
the mRNA
instructions. Youa€™ ve destroyed asshole proteins. Everything from the vaccine is gone. Except for 
those memory cells who remember that protein very well. So then, a CO VID virus enters your body. 
Your body has never
seen the virus before. BUT ita€™ s seen that protein thata€™ s on the outside of the virus. Your 
memory cells say a€oeyoua€™ ve got to be kidding me, THIS asshole again? Get the fa€” out of 
here!a€D Your bodya€™ s
own a€~natural immune systema€™ quickly and efficiently launches an all out war, using the template 
it hasa€! LINK: <https://threadreaderapp.com/thread/1339624815137722368 .html>

