Subscribe now

The 2020-2022 COVID-19 plague caused by the coronavirus SARS-COVID-19 is, many today think, going 
to place the world economy in an odd position. For more than a quarter century now the ongoing 
revolution in data
processing and data communications technology has been profoundly altering the basic underpinnings 
of property and exchange and valuea€”has been shifting us from a a€cecommoditya€D to an 
a€ceattentiona€D
economy. We have all watched this shift gradually lurch forward. But now, many say, our two plague 
years are packing, in some aspects, what would have been at least a decade of change and 
development into two years, as
requirements of quarantine and social distancing have taught and humans have had to learn on an 
emergency basis how to better use information and communications technology to try to substitute 
for much face-to-face
interaction.

Share

I am, today, here to think out loud about whether this is true. If it is true, what it means. If it 
means much of anything, how should we react.

Let me first attempt to set out two ideal types: that of a commodity economya€”as set out by Adam 
Smith two and a half centuries ago in his Wealth of Nationsag” and that of the attention economy 
toward which we have
been moving.

In a commodity economy, in my image of it at least, things of value are concrete easily assay able 
commodities created for and then distributed via sale in competitive markets. The commodities are 
rival, excludible,
transparent, and as for coordination, market prices creating incentives directing small-scale 
producers are enough to solve coordination problems. In fact, the properly tuned market economy 
solves all the problems:

Because in a commodity economy the principal sources of value are rival goods, requiring people to 
pay prices for using them is a very good way to incentive-compatibly crowdsource the solution to 
the problem of how what
is produced is going to be distributed:

[willingness to pay] = [intensity of demand] x [social power (mediated through their wealth) of the 
demander].

That use of goods is also easily excludible makes it possible to implement such a price and market 
exchange-based system. Then, in addition, it immediately drops out that you have solve the problem 
of what should be
produced: whatever makes a profit should be produced. And as long as you are comfortable with the 
distribution among people of social power implicit in the distribution of wealth, and as long as 
Pigouvian externalities are
not widespreada€”and you can at least argue in favor of the powerful insights of Ronald Coase (or 
is it a dodge?) that it is possible to a€oecut property rights at the jointsa€D, so to speak, to 
all but eliminate transaction costs
and so make externalities truly de minimi sag” property, contract, and the market are what you 
need. What then is not to like?

Well, there may be information problemsa€’’adverse selection and moral hazard. Well, there is the 
question of whether the market and its prices are a thick enough communication channel to actually 
do the coordination of
human activity required to make production efficient. Well, there is the question of who is going 
to do the R&D, and what is the right amount of R&D to do. Well, there is the question of market 
power.

Of these the last, the problem of market power, was well-known to Adam Smitha€™ s generation. It 
was a major wellspring of his belief that only landlords should have the vote. The working 
classa€”even if a well­
functioning commercial society made it prosperous and comfortable, and even if the government took 
a hand to moderate the stultifying effects of the division of labor on the minds of the working 
class, and make no mistake:
Smith thought a sophisticated division of labor was both marvelously productive and appallingly 
stultifyinga€’’could not handle the required cognitive load of voting. And the mercantile and 
manufacturing classes would, if
given the vote, use it to have the government give them all monopolies. But landlords, Smith 
thought, had an interest both in general prosperity and in competitive markets.

Of these the next to last, the problem of R&D, was always an embarrassment.

At the start it was a minor embarrassment. Suppose that we are willing to make the brave guess that 
the efficiency-of-labor E in a Solow growth model is equal to the value of the stock of useful 
ideas discovered, developed,
and deployed in the world economy H times the square-root of natural resources R per worker L:

Then in Adam Smitha€™ s age, from 1500 to 1770, worldwide, the proportional rate of growth h of the 
value of the deployed-ideas stock H was 0.15%/year: less than 5% per generation; only 16% per 
century. Adam Smith
saw a world in which the density and sophistication of your commercial network and thus the 
fineness of your societal division of labor was much more important as a determinant of the 
efficiency-of-labor than was the
process of invention, innovation, development, and deployment. Indeed, he thought of those largely 
as immediate consequences of a fine division of labor, rather than as an independent force.

It was soon thereafter clear that that judgment was wrong for the future humanity was then moving 
into. Over 1770-1870 our h becomes 0.45%/year, worldwide. And starting in 1870 it has been 
approximately 2%: 4.5 times
its pace during the 1770-1870 Industrial Revolution century, 14 times its pace during the 1500-1770 
Imperial-Commercial Revolution era, (and 55 times its pace during the preceding 1-1500 Late 
Agrarian Age). By the 1840s
Friedrich Engels was dismissing classical economists as obvious paid shills for the rich because of 
their reduction of:

the production costs of a commodity... [to] three elements: the rent... the capital with its 
profit, and the wagesa€!. A factor which the economist does not think abouta€“I mean the mental 
element of
invention, of thoughta€l. What has the economist to do with inventiveness? Have not all inventions 
fallen into his lap without any effort on his part? Has one of them cost him anything? Why then
should   he bother about them in the calculation of production costs? Land, capital and labour are 
for him the conditions of wealth, and he requires nothing else. Science is no concern of his. What 
does
it matter to him that he has received its gifts through Berthollet, Davy, Liebig, Watt, Cartwright, 
etc.a€“gifts which have benefited him and his production immeasurably ?a€ I In a rational order 
which
has gone beyond the division of interests as it is found with the economist, the mental element 
certainly belongs among the elements of production and will find its place, too, in economics among 
the
costs of productiona€l. A single achievement of science like James Watta€™ s steam-engine has 
brought in more for the world in the first fifty years of its existence than the world has spent on 
the
promotion of science since the beginning of time...

As I say, it was an embarrassmenta€’’subsumed under Pivouvian externalities or discussed as 
requiring a tradeoff between static and dynamic efficiency via patent systems making legally 
excludible what was non-rival in is
essence. It was a sign that Smitha€™ s mental image of what was typical for a a€oecommodity 
economya€D was not describing reality, and was describing it less well as time passed.

How about information problems? They do not arisea€”mucha€”in a commodity economy because you are 
buying and selling concrete, visible, assayable things. Neither moral hazard nor adverse selection 
has much play.

And problems of coordination? The image of production in a commodity economy is of a small farmer, 
or a small craftsman, or the work of a small team. And, where necessary, the Coasian insighta€”or, 
again, is it a dodge?
a€”that Darwinian processes would let firms grow in size as long as their internal processes were 
more efficient than market coordination would have been, but then firm growth would stop, and to 
inquire into the workings of
firms was somebody elsea€™ s business.

That is the mental image of what is typical for a commodity economya€”the Weberian ideal-type. It 
is, of course, only an ideal-type. It was never an actual empirical reality. But it was close 
enough in Adam Smitha€™ s day
to guide a great deal of useful thought about economy and economic policy.

That, however, is past. What is future? What exactly, are we moving toward? Let me attempt to set 
out the ideal type of an attention economy, more-or-less by simply reversing the polarity on a 
a€cecommodity economya€D
under the four headings: excludability, rivalry, transparency, and coordination.

In a commodity economy the things of valuea€”the goods that people wanta€”are concrete objects 
useful to them that are both rival (hence you a€oeshoulda€D in some sense pay a price for using 
them) and excludible
(hence you can straightforwardly be charged a price for access). In an attention economy the things 
of valuea€”the things that you can be led to pay attention to, and would be willing in the abstract 
to pay fora€”are neither.
Hence, on the one hand, you a€oeshoulda€D in some sense have access to them for free. And, on a 
second hand, you should be offered great variety conforming to your taste, because it is no longer 
make-one use-one, it is
write-once run-everywhere. But how is such a system of creators and attention-payers to be 
sustained when you cannot charge directly for what people find valuable in terms of what they want 
to pay attention to? You must,
somehow, sell something ancillary that is not itself an attention good that you can somehow bundle 
with the attention good, and often this will take the form of a side-channel that can be 
manipulated to get them to direct
attention elsewhere, for people who think that they can profit from it.

In an attention economy information problems are not just a complication or a distraction, they are 
at the essence. You cannot know what you are consuming before you do so. Once you have learned what 
it is, you have
already paid attention to it, and your part of the economic cycle is done. This seems likely to 
lead to a world in which reputation and branding are of overwhelming importance: since I cannot 
know what it is before I make my
decision to pay attention to it or not, a natural heuristic will be: is this channel one that I 
have found it worthwhile to pay attention to in the past, or that has a warranty of quality from 
something I trust?

This will, I think, lead repeatedly to the dominance of platforms and aggregatorsa€”of all kinds.

Plus there is the problem that human attention is not human utility, not to mention not human 
flourishing. Looking at a lot of people I know, a number of them would really be much happier and 
much more well-balanced if
Facebook had never existed. The sharp Matthew Yglesias has, I think, a good take:

Matthew Yglesias: d€ceFutured€ce & the Future of Media’. a€~Content distributional is mediated via 
Googlea€l Facebook, anda€l lessera€l smaller networks like Twitter. Alla€l especially
Facebooka€! deci[ded]a€! to give maximum visibility to content that is maximally engaginga€l. 
Engagement-maximization mostly boosts rightwing populists pushing pessimistic negative-sum
worldviews while giving a secondary boost to leftwing populists pushing a different set of 
pessimistic negative-sum worldviews. Oops!a€! <https://www.slowboring.eom/p/future-media>

People who are prosperousa€”even richa€”in a material sense, and who are definitely engaged, but in 
a way that makes them extremely unhappy, and dangerous to their fellows who happen to look 
different, speak different,
get labeled as different, and simply happen to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.

Thpn th AKA ic th A miActinn nf th A pnnrrlinQtinn nrnhlpm in an ottAntinn ppnnntmz RarV in thA 
pnmmndihz Annnnmxz thA nrinA mArhanicm WQC on firlAniicitA pAmmiinipatinnc nhcinnAl hAAtnicA th A 
dAtciilc                            thA cnAnifi A at inn ahmit



Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

