Subscribe now

First:

This is, I think, by far the most important thing today. It would be one thing if Facebook has not 
yet figured out how to create frameworks and algorithms in which people are their better selves as 
they decide what to engage with and what to look at next.

It is quite another thing that Facebooka€™ s highest executives are in there actively cheering and 
creating space for people who deny that mass child murders ever actually happened. Zuckerberg needs 
to go. Or Facebook needs to go. And maybe, by this point, it needs to be not a€ceora€D but 
a€ceanda€D:

Ryan Mac & Craig Silverman: a€oeMark [Zuckerberg] Changed The Rulesa€\ZJ How Facebook Went Easy On 
Alex Jones And Other Right-Wing Figures: a€~Joel Kaplana€™ s Policy Team Sways Big Facebook 
Decisions Like Alex Jones Ban: Facebooka€™ s rules to combat misinformation and hate speech are 
subject to the whims and political considerations of its CEO and his policy team leader: In April 
2019, Facebook was preparing to ban
one of the interneta€™ s most notorious spreaders of misinformation and hate, Infowars founder Alex 
Jones. Then CEO Mark Zuckerberg personally intervened. Jones had gained infamy for claiming that 
the 2012 Sandy Hook elementary school massacre was a a€oegiant hoax,a€D and that the teenage 
survivors of the 2018 Parkland shooting were a€oecrisis actors.a€D But Facebook had found that he 
was also relentlessly spreading hate against
various groups, including Muslims and trans people. That behavior qualified him for expulsion from 
the social network under the companya€™ s policies for a€oedangerous individuals and organizations 
,a€D which required Facebook to also remove any content that expressed a€oepraise or supporta€D for 
them. But Zuckerberg didna€™ t consider the Infowars founder to be a hate figurea€l

LINK: 
<https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/ryanmac/mark-zuckerberg-joel-kaplan-facebook-alex-jones>

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Jason Sanford: Baen Books Forum Being Used to Advocate for Political Violence: a€~ Author Tom 
Kratmana€! urge[d] Trump to a€oestart his own well-armed militiaa€!. [Trump should say] a€™ I can 
start the civil war with a stamp of my foot. Ia€™ ve refrained, so far, but you cannot count on 
that restraint under all circumstancesa€™ a€da€l LINK: <https ://www.patreon 
.com/posts/baen-books-forum-47582408>

• Miguel F. Morales: A a€oeNo Mathd€U\(but Seven-Part) Guide to Modern Quantum Mechanics I Ars 
Technica: a€~Welcome to a€oeThe curious observera€™ s guide to quantum mechanicsa€Da€“featuring 
particle/wave dualitya€l LINK: 
<https://arstechnica.com/science/2021/01/the-curious-observers-guide-to-quantum-mechanics/>

• Panmure House: Panmure House Prize <https 
://www.panmurehouse.org/programmes/panmure-house-prize/>

• Emily Atkin: Fox Is Lying About Wind Energy. These Brands Are Helping: a€~Fox News aired the 
fossil fuel industrya€™ s latest climate lie 128 times in 3 daysa€l LINK: 
<https://heated.world/p/fox-is-lving-about-wind-energv-these>

One Chart:

What was the Trumpist goal, aim, and point in not following the New Zealand or the Australia or the 
Taiwan or the South Korea strategya€’’lock down, scotch the virus, vigilantly shut down again at 
signs of trouble, and then reopen so we can have a somewhat-normal 2020? What was the gain? What 
was the win? What did they think the win would be?

Youyang Gu: a€™The strongest single variable Ia€™ve seen in being able to explain the severity of 
this most recent wave in each state. Not past infections/existing immunity, population density, 
racial makeup, latitude/weather/humidity, etc. But political leana€l LINK: 
<https://twitter.eom/vouvanggu/status/1362109363029225480>


Predictive power of

40

States: 51 | R~2 = 0.0114

Best fit:

0.1694 x + 17.74

• All states (larger size = larger pop)

Predictive power of

35                 SD

States: 51 | R~2 = 0.5030

Best fit:

’ 0.1972 x + 18.92

All states (larger size = larger pop)


35

• ND

30

• wrOK

• SD

• lop 10 most populous states

•ND

30

•OK                     •Wl

MT

Top 10 most populous states


-MT

• WY

25 J 1         —

Q
UI

k.
01

20 ■  —

L

•KY e|N

•MH

•KS        -*Fil       

NE       *AZ .MS

•NV

•TX »AL

- -

• WY

25

UI

20

•AR»TN

ID

•KY

•AL

•KS .IA

•SC <GA *MN

JT*MO

• NV

•NM

*■ • RI


£

15 • *

•VAX

AK

•CJ^NC

•4VA

•DE

•FL

•LA

• 1 'JJ

6          wv

15

• LA 'AK

•FL

• Ml

• VA

c^rDE


•NH

10

• HD

• MC )

• WA

?MA                      •NY

10

'NY' * MA

• NH

•WA

•OR

• MD


Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Five Paragraphs:

1) Between 1425 and 1525, if you had to bet on which civilization would lead humanitya€™ s 
progressive way forward over the next half-millennium, you might well have been strongly tempted to 
be on the Islamic ekumene. It was technologically on par with the others. When Mehmet II a€oethe 
Conquerera€D Osmanlia€”Sultan of what Europeans called the Ottoman Empire, or, more usually, 
a€oethe Grand Turka€Da€’’besieged Constantinople in 1453, he did so with
the most modern artillery park in the world. And Islamic civilization was much better organized. 
Mehmeta€™ s military establishment^’’the galleys and the cannon and the janissaries and the 
sipahisa€”was unequalled anywhere in the world.

60 years later, at the other end of the Islamic ekumene, a prince, Babur, who has lost his wars to 
become Emir of Samarkand has to settle for becoming Emperor of India as a consolation prize. And he 
wins much as the British were to conquer India 300 years later: with massively inferior forces but 
massively superior discipline and coordination:

Kallie Szczepanski: Overview of the First Battle ofPanipaf. a€~Babura€™ s Mughal forces consisted 
of between 13,000 and 15,000 men, mostly horse cavalry. His secret weapon was 20 to 24 pieces of 
field artillery, a relatively recent innovation in warfare. Arrayed against the Mughals were 
Ibrahim Lodia€™ s 30,000 to 40,000 soldiersa€!war elephantsa€! from 100 to 1,000 trained and 
battle-hardened pachydermsa€!. Hisarmy simply marched
out in a disorganized blocka€!. BaburaCI employed two tactics unfamiliar to Lodia€! tulughma, 
dividing a smaller force into forward left, rear left, forward right, rear right, and center 
divisions. The highly mobile right and left divisions peeled out and surrounded the larger enemy 
force, driving them towards the center. At the center, Babur arrayed his cannons.The second 
tactical innovation was Babura€™ s useof carts, called araba. Hisartillery
forces were shielded behind a row of carts which were tied together with leather ropes, to prevent 
the enemy from getting between them and attacking the artillerymen. This tactic was borrowed from 
the Ottoman Turksa€!

LINK: <https://www.thoughtco .com/the-first-battle-of-panipat-195785>

2) Would there have been a Rush Limbaugha€”and the descent of the Republicans of America into 
neofascist idiocy a€’’without Reagana€™ s repeal of the Fairness Doctrine? Perhaps yes. But perhaps 
not:


Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Five Paragraphs:

1) Between 1425 and 1525, if you had to bet on which civilization would lead humanitya€™ s 
progressive way forward over the next half-millennium, you might well have been strongly tempted to 
be on the Islamic ekumene. It was technologically on par with the others. When Mehmet II a€oethe 
Conquerera€D Osmanlia€”Sultan of what Europeans called the Ottoman Empire, or, more usually, 
a€oethe Grand Turka€da€’’besieged Constantinople in 1453, he did so with
the most modern artillery park in the world. And Islamic civilization was much better organized. 
Mehmeta€™ s military establishment^’’the galleys and the cannon and the janissaries and the 
sipahisa€”was unequalled anywhere in the world.

60 years later, at the other end of the Islamic ekumene, a prince, Babur, who has lost his wars to 
become Emir of Samarkand has to settle for becoming Emperor of India as a consolation prize. And he 
wins much as the British were to conquer India 300 years later: with massively inferior forces but 
massively superior discipline and coordination:

Kallie Szczepanski: Overview of the First Battle ofPanipat: a€~Babura€™ s Mughal forces consisted 
of between 13,000 and 15,000 men, mostly horse cavalry. His secret weapon was 20 to 24 pieces of 
field artillery, a relatively recent innovation in warfare. Arrayed against the Mughals were 
Ibrahim Lodia€™ s 30,000 to 40,000 soldiersa€! war elephantsa€! from 100 to 1,000 trained and 
battle-hardened pachydermsa€!. His army simply marched
out in a disorganized blocka€!. BaburaCI employed two tactics unfamiliar to Lodia€! tulughma, 
dividing a smaller force into forward left, rear left, forward right, rear right, and center 
divisions. The highly mobile right and left divisions peeled out and surrounded the larger enemy 
force, driving them towards the center. At the center, Babur arrayed his cannons. The second 
tactical innovation was Babura€™ s use of carts, called araba. His artillery
forces were shielded behind a row of carts which were tied together with leather ropes, to prevent 
the enemy from getting between them and attacking the artillerymen. This tactic was borrowed from 
the Ottoman Turksa€!

LINK: <https://www.thoughtco .com/the-first-battle-of-panipat-195785>

2) Would there have been a Rush Limbaugha€”and the descent of the Republicans of America into 
neofascist idiocy a€’’without Reagana€™ s repeal of the Fairness Doctrine? Perhaps yes. But perhaps 
not:

Erik Loomis: The Gasbag of Fascism'. a€~This often drug-addled hypocrite dedicated his entire life 
to destroying American democracy, to promoting the power of the rich and the racist, to dividing 
Americans against each other, to ginning up hate and violence. Limbaugh is truly one of the worst 
Americans to ever pollute this nationa€!. What made Rush Limbaugh the era-changing blowhard he 
became was Ronald Reagana€™ s Federal
Communications Commission repeal of the Fairness Doctrine in 1987a€!. The country has never 
recovered from this horrible event since, as wea€™ ve been flooded with ever more extreme 
right-wing propaganda that has moved us increasingly down the road toward fascism, culminating with 
the election on Donald Trump. Limbaugh was perhaps the first major beneficiary of the Fairness 
Doctrinea€™ s repeal and he holds more responsibility than
anyone   else except perhaps Rupert Murdoch in what the hellscape this nation has becomea€!

LINK: <https ://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog .com/2021/02/the-gasbag-of-fascism>

3) It would be nice to be able to believe this. But, alas!, I cannot:

David Frum: Impeachment Did Not Prevail, But Trump Still Lost'. a€~The 57a€“43 margin wasna€™ t 
enough to convict under the Constitution. It wasna€™ t enough to formally disqualify Trump from 
ever again seeking office in the United States. But practically? It will do as a solemn and eternal 
public repudiation of Trumpa€™ s betrayal of his oath of officea€!. The 57a€“43 margin in the 
Senate flashes a green light to federal and state
prosecutorsa€!. The Senate minority leader condemned Trumpa€™ s actions as a a€oedisgraceful, 
disgraceful dereliction of dutya€D and said he held Trump a€oepractically and morally responsible 
for provoking the events of the daya€Ua€!. His own damning assessment did not suffice to persuade 
McConnell to convict Trump of impeachable offenses. That abdication will weigh on McConnella€™ s 
conscience and historical reputationa€!

4) Pretending that you speak for a movement while you look for a grift. Making your living out of 
steel manning racism and sexism. Et cetera. God! I am cranky this morning! But Conor Friedersdorf 
certainly gives us all cause:

Scott Lemieux: He Just Wasna€™t a True Scotsman: a€~Conor is this close to getting it: a€oeAs a 
proponent of conservatism in America, Limbaugh was a failurea€! culminating in his alignment with 
the vulgar style and populist anti-leftism of Donald Trump. Character no longer mattered. Budget 
deficits no longer mattered. Free trade no longer mattered. Nepotism no longer mattered. Lavishing 
praise on foreign dictators no longer mattered. All
that mattered was owning the libs in the culture war, in part to avenge a deeply felt sense of 
aggrievementa€!a€D When oh when did conservatism become about what 99% of conservatives want rather 
than the priorities of 20 libertarian journalists?a€!

LINK: <https ://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog .com/2021/02/he-just-wasnt-a-true-scotsman>

5) SAS knows more about how macroeconomics should think about the world than any economist from the 
so-called a€cefreshwatera€D school I have ever heard or read:

Scott Alexander Simkins: Complicated Dynamical Systems: a€~Imagine some benevolent aliens 
surveilling Earth from orbit. They dona€™ t understand our languages, and their own culture is so 
exotic that even basic ideas like a€oemoneya€D or a€oewara€D are hard for them to understand. 
Still, they have good telescopes, and theya€™re able to measure things like how much light our 
cities have, how much traffic is on our roads and sea-lanes,
and how much smoke our industries emita€!. There are some years (for example late 1929 and the 
early 1930s) when city lighting, smoke emissions, and traffic all stagnate. In other years (like 
the late 1990s), all these things grow even faster than usual. After analyzing word frequency in 
human communications, they hypothesize that the former type of period corresponds to English 
a€cerecessiona€D and the latter period to a€cebooma€d. By
performing sentiment analysis of human faces in the media during these periods, they hypothesize 
that we dislike recessions.

These are benevolent aliens, and they want us to be happy, so they wonder how to prevent 
recessions. Sometime during the 1970s, they notice that during a recession, there are fewer oil 
tankers leaving the Middle East, and longer lines at First World gas stations. They know enough 
chemistry to realize that oil is a pretty useful fuel at our stage of technological development, so 
they deduce that the recession is caused by an oil shortage. This seems
solveable! Using their Materialization Ray, they cause one billion barrels of crude oil to appear 
on the White House lawn. This actually helps a lot! Light, traffic, and industrial emissions all 
return to normal. Sentiment analysis of human faces reveal a brief period of extreme confusion, 
followed by happiness. The aliens have successfully solved the recession. In 2020, they notice 
another profound decrease in lighting, traffic, and factory smoke; looks
like another recession. The aliens, still wanting to help and now confident they know how, 
materialize another billion barrels of crude oil on the White House lawn. The Earthlings continue 
sheltering in place from the coronavirus, but now they also have to deal with a billion random 
barrels of oil tumbling around Washington DC. The aliens have solved nothinga€!.

The global economy behaves like a huge dynamical system. Everything affects everything else in so 
many different ways that ita€™ s hard to keep track of. If aliens tried to model the economy the 
same way Borsboom et al are modeling the mind, theya€™ d fail. They could pick ten important 
economic indicatorsa€’’maybe employment rate, the S&P 500, inflation, and a few other thingsa€”and 
track how they co-evolved over time. This would
probably be illuminatinga€”for all I know some economist in our world is doing it already and 
learning a lot. But it wouldna€™t be enough. They would never be able to predict a recession caused 
by conflict in the Middle East causing an oil embargo causing an energy shortage. Or a recession 
caused by deregulation of banks causing them to offer too many subprime loans causing all of them 
to go belly-up at oncea€!. At best theya€! could
understand that recessions (and booms) are attractor states in a massively complex dynamical 
system, and come up with vague principles about how that system responds to certain shocks (eg 
a€oelarge stimulus packages can sometimes shift the system from recession to normal growtha€D)a€!

LINK: <https://astralcodexten.substack.eom/p/ontology-of-psychiatric-conditions-34e>

Hoisted from the Archives

2016: Regional Policy and Distributional Policy in a World Where People Want to Ignore the Value 
and Contribution ofKnowledgea€”and Network-Based Increasing Returns: Pascal Lamy: a€oeWhen the wise 
man points at the moon, the fool looks at the fingera€!a€D Perhaps in the end the problem is that 
people want more than anything else to pretend that they are filling a valuable role in the 
societal division of labor, and are receiving no more than they earna€”than
they contribute. But that is not the case.

The valuea€”the societal dividenda€”is in the accumulated knowledge of humanity and in the 
painfully constructed networks that make up our value chains, not in any of our individual 
contributions. A a€oecontribution^□ theory of what a proper distribution of income might be can 
only be made coherent if there are constant returns to scale in the scarce, priced, owned factors 
of production. Only then can you divide the pile of resources by giving to each the marginal
societal product of their work and of the resources that they own.

That, however, is not the world we live ina€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2016/12/is-the-problem-one-of-insufficient-market-wages-inadequate-
social-insurance-polanyian-disruption-of-patterns-of-life-.html>
Leave a comment


Hoisted from the Archives

2016: Regional Policy and Distributional Policy in a World Where People Want to Ignore the Value 
and Contribution of Knowledged€ ” and Network-Based Increasing Returns'. Pascal Lamy: a€oeWhen the 
wise man points at the moon, the fool looks at the finger a€ I a€D Perhaps in the end the problem 
is that people want more than anything else to pretend that they are filling a valuable role in the 
societal division of labor, and are receiving no more than they earna€”than
they contribute. But that is not the case.

The valuea€”the societal dividenda€”is in the accumulated knowledge of humanity and in the 
painfully constructed networks that make up our value chains, not in any of our individual 
contributions. A a€ce contribution^ □ theory of what a proper distribution of income might be can 
only be made coherent if there are constant returns to scale in the scarce, priced, owned factors 
of production. Only then can you divide the pile of resources by giving to each the marginal
societal product of their work and of the resources that they own.

That, however, is not the world we live ina€!

LINK: 
chttps://www.bradford-delong.com/2016/12/is-the-problem-one-of-insufficient-market-wages-inadequate-
social-insurance-polanyian-disruption-of-patterns-of-life- .html>
Leave a comment

