Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Zhenyi Tan: Launch: Vinegar. a€~the YouTube player situation has gotten bad enough that we need 
another extension to fix it. Thata€™ s where Vinegar comes in. Vinegar also replaces the YouTube 
player (written in who-knows-what) with a
minimal HTML <video> taga€! <https://andadinosaur.com/launch-vinegar>

•  Rakesh Bhandari: a€~Here on Engelsa€™ b-day is Jacques Monoda€™ s dismissal of Engels as a 
metaphysical animist disguised as a a€cescientifica€D dialectical materialising!


Rakesh Bhandari ©postdiscipline

Here on Engels' b-day is Jacques Monod's dismissal of Engels as a metaphysical animist disguised as 
a "scientific11 dialectical materialism. Interestingly Levins and Lewontin would later dedicate 
their Dialectical Biologist to Engels whom they
praise as it getting it mostly right!

The pure reflection thesis, of the perfect mirror which
would not even invert the image, must therefore strike us
as still less defensible than it did our grandparents. But
after all, a perceptive eye hardly needed what twentieth­
century science was to bring, in order to see the confu­

sions  and  foolishness  to  which


the epistemological
bankruptcy of
dialectical
materialism

this notion was bound to lead. To
set  straight  poor  Herr  Duhring,
an early recalcitrant. Engels him­
self  proposed  numerous  exam­
ples of the dialectical interpreta-

tion of natural phenomena. There is the memorable one of
the grains of barley, to illustrate the “Third Law."

Let us take a grain of barley. ... If such a grain of
barley meets with conditions which are normal for
it, if it falls on suitable soil, then under the influence

Vitalisms and Animisms

of heat and moisture it undergoes a specific change,
it germinates; the grain as such ceases to exist, it is
negated, and in its place appears the plant which has
arisen from it, the negation of the grain. But what is
the normal life-process of this plant? It grows, flow­
ers,  is  fertilized  and  finally  once  more  produces
grains of barley, and as soon as these have ripened
the stalk dies, is in its turn negated. As a result of this


negation 01 me negation we nave once again me orig­

inal grain of barley, but not as a single unit, but ten-,
twenty- or thirty-fold. . . .

It is the same (Engels adds a little further on) in math­
ematics. Let us take any algebraic quantity whatever:
for example, a. If this is negated, we get -a (minus a).
If we negate that negation, by multiplying -a by -CL
we get +a2, i.e., the original positive quantity, but at a
higher degree, raised to its second power. . . .

And so forth.

What these examples illustrate above all is the scope of
the epistemological disaster that ensues from the “scien­
tific" use of dialectical interpretations. Modern dialectical
materialists ordinarily manage to avoid such silliness. But
to    make dialectical contradiction the “fundamental law"
of all movement, all evolution, is nonetheless to try to
systematize a subjective interpretation of nature whereby
it     may be shown to have an ascending, constructive, crea­
tive intent, a purpose: in short, to render nature decipher­
able and morally meaningful. This is “animist projection”
again, always recognizable whatever its disguises.

5:56 PM r™ Nov 28,2021

7Likesl Retweet

Paragraphs

Kwame Anthony Appiah: Digging for Utopia: a€~[Graeber and Wengrovea€™ s] thesis that Europeans, 
before the Enlightenment [and their encounter with the Indigenous Critique], lacked the concept of 
social inequality a€! is plainly wide of the mark. Look
south, and you find that Francisco de Vitoria (circa 1486a€“1546), like others of the School of 
Salamanca, had much to say about social inequality; and he, in turn, could cite eminences like 
Gregory the Great, who in the sixth century insisted that all men were
by nature equal, and that a€oeto wish to be feared by an equal is to lord it over others, contrary 
to the natural order.a€D Look north, and you find the German radical Thomas MAUntzer in 1525 
spurring on the Great Peasantsa€™ Revolt: "Help us in any way
you can, with men and with cannon, so that we can carry out the commands of God himself in Ezekiel 
14, where he says: a€™ I will rescue you from those who lord it over you in a tyrannous waya€™ 
a€Ua€!

LINK: chttps://www.nybooks .com/articles/2021/12/16/david-graeber-digging-for-utopia/>

Nicholas V (1452): Dum Diversas: a€~Wea€! granteda€! toa€! King Alfonsoa€! to invade, search out, 
capture, vanquish, and subdue all Saracens and pagans whatsoever, and other enemies of Christ 
wheresoever placed, and the kingdoms, dukedoms,
principalities, dominions, possessions, and all movable and immovable goods whatsoever held and 
possessed by them and to reduce their persons to perpetual slavery, and to apply and appropriate to 
himself and his successors the kingdoms, dukedoms,
counties, principalities, dominions, possessions, and goods, and to convert them to his and their 
use and profita€”by having secured the said faculty, the said King Alfonso, or, by his authority, 
the aforesaid infante, justly and lawfully has acquired and
possessed, and doth possess, these islands, lands, harbors, and seas, and they do of right belong 
and pertain to the said King Alfonso and his successorsa€!

LINK: <https://doctrineofdiscovery.org/dum-diversas/>

Michael Spence: Lessons from Digital India: a€~The country already offers important lessons for 
understanding and adapting development models to an era in which traditional sources of employment 
(especially manufacturing) will be displaced by
automation and artificial intelligence. Internet-based digital technologies are crucial to economic 
and financial inclusiona€! the rapid expansion of the mobile internet creates opportunities for 
employment, value creation, and growth far exceeding the returns to


investorsS!. Yes, the up-front investments are substantial, and the returns may not be realized for 
many years. Reliance is a large and profitable energy company that used its resources to finance 
long-term investments in the mobile internet, setting the stage for
Jio PlatformsS™ rapid expansion. That model, which did not require significant public-sector 
investment, probably will not work everywhere. Nonetheless, the argument for public support and 
investment in the rapid rollout of the mobile internet seems
overwhelmingly strongS!

LINK: 
chttps://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/lessons-from-digital-india-by-michael-spence-2021-11>

Nathan Newman: Education Polarization in Elections: People are Voting Their Class Interests'. S~Our 
Two Parties Reflect Two Class Strategies for Addressing Stagnating IncomesS!. Americans couldS! 
either seek to expropriate some of the burgeoning
growth among emerging economies or go after the wealth of the superelite, the global top 1% holding 
43% of all global wealth in 2020. Arguably, our two political parties have increasingly sorted 
themselves along the line of those two strategiesS!. Workers
who have found themselves directly in competition with developing world workersS! have allied with 
a portion of the economic elite willing to help them extract some additional income and jobs from 
those emerging economies, including via trade wars,
energy policy, agricultural policy, and other economic and occasionally military actions, all in 
exchange for support for the Republican Party policies that help that elite keep their wealths!. 
Workers whose industries are largely outside global competition, such
as service work or public employment, or in what has been dubbed the Soecreative economy SDSI 
require extracting some of the income of the economic eliteS! whether through stronger labor 
rights, tighter economic regulation, or higher taxes paid to

fund government spending. Those pro-labor policies keep a portion of the industrial sectors™ s 
workers, particularly those who still see some room to maneuver for extracting higher wages from 
their employers, in the Democratic Party camp as wellS!. The
higher the percentage of welders, machinery mechanics, parts salespersons, and other jobs tied to 
the manufacturing and trade-in-goods economy, the more likely that state voted for Trump. And the 
higher the percentage of manicurists, medical scientists, pre­
school teachers, transit drivers and many others tied to non-manufacturing professions, the more 
likely that state was to support Clinton in 2016SL Service workers overall were a mixed bag 
politically, no doubt reflecting other studies showing peoples™ s
views                                                                                               
                 on trade policy and related issues often relate to the dependence of the region 
where they live on trade as much as their own employments!. Attitudes on race end up closely tied 
up in votersS™ views on trade, again emphasizing that SoecultureSD

and a€ceclassa€D affiliations are not so separate. As an analysis by the Peterson Institutes™ s 
Marcus Nolan detailed, white voters in regions with employment impacted by the SoeChina shockSD 
seemed to adopt Soeharsher attitudes towards immigrants
and racial minoritiesSD and even to gravitate towards more fundamentalist versions of 
ChristianityS!

LINK:


Left Future

Education Polarization in Elections: People are Voting Their Class Interests

Why did so many non-college whites lurch towards Trump in the 2016 and 2020 elections - and 
conversely why are more educated whites trending towards the Democrats? Many progressive analysts 
are a bit anguished at what they perceive to be an inversion
of traditional class politics in voting, which for some means that the new split in voting has to 
be aboua€!

Read more

a year ago A- Nathan Newman dY§

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

