Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• John Quiggin: The Time Is Right to Reclaim the Utopian Ideas of Keynes 
<https://aeon.co/essays/the-time-is-right-to-reclaim-the-utopian-ideas-of-keynes>

• Robert Schalkenbach Foundation <https://schalkenbach,org/>


• Barry Ritholtz: The Great Reset <https://ritholtz.com/2021/06/the-great-reset/>

•  Josh Rosenau: a€~Some have wrongly claimed the natural, zoonotic origin of SARS-CoVa€“2 is now 
less likely because ita€™ s been A WHOLE YEAR and we dona€™ t have the wild ancestor. Today, a
journal article brings us closer, and shows how hard ita€™ 11 be to get the whole storya€l 
<https://twitter.eom/i/timeline>

•  Jeet Heer: Trumpists Havena€™ t Given Up on Military Coups'. a€~The American military has always 
abided by civilian leadership. The Trumpist movement wants to change thata€!

<https://jeetheer.substack.eom/p/military-coup-threats-on-the-right>

• Booker T. Washington & al.: The Negro Problem <https ://w w w.gutenberg 
.org/files/15041/15041-h/15041-h .htm>

• W.E.B. Du Bois: The Talented Tenth 
<https://www.gutenberg.org/files/15041/15041-h/15041-h.htm#The_Talented_Tenth>

• Martin Wolf: The 2020s Are Set to Be a Decisive Economic Decade for the UK 
<https://www.ft.com/content/4138160c-051b-45c9-9c55-8b46dbalfecl>

• LEAP Stellenbosch <https ://leapstellenbosch .org .za/#webinar>

• David H. Autor: Work of the Past, Work of the Future <https ://economics .mit .edu/files/16724>

• Nicholas G. Blackwell: Making the Lion Gate Reliefat Mycenae: Tool Marks and Foreign Influence 
<https ://www. j stor.org/stable/pdf/10.3764/aja .118.3.0451 .pdf>

Paragraphs:

Noah is, I think, right here. But I would make two cautions: (i) this is no longer a development 
strategy that can make you rich, it can only make you un-poor; and (ii) there is really not that 
much space in this particular niche,
and Bangladesh looks to have filled it for the next decade:

Noah Smith: Bangladesh Is the New Asian Tiger. a€~Ita€™ s succeeding using the classic formula, and 
defying the skepticsa€!. When it comes to developing countries outside East Asia or the
periphery of Europe, I find that discussions of their growth prospects suddenly turn gloomya€!. The 
official reason for pessimism is a€oepremature deindustrializationa€d, and therea€™ s some
concern  that labor-intensive manufacturing will be automated away. But really I think the reason 
is much simpler and more intuitivea€”we havena€™ t seen many countries outside of Europe or East
Asia industrialize yet (the main exceptions being Malaysia, Turkey, and Israel), so ita€™ s just 
not a thing people expect to happen. All those skeptics should take a look at Bangladesh. The 
compact
but populous South Asian country has quietly been powering ahead using a very traditional-looking 
growth modela€!. How is Bangladesh managing this feat? Did it manage to create a new type of
development model based on?a€! Nope. In fact, ita€™ s doing the very same thing that Britain did 
when it became the first country to industrialize, over two centuries ago. Ita€™ s making and
selling     a bunch of clothesa€! a hub of the worlda€™ s garment industrya€!. This strategy 
didna€™t just happen; it was intentionala€!. Bangladesh picked a traditional labor-intensive light
manufacturing industry, laid out plans for promoting that industry, and successfully built a 
dominant position in that industrya€!. Ita€™ s a big victory for industrial policya€!. Make no 
mistakea€”
this     is still a very poor country, with a per capita GDP (PPP) of only around $5800, similar to 
that of Ghana or Hondurasa€!. For Americans, Bangladesha€™ s growth should remind us that
globalization is still an incredibly powerful force for good. Access to European and U.S. export 
markets has been cruciala€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/bangladesh-is-the-new-asian-tigei>

What makes a (hu)man? And if you have never read Doug Jonesa€™ s Logarithmic History over the 
course of a year, you really should:

Doug Jones: Homo Erectus: a€™ he time 1.8 million years ago has a good claim to be the time when 
human beings begana€! the new species Homo erectus, albeit somewhat shorter and smaller-
brained than later erectusa€!. H. erectus has a bigger brain than earlier forms, and reduced jaws 
and teeth. And there are dramatic changes below the neck. Erectus has a body shape and size quite
similar  to ours. Strikingly, the changes in body form seem to be systematically related to 
distance running. Tendons in the feet and calves turn into springs that put a bounce in our running 
stride (but
also rule out serious tree-climbing). Our neck gets longer and shoulders and head get more 
independent so we can swing arms for balance without twisting our heads from side to side. And the 
gluteus
maximus becomes the largest muscle in the body, to prevent our bodies from toppling forward with 
each step. Homo erectus is the first hominin with a serious butta€!. We guessa€! Homo erectus had
shifted to a new diet and a new mode of acquiring fooda€! a persistence hunter, running after prey 
until they were exhausteda€! Fire may or may not have played a significant role at this early
stagea€!

LINK: <https://logarithmichistory.wordpress .com/2021/06/09/homo-erectus-6/>

Ian Buruma: The Man Who Got It Right: a€~When Confucius was asked by one of his disciples what he 
would do if he were given his own territory to govern, the Master replied that he would a€oerectify 
the names,a€D
that is, make words correspond to reality. He explained (in [Simon] Leysa€™ s translation): a€oelf 
the names are not correct, if they do not match realities, language has no object. If language is 
without an object, action
becomes impossiblea€”and therefore, all human affairs disintegrate and their management becomes 
pointless. a€DLeys comments that Orwell and Chesterton a€oewould have immediately understood and 
approved of the
ideaa€Da€! LINK: <https://www.nybooks .com/articles/2013/08/15/simon-leys-man-who-got-it-right/>

Tim Duy: _Consider the Potential Sources of Spending Power: a€™ Strong job growth, rapid wage 
growth, a decrease in the savings rate, the separate issue of the ability to spend from accumulated 
excess saving, and the
ability to tap into housing wealth via cash-out refinancing. There will be no shortage of consumer 
spending power this year or next. Meanwhile, PCE price inflation followed the CPI higher with 
core-PCE rising at an
annualized 8.3% rate in April. No one really believes that inflation will be sustained at an 8.3% 
ratea€!. At this point, we can be fairly certain the economy is experiencing a substantial level 
shift upward in prices and wages.
It    is premature to say much more than that because we are not going to experience a regime 
change in the underlying inflation dynamics over the course of one or two or even several months. 
Sustained higher inflation is
something that will only happen over the course of many months if demand pressure in the labor 
market builds into faster wage growth that feeds into faster inflationa€!

Luke Oa€™Neil: Commuting Is Psychological Tortured: a€™ a€oel am never going back to that commute 
five days a week every single week again,a€D a friend told me recently. Before Covid he was 
spending about three
hours a day in his cara€!. a€oel proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that I dona€™ t need to actually 
be in an office every day to perform at a very high level at my job,a€D he saida€!. a€oel got used 
to the commute, but it
was like Stockholm Syndrome,a€D he said. a€oel just talked myself into thinking it wasna€™t so bad. 
But it was. It was. Not doing that commute gave me 15 hours per week of my life backa€da€! a common 
refrain from
the dozens of people I heard from this weeka€! LINK: 
<https://luke.substack.eom/p/commuting-is-psychological-torture>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

John Stuart Mill: Principles of Political Economy: a€~the Protectionist doctrine finds support in 
particular cases, from considerations which, when really in point, involve greater interests than 
mere saving of labour; the
interests of national subsistence and of national defence. The discussions on the Corn Laws have 
familiarized everybody with the plea, that we ought to be independent of foreigners for the food of 
the people; and the
Navigation Laws were grounded, in theory and profession, on the necessity of keeping up a 
a€oenursery of seamena€D for the navy. On this last subject I at once admit, that the object is 
worth the sacrifice; and that a country
exposed to invasion by sea, if it cannot otherwise have sufficient ships and sailors of its own to 
secure the means of manning on an emergency an adequate fleet, is quite right in obtaining those 
means, even at an economical
sacrifice in point of cheapness of transport. When the English Navigation Laws were enacted, the 
Dutch, from their maritime skill and their low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other 
nations, England included, at
cheaper rates than those nations could carry for themselves: which placed all other countries at a 
great comparative disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for their ships of war. The 
Navigation Laws, by which this
deficiency was remedied, and at the same time a blow struck against the maritime power of a nation 
with which England was then frequently engaged in hostilities, were probably, though economically 
disadvantageous,
politically expedient. But English ships and sailors can now navigate as cheaply as those of any 
other country; maintaining at least an equal competition with the other maritime nations even in 
their own trade. The ends which
may once have justified Navigation Laws, require them no longer, and afforded no reason for 
maintaining this invidious exception to the general rule of free trade.

With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists has been so often and so triumphantly 
met, that it requires little notice here. That country is the most steadily as well as the most 
abundantly supplied with food, which
draws its supplies from the largest surface. It is ridiculous to found a general system of policy 
on so improbable a danger as that of being at war with all the nations of the world [921] at once; 
or to suppose that, even if
inferior  at sea, a whole country could be blockaded like a town, or that the growers of food in 
other countries would not be as anxious not to lose an advantageous market, as we should be not to 
be deprived of their corn. On
the subject, however, of subsistence, there is one point which deserves more especial 
consideration. In cases of actual or apprehended scarcity, many countries of Europe are accustomed 
to stop the exportation of food. Is this,
or not, sound policy? There can be no doubt that in the present state of international morality, a 
people cannot, any more than an individual, be blamed for not starving itself to feed others. But 
if the greatest amount of good to


hours a day in his cara€!. a€oel proved beyond a shadow of a doubt that I dona€™ t need to actually 
be in an office every day to perform at a very high level at my job,a€D he saida€!. a€oel got used 
to the commute, but it

was like Stockholm Syndrome,a€D he said. a€oel just talked myself into thinking it wasna€™t so bad. 
But it was. It was. Not doing that commute gave me 15 hours per week of my fife backa€Ua€! a common 
refrain from
the dozens of people I heard from this weeka€! LINK: <https 
://luke.substack.com/p/commuting-is-psychological-torture>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

John Stuart Mill: Principles of Political Economy. a€~the Protectionist doctrine finds support in 
particular cases, from considerations which, when really in point, involve greater interests than 
mere saving of labour; the
interests of national subsistence and of national defence. The discussions on the Corn Laws have 
familiarized everybody with the plea, that we ought to be independent of foreigners for the food of 
the people; and the
Navigation Laws were grounded, in theory and profession, on the necessity of keeping up a 
a€oenursery of seamena€D for the navy. On this last subject I at once admit, that the object is 
worth the sacrifice; and that a country
exposed to invasion by sea, if it cannot otherwise have sufficient ships and sailors of its own to 
secure the means of manning on an emergency an adequate fleet, is quite right in obtaining those 
means, even at an economical
sacrifice in point of cheapness of transport. When the English Navigation Laws were enacted, the 
Dutch, from their maritime skill and their low rate of profit at home, were able to carry for other 
nations, England included, at
cheaper rates than those nations could carry for themselves: which placed all other countries at a 
great comparative disadvantage in obtaining experienced seamen for their ships of war. The 
Navigation Laws, by which this
deficiency was remedied, and at the same time a blow struck against the maritime power of a nation 
with which England was then frequently engaged in hostilities, were probably, though economically 
disadvantageous,
politically expedient. But English ships and sailors can now navigate as cheaply as those of any 
other country; maintaining at least an equal competition with the other maritime nations even in 
their own trade. The ends which
may once have justified Navigation Laws, require them no longer, and afforded no reason for 
maintaining this invidious exception to the general rule of free trade.

With regard to subsistence, the plea of the Protectionists has been so often and so triumphantly 
met, that it requires little notice here. That country is the most steadily as well as the most 
abundantly supplied with food, which
draws its supplies from the largest surface. It is ridiculous to found a general system of policy 
on so improbable a danger as that of being at war with all the nations of the world [921] at once; 
or to suppose that, even if
inferior  at sea, a whole country could be blockaded like a town, or that the growers of food in 
other countries would not be as anxious not to lose an advantageous market, as we should be not to 
be deprived of their corn. On
the subject, however, of subsistence, there is one point which deserves more especial 
consideration. In cases of actual or apprehended scarcity, many countries of Europe are accustomed 
to stop the exportation of food. Is this,
or not, sound policy? There can be no doubt that in the present state of international morality, a 
people cannot, any more than an individual, be blamed for not starving itself to feed others. But 
if the greatest amount of good to
mankind on the whole, were the end aimed at in the maxims of international conduct, such collective 
churlishness would certainly be condemned by them. Suppose that in ordinary circumstances the trade 
in food were
perfectly  free, so that the price in one country could not habitually exceed that in any other by 
more than the cost of carriage, together with a moderate profit to the importer. A general scarcity 
ensues, affecting all countries,
but   in unequal degrees. If the price rose in one country more than in others, it would be a proof 
that in that country the scarcity was severest, and that by permitting food to go freely thither 
from any other country, it would be
spared from a less urgent necessity to relieve a greater. When the interests, therefore, of all 
countries are considered, free exportation is desirable. To the exporting country considered 
separately, it may, at least on the
particular occasion, be an inconvenience: but taking into account that the country which is now the 
giver will in some future season be the receiver, and the one that is benefited by the freedom, I 
cannot but think that even to
the apprehension of food rioters it might be made apparent, that in such cases they should do to 
others what they would wish done to themselves.

In countries in which the Protection theory is [1848] declining, but not yet given up, such as the 
United States, a doctrine has come into notice which is a sort of compromise between free trade and 
restriction, namely, that
protection for protectiona€™ s sake is improper, but that there is nothing objectionable in having 
as much protection as may incidentally result from a tariff framed solely for revenue. Even in 
England, regret is sometimes
expressed that a a€oemoderate fixed dutya€D was not preserved on corn, on account of the revenue it 
would yield. Independently, however, of the general impolicy of taxes on the necessaries of life, 
this doctrine overlooks
the  fact, that revenue is received only on the quantity imported, but that the [922] tax is paid 
on the entire quantity consumed. To make the public pay much that the treasury may receive a 
little, is not an eligible mode of
obtaining a revenue. In the case of manufactured articles the doctrine involves a palpable 
inconsistency. The object of the duty as a means of revenue, is inconsistent with its affording, 
even incidentally, any protection. It can
only operate as protection in so far as it prevents importation; and to whatever degree it prevents 
importation, it affords no revenue.

The only case in which, on mere principles of political economy, protecting duties can be 
defensible, is when they are imposed temporarily (especially in a young and rising nation) in hopes 
of naturalizing a foreign industry,
in itself perfectly suitable to the circumstances of the country. The superiority of one country 
over another in a branch of production, often arises only from having begun it sooner. There may be 
no inherent advantage on one
part, or disadvantage on the other, but only a present superiority of acquired skill and 
experience. A country which has this skill and experience yet to acquire, may in other respects be 
better adapted to the production than
those which were earlier in the field: and besides, it is a just remark of Mr. Rae, that nothing 
has a greater tendency to promote improvements in any branch of production, than its trial under a 
new set of conditions. But it
cannot be expected that individuals should, at their own risk, or rather to their certain loss, 
introduce a new manufacture, and bear the burthen of carrying it on until the producers have been 
educated up to the level of those
with whom the processes are traditional. A protecting duty, continued for a reasonable time, might 
1 sometimes be the least inconvenient mode in which the nation can tax itself for the support of 
such an experiment. But it is
essential that the protection should be confined to cases in which there is good ground of 
assurance that the industry which it fosters will after a time be able to dispense with it; nor 
should the domestic producers ever be
allowed  to expect that it will be continued to them beyond the time necessary for a fair trial of 
what they are capable of accomplishing .a€! LINK: 
chttps://oll.libertyfund.org/title/mill-principles-of-political-economv-ashlev-
ed#lfO199 label 1205>

Paul Krugman: The Economic Consequences of Canceling Keynes: a€~What should we be talking about 
when we talk about cancellation? It certainly doesna€™t mean saying mean things a€” Ia€™m not
a€cecancelinga€D Bitcoin advocates when I suggest that much of what they say is a€ celibatarian 
derp.a€D It also doesna€™ t mean ignoring points of view that have little claim to be taken 
seriously; The Times is under no
obligation    to publish guest essays by people claiming that satanic pedophiles control the 
Democratic Party. But there is a real phenomenon in which powerful interests try to block the 
dissemination of ideas they find
threateninga€!. Let me talk about one example I know a fair bit about: attempts to cancel Keynesian 
economics. I say a€oeattempts,a€D plural, because it has happened twice: an overtly political 
attempt to block the teaching
of  Keynesian economics in the 1940s and a€™ 50s, and a subtler freezing out of Keynesian ideas in 
the decades leading up to the 2008 financial crisisa€!. In the 1970s some economists began arguing 
that Keynesianism must
be wrong, because the phenomena Keynes described couldna€™ t happen in an economy of perfectly 
rational individuals and perfectly functioning markets. You might consider this a weak 
critiquea€”but in the culture of
economics, with its demand for rigorous modeling, it carried weight. Defenders of Keynes, uneasy 
about a theory that relied on plausible descriptions of behavior rather than ineluctable 
mathematics, lacked all conviction;
enemies                                                                                             
          of Keynes were filled with a passionate intensity. Just a few years into the 
anti-Keynesian backlash, influential economists were ridiculing the whole doctrine, declaring that 
whenever anyone engaged in Keynesian
theorizing, a€cethe audience starts to giggle and whisper to one another. a€Da€ I It soon became 
common knowledge that major journals would not publish anything overtly Keynesian. During my own 
early career, I and
others simply took it as a fact of life that if you wanted to get tenure, you would have to build 
your publication record in subfields that steered clear of the core issue of depressions and how 
they happen; you could sometimes
smuggle some Keynesian material into your papers, but only if it came wrapped in a model that 
seemed to be mainly about something else. So Keynes had in effect been canceled. Then came the 2008 
crisis and its aftermath,
which demonstrated that Keynes had been right all along. The slump reflected a collapse in demand; 
governments that responded with deficit spending were able to mitigate the downturn, while those 
that practiced fiscal
austerity made it worse. And the anti-Keynesian theories that had dominated the journals for 
several decades proved perfectly uselessa€!. But the years of Keynesian cancellation had a heavy 
cost. Many economists entered
the crisis ignorant of basic concepts that had been worked out many decades earlier, because you 
couldna€™t publish those concepts in the journals or teach them in many (not all) graduate 
programs. This intellectual
impoverishment, Ia€™ d argue, weakened and distorted the policy response: We had a much worse, much 
more prolonged slump than we might have had if the ideas needed to fight the slump hadna€™ t been 
suppressed. So
yes, cancellation can be a serious issue and should be fought. Unfortunately, making that case is 
harder than it should be when so many privileged people conflate the real thing with not being 
invited to fancy dinner

parties .a€! LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters 
.nytimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&campaign_id= 116&emc=edit pk 20210601&instance 
id=31997&nl=paul-
krugman&productCode=PK&regi 
id=64675225&segment_id=59554&te=l&uri=nyt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2F41b9ba2a-b998-5d36-9aa2-a79dbdcec326&
user id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

Paul Krugman (2009): A Dark Age of Macroeconomics: a€~Brad DeLong is upset about the stuff coming 
out of Chicago these daysa€”and understandably so. First Eugene Fama, now John Cochrane, have made 
the claim
that debt-financed government spending necessarily crowds out an equal amount of private spending, 
even if the economy is depresseda€”and they claim this not as an empirical result, not as the 
prediction of some model,
but  as the ineluctable implication of an accounting identity. There has been a tendency, on the 
part of other economists, to try to provide covera€”to claim that Fama and Cochrane said something 
more sophisticated than they
did. But if you read the original essays, therea€™ s no ambiguitya€”ita€™ s pure Saya€™ s Law, pure 
a€oeTreasury viewa€D, in each case. Herea€™ s Fama: a€oeThe problem is simple: bailouts and 
stimulus plans are
funded by issuing more government debt. (The money must come from somewhere!) The added debt 
absorbs savings that would otherwise go to private investment. In the end, despite the existence of 
idle resources, bailouts
and stimulus plans do not add to current resources in use. They just move resources from one use to 
anothera€!a€D And herea€™ s Cochrane: a€oeFirst, if money is not going to be printed, it has to 
come from somewhere. If
the government borrows a dollar from you, that is a dollar that you do not spend, or that you do 
not lend to a company to spend on new investment. Every dollar of increased government spending 
must correspond to one less
dollar of private spending. Jobs created by stimulus spending are offset by jobs lost from the 
decline in private spending. We can build roads instead of factories, but fiscal stimulus cana€™ t 
help us to build more of both.l
This  is just accounting, and does not need a complex argument about a€~crowding outa€™ a€!a€U. 
Therea€™ s no ambiguity in either case: both Fama and Cochrane are asserting that desired savings 
are automatically
converted into investment spending, and that any government borrowing must come at the expense of 
investment a€” period. Whata€™ s so mind-boggling about this is that it commits one of the most 
basic fallacies in
economicsa€’’interpreting an accounting identity as a behavioral relationship.a€! LINK: 
<https://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/20Q9/01/27/a-dark-age-of-macroeconomics-wonkish/>

