Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) 62 very good people funded for the net year. I confess that this program has been even more of a 
success than I had projected. It turns outa lot of very good people really were
budget-constrained in doing the very good work that they wanted to do. And I confess that I had 
underestimated how much the research-university system as it worked a decade ago
was  constraining visible economic research away from policy-relevant and equitable growth-relevant 
topics:

Equitable Growth: [A] Record $1.39 Million in Research Grants for Scholars Examining Economic 
Inequality & Growth'.
a€~The Washington Center for Equitable Growth today announced its 2021 research grants, with 
funding of $l,392,795a€”a
record-breaking levela€’’awarded to 62 researchers. These scholars are studying the various 
channels through which economic
inequality,  in all its forms, impacts economic growth and stabilitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/equitable-growth-announces-record-l-39-million-in-research-grants-for-s
cholars-examining-
economic-inequality-and-growth/>

2) It was Martha Bailey who first hammered it into me how incredibly important fertility control 
and child spacing is for womena€™ s economic opportunity in America over the
past centurya€”how huge a friction the fact that you might, any year, find yourself bearing a child 
was. This was the case even after the demographic transition. While before the
demographic transition in the time of astronomical child and maternal mortality the biosocial 
fertility load on women was enormous, even afterwards the inability to engage in
reliable family planning was extraordinarily disruptive for womena€™ s economic activity. Here Kate 
Bahn and Maryan Janani-Flores review the evidence:

Kate Bahn & Maryam Janani-Flores: Economic security & Opportunity for Women Under Threat After U.S. 
Supreme Court
Takes Anti-Abortion Stance in Texas: a€~Nearly 1 in 4 women in the United Statesa€! will have an 
abortion by the age of 45, and
nearly 1 in 20a€! will have an unintended pregnancya€!. An intrinsic link between reproductive 
justice and economic
opportunitya€! contraception^! access to abortiona€!. Bodily autonomy and a persona€™ s ability to 
decide when, how, and
under    what circumstances to plan for a family is critical toa€! a womana€™ s job opportunities 
and financial securitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/economic-security-and-opportunity-for-women-under-threat-after-u-s-supr
eme-court-takes-
anti-abortion-stance-in-texas/>

3) Theoriesa€”very good theoriesa€”that economists were exploring around 1900 are now back again. 
But why did they all but vanish from, say, the 1920s through the 2000s? My
view is that first the a€oeliquidationista€n ideological turn of macroeconomics toward solving the 
problem of finding some reason that business cycles were functional for the
system and then the neoclassical synthesisa€™ s prioritization of rational representative-agent 
model made such a€ceHobsoniana€D theories profoundly uncool:

Atif Mian: Understanding the Macroeconomic Consequences of Rising Income & Wealth Inequality in the 
United States -
Equitable Growth: a€~With Ludwig Strauba€! and Amir Sufia€! we show that when the rich save morea€! 
an increase in
inequality leads to a persistent fall in the long-term interest rate and an growing reliance on 
credit for sustaining aggregate
demanda€!. Downward pressure on aggregate demanda€! countered through increased borrowing by 
nonrich households. This
kind   of upswing in aggregate demand, however, is a€ceindebteda€Da€l. It can only be sustained 
over time if interest rates
falla€!. The theory of indebted demand fits the empirical patterns observed in the United Statesa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/understanding-the-macroeconomic-consequences-of-rising-income-and-wealt
h-inequalitv-in-
the-united-states/>

4) Ever since the days of Alexander Hamilton, investors have regarded the debt of the U.S. 
government as a very valuable and safe asset. In all but rare and exceptional times, the
only return return debt purchasers and holders have demanded from the U.S. government is that it 
maintain the real value of the wealth they have entrusted to it. The U.S.
government should invest this wealth wisely and prudently, yes, in the highest societal-value 
projects, yes. But the main consideration and the bottom line is thata€’’except in the
1870s  and 1880s, and in the 1980sa€”the U.S. government has never faced a debt-financing 
constraint as long as long as its investments yield any possible positive return in the
form                                                                                 of additional 
taxes collected downstream at all. Worried that this may change in the future if interest rates 
rise sharply? Then issue inflation-adjusted consols, and lock in real
debt payments permanently:

Barry Eichengreen: The Coming Public Debt Scare Should Not Spook U.S. Policymakers from Investing 
in Physical and Social
Infrastructure: a€~[In our] In Defense of Public Debt, my co-authors and I show how governments, 
through the ages, have
resorted     to issuing public debt to meet emergencies and address pressing social needsa€!. My 
co-authors and I argue [that]
expenditure restraints that limit the U.S. economya€™ s capacity to grow would be counterproductive 
from even the narrow
standpoint  of debt sustainabilitya€!. Do our nationa€™ s infrastructure problems rise to the level 
of a national emergency? Some
answer yes, on the grounds that our physical infrastructure is old, dangerously vulnerable to 
climate change, and inadequately
green and digital. A significant minority in the U.S. Senate insists otherwisea€!. One way of 
adjudicating the dispute is to ask
whether additional infrastructure investments will pay for themselvesa€!. We really should be 
comparing apples with applesa€”
real returns with real returns. Currentlya€! any investment that yields a positive real return is 
effectively self-financinga€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-coming-public-debt-scare-should-not-spook-u-s-policymakers-from-inv
esting-in-
physical-and-social-infrastructure/>

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)I confess I do not understand why a President Biden should shy away from a a€oepotentiallya€! 
contentious confirmation fighta€!a€D to get the most-qualified person who
agrees with the administration^™ s view of what Americaa€™ s interest is as Chair of the Federal 
Reserve Board. Ita€™ s not like a a€cecontentiousa€D Senate debate over the
nomination of Lael Brainard to be Fed Chair would reduce the number of Republican senators who vote 
for Biden initiatives in the future, is it? And yet the Washington Blob thinks
that avoiding a€oecontentiona€D is a thing that has immense valuea€”but only when Democrats do it. 
Supporters of a Jay Powell renomination seem overwhelmingly concerned
with dodging the question of a€oels Jay Powell the best possible Fed Chair for the next four 
years?a€D:

Gregg Gelzinis: a€™ The best case (yet still realistic) scenario with a Powell reappointment is 
that the ceiling on the progressive
FinReg agenda is materially lowered. The worst case is that the entire progressive FinReg agenda is 
stymied &Trumpa€™ s
FinReg agenda persists at the Feda€!

Jordan Weissmann: a€™ Ita€™ s pretty obvious hea€™ s not ideal on FinReg, either from the lefta€™ s 
or the admina€™ s
perspective. The question is whether the status quo there is so terrible that ita€™ s worth 
ditching him and facing a potentially
more contentious confirmation fight. Ia€™ d say noa€!

LINK: <https://twitter .com/FinGregg/status/1429159236274204675>

2) I take Matthew Yglesiasa€™ s point here. But is this the right way to frame the question? The 
answer to a€oeshould local governments commit the additional money to make the
bus free?a€D is almost surely yes. The answer to a€oeshould local governments that have a fixed 
pool of money to spend on buses provide a lower-quality free bus than the current
system?a€n is almost surely no. To fail to distinguish between these two questions leaves Matt, I 
think, somewhat confused. The real question is: which of the many worthwhile
things   that bus systems could do with more money can be framed so as to win voter support and 
enthusiasm?

Matthew Yglesias: Should the Bus Be Free?: a€~In most cases, the better investment is to make the 
buses bettera€!. In a very
abstract way, free transit makes sense. Cars generate pollution and traffic externalities. Ideally, 
we would fully price those


externalities witn a caroon tax aim congestion unarges. DUI in me real worm, DOLII are politically 
uiincuii, so an equivalent way 01

addressing the issue would be to subsidize the low-externality optiona€”the busa€”by making it 
freea€!. [but] the question
becomes: if you assume your transit agency has a bunch of extra money, is eliminating fares the 
best way to turn money into
ridership? Bus riders want better buses, not cheapera€!. Cutting fares is a relatively low priority 
compared to other things you can
straightforwardly achieve with more money, like improving bus frequency and reducing bus 
crowdinga€!

LINK: <https://www. slowboring.eom/p/free-bus>

3)

4)

5)

6)

Cory Doctorow: End of the Line for Uber. Accounting Tricks & Tech Gimmickry: a€~Uber is a bezzle 
(a€oethe magic interval when a confidence trickster knows he has the money
he has appropriated but the victim does not yet understand that he has lost ita€d). Every bezzle 
ends. Ubera€™ s time is upa€!. Uber didna€™ t need self-driving carsa€”it needed
us to think it would have self-driving carsa€!. Thata€™ s the bezzle at worka€”a dazzle op that 
keeps new money flowing ina€!. $3.7b of its assets are actually worthless paper
from failing overseas ridehail companies. Ubera€™ s cash reserves declined by $4.7b in 2020 and 
$937m more in the first half of 2021. Theya€™ ve got $6.7b in the banka€!.

Ubera€™ s invented a new field of accounting: a€ceAdjusted EBITDA profitability.a€D EBITDA is 
a€oeearnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization.a€C
a€oeAdjusted EBITDAa€Da€! ignored $2b in expensesa€!. I live in Burbank, where Ubers were never 
more than 5 minutes away. Now, a 30 minute wait is commona€”and the
fare   is comparable to the licensed taxi comp any a€ I LINK: 
<https://marker.medium.eom/amp/p/901e3077bbbo

7) Jordan Nel: China, Semiconductors, & the Push for Independence'. a€~China is chasing 
technological independence. Broadly, theya€™re doing a remarkable job at it barring
perhaps in the field of semiconductors. And what is the crux of all modern tech? Semiconductors^!.. 
The 14th 5YP is the first to emphasise complete self-reliance and suggest
building  a near end-to-end chain locally. It is also the first time where China is in a strong 
enough position nationally to fund this foray and the first time where it is considered a
matter  of national securitya€!.. Process nodes (chips) come in a range of sizes, for a range of 
use cases: Large nodes (>180nm) are usually analog. Generally, they are used for
taking  in non-binary input and converting it to binary (like how sensors in EVs a€ceseea€O the 
road and disseminate that information across the rest of the system). Medium nodes
(28nma€“180nm) are majority logic nodesa€! process computation, like for CPUs and GPUs. Small nodes 
(lOnm to 22nm) are split 80/20 between memory and logic
respectivelya€!.     The minimum for 5G rollout at scale is 5nm nodes, so their production 
underpins AI advancement, 5G, and much of the datacentre progression^!.. Each type of
node      is dominated by specific producers, with specific expertise. Because analog chips (the 
large ones) are far easier to make, the competitive advantages of firms in this domain
come from their breadth of products, reach of marketing channels, and scale-derived cost 
advantagesa€!. The only way China can become technologically independent isa€! China
needs foundries. But foundries need equipment, processes, a large talent pool, clients, and an 
incredible amount of know-how. While money goes a long way to creating these, there
are some things money cana€™ t buy. Each equipment manufacturer has built up expertise developing 
that particular equipment (and maintenance) stack over decades of cycles and
consolidation. For real independence, China needs to be self-sufficient not just in producing 
foundries, but also producing the equipment that foundries rely on. Otherwise, the
chokepoint   just moves further up the chaina€!

LINK: «https:// lillianli .substack .com/p/china- semiconductors- and-the-push>
LINK: «https:// lillianli .substack .com/p/china- semiconductors- and-the-push>

Jordan Nel: China, Semiconductors, & the Push for Independence'. a€~China is chasing technological 
independence. Broadly, theya€™ re doing a remarkable job at it barring
perhaps in the field of semiconductors. And what is the crux of all modern tech? Semiconductors^!.. 
The 14th 5YP is the first to emphasise complete self-reliance and suggest
building  a near end-to-end chain locally. It is also the first time where China is in a strong 
enough position nationally to fund this foray and the first time where it is considered a
matter  of national securitya€!.. Process nodes (chips) come in a range of sizes, for a range of 
use cases: Large nodes (>180nm) are usually analog. Generally, they are used for
taking  in non-binary input and converting it to binary (like how sensors in EVs a€oeseea€D the 
road and disseminate that information across the rest of the system). Medium nodes
(28nma€“180nm) are majority logic nodesa€! process computation, like for CPUs and GPUs. Small nodes 
(lOnm to 22nm) are split 80/20 between memory and logic
respectivelya€!.     The minimum for 5G rollout at scale is 5nm nodes, so their production 
underpins AI advancement, 5G, and much of the datacentre progression^!.. Each type of
node      is dominated by specific producers, with specific expertise. Because analog chips (the 
large ones) are far easier to make, the competitive advantages of firms in this domain
come from their breadth of products, reach of marketing channels, and scale-derived cost 
advantagesa€!. The only way China can become technologically independent isa€! China
needs foundries. But foundries need equipment, processes, a large talent pool, clients, and an 
incredible amount of know-how. While money goes a long way to creating these, there
are some things money cana€™ t buy. Each equipment manufacturer has built up expertise developing 
that particular equipment (and maintenance) stack over decades of cycles and
consolidation. For real independence, China needs to be self-sufficient not just in producing 
foundries, but also producing the equipment that foundries rely on. Otherwise, the
chokepoint   just moves further up the chaina€!

LINK: «https:// lillianli .substack .com/p/china- semiconductors- and-the-push>

8) Out of my lane. But I remember Jim Stock telling me in February 2020 that unless everyone greed 
afterthe fet that our Covi response had been overkill, we would not have done
enough. The Biden administration did not hear this message. And so last March, I presume, they 
decided then that these measures would be overkill. Better late than never:

Heidi Przybyla: a€™ The Full Biden Plan Here: 1. Requiring All Employers with 100+ Employees to 
Ensure their Workers are
Vaccinated or Tested Weekly 2. Requiring Vaccinations for all Federal Workers and for Millions of 
Contractors. 3. Requiring vax
for over 17 Million Health Care Workers at Medicare and Medicaid Participating Hospitals and Other 
Health Care Settings 4.

Calling on Large Entertainment Venues to Require Proof of Vaccination or Testing for Entry 5. 
Requiring Employers to Provide
Paid Time Off to Get Vaccinated 6. Requiring Staff in Head Start Programs, DOD Schools, and Bureau 
of Indian Education-
Operated Schools to be Vaccinated 7. Calling on All States to Adopt Vaccine Requirements for All 
School Employees 8.

Providing Additional Funding to School Districts for Safe School Reopening, Including Backfilling 
Salaries and other funding
withheld by states for implementing COVID Safety Measures 9. Using the Dpt of Educationa€™ s Full 
Legal Authority to
increase access to in-person instruction 10. Getting Students and Staff Tested Regularly 11. Making 
At-Home Tests More
Affordable Sending Free Rapid, At-Home Tests to Food Banks and Community Health Centers Expanding 
Free, Pharmacy
Testing                                                       12. Bigger push on monoclonal 
antibodies, more support for small businesses affecteda€!. These are the primary
takeawaysa€!

LINK: <https://twitter. com/heidinbc/status/1436050623439548424?s=21>

