Subscribe now

a€!for the Washington Center for Equitable Growth <http: //equitablegrowth .org>

Share

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)The general flow of news and misinformation in today's media gives people who are not following 
closely a very false impression. It greatly understates how far we still are away from full 
employment. There remain considerable supply constraints on peoplea€™ s willingness and ability to 
worka€”fear of catching the plague and then giving the plague to
immunocompromised and elderly relatives and friends, plus the logistical difficulties that 
stubbornly remain large, due to the inability to get all of the pieces of the family weekly 
schedule together, and due to failures of supply chain management in the economy as a whole. As 
these supply constraints are relaxed in the future, there will then need to be the
demand to pull people back into work, and into the best attainable work for themselves and the 
economy. That will require a transitory burst of inflation. That is how the market works. Price 
signals make it individually advantageous to take the jobs that are the most opportunity laden for 
the economy as a whole. We should welcome thisa€’’transitory a€”
ongoing inflation as a healthy and indeed a necessary part of rapid recovery. The large remaining 
gap between our current and our full-employment employment-to-population ratio should guide our 
thinking about how much such transitory inflation is likely to be desirable over the next year or 
so:

Kathryn Zickuhr & Carmen Sanchez Cumming: Equitable Growtha€™s Jobs Day Graphs: October 2021 Report 
Edition'. a€~Total nonfarm employment rose by 531,000 in October, and the prime-age employment rate 
for prime-age workers rose to 78.3 percent.

Employment rotes for U.S. prime age-workers have not fully recovered
after falling sharply since the onset of the coronavirus recession

Shore of 25- to 54-year-olds who are employed, 2007-2021. Recessions are shaded.

2000          2004          2008           2012          2016          2020

Cnnrro' Dnro3ii I ahnr Ctsficfirc II C R o n a                         n       I aknr         
cerine I MCl □ A A A £ A


JUUI       WUICUU VI UWVI JlUllJlIUJj V.V. ucpui III ICHI VI LUUUI, UULU JCIICJ U11 V X X J V V V V 
V.

Equitable Growth

The unemployment rate declined to 4.6 percent in Octobera€! higher for Black workers (7.9 percent) 
and Latinx workers (5.9 percent)a€!. Unemployment rates are markedly higher for workers with lower 
levels of education, at 7.4 percent for those with less than a high school degree and 5.4 percent 
for high school graduatesa€!.
Public-sector employment fell in October and remains significantly below pre-crisis levels, while 
private sector employment continued to see more rapid gainsa€!. The proportion of unemployed U.S. 
workers facing long-term unemployment^! remains elevated, as 45.0 percent of unemployed workers 
have now been out of work for
more  than 15 weeks.

LINK: chttps ://equitablegrowth 
.org/equitable-growths-jobs-day-graphs-october-2021-report-edition/>

2) Reproductive autonomy a€’’the ability to effectively engage in family planninga€”has always been 
key to what opportunities women have had and what freedom to live their lives as they choose women 
have been able to grasp. Abortion rights have been a very powerful part of enabling women's 
opportunities in America over the past two generations.
They now appear to be under considerable threat in Texas, Louisiana, and elsewhere:

Kate Bahn & Maryam Janani-Flores: Economic Security & Opportunity for Women Under Threat After U.S. 
Supreme Court Takes Anti-Abortion Stance in Texas: a€~Nearly 1 in 4 women in the United Statesa€! 
will have an abortion by the age of 45, and nearly 1 in 20 women will have an unintended 
pregnancya€!. Research by
economists and other social scientists repeatedly demonstrates how this link between bodily 
autonomy and a persona€™ s ability to decide when, how, and under what circumstances to plan for a 
family is critical to economic security and stabilitya€!. The early broad-based dissemination of 
the birth control pill and on restrictions for
abortion services, including gestational limits and targeted restrictions of abortion providers, or 
TRAP laws, finds that autonomy over family planning choices is directly linked to a womana€™ s job 
opportunities and financial securitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/economic-security-and-opportunity-for-women-under-threat-after-u-s-supr
eme-court-takes-anti-abortion-stance-in-texas/>

3) The American workforce and job system has so much month-to-month churn, and the value of the 
local information present in a businessa€™ s knowledge of the quirks of an employee and an 
employeea€™ s knowledge of the quirks of a business and a boss is so large, that I have never, ever 
understood why the American private sector has not done a
better job of maintaining employer-employee ties across all the accidents and disruptions of life 
that lead people to need to step away from the job for a week, a month, or a season. The hope is 
that requiring that medical and caregiving leave be offered, and making it paid leave, will 
jumpstart a more general shift to preserve much of this valuable
information^’’information now lost when employee-employer ties are completely severeda€’’across 
time:

Julia M. Goodman & Daniel Schneider: The Association of Paid Medical & Caregiving Leave with the 
Economic Security & Wellbeing of Service Sector Workers: a€~Our objective was to determine whether 
paid leave was associated with improved economic security and wellbeing for workersa€!. Data 
collected in 2020 by the
Shift Project from 11,689 hourly service-sector workersa€!. Twenty percent of workers needed 
medical or caregiving leave in the reference period. Workers who took paid leave reported 
significantly less difficulty making ends meet, less hunger and utility payment hardship, and 
better sleep quality than those who had similar serious
health or caregiving needs but did not take paid leave. Access to paid leave enables frontline 
workers to take needed leave from work while maintaining their financial security and wellbeinga€!

LINK: <https://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral .com/articles/10.1186/s 12889-021-11999-9>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Treasury Tax Policy rightly focuses our attention on exactly how much money the build back 
better act can raise for the government by simply collecting taxes that are already owed but have 
not been collected due to the understanding of the IRS in the past:

Lily Batchelder: Preliminary Estimates Show Build Back Better Legislation Will Reduce Deficits: 
a€~The Build Back Better Act invests meaningfully in American families and workers, while laying 
the foundation for meeting imperative climate goalsa€!. The legislation would, as the President 
proposed, generate more than $2
trillion in savings. These savings come from ensuring large multinational corporations and wealthy 
Americans pay their fair share and reducing the cost of prescription drugs. These provisions will 
not raise taxes on any taxpayer making less than $400,000a€!. At the crux of reforms to the tax 
code is a historic overhaul of the
international tax regime, whose global adoption has been successfully negotiated with 136 countries 
representing nearly 95% of the worlda€™ s economy. As a result of these changes, the ability of 
large corporations to shift profits abroad will be substantially limited, and the race to the 
bottom in corporate taxation will no longer be a
driving force weakening capital taxationa€!. The largest pay-for in the bill is not a tax increase 
at all. By collecting taxes that are already oweda€”and disproportionately unpaid by the 
highest-earnersa€”the Build Back Better Act will generate at least $400 billion in additional 
revenue. Over the last decade, an under-resourced IRS

has been unable to appropriately focus attention on top earners who are most responsible for the 
tax gapa€!. These are historic policy achievements in and of themselvesa€”and they also pay for 
transformational investments that will improve the lives of American workers, our children, and the 
generations that will followa€!
LINK: 
<https://home.treasurv.gov/news/featured-stories/preliminary-estimates-show-build-back-better-legisl
ation-will-reduce-deficits>

2) John D. Rockefeller, Henry Clay Frick, Andrew Carnegie, and George Fisher Bakera€”the top four 
wealthholders (we think) in America in 1913 collectively then held only 2/3 as large a share of the 
wealth in the American economy then as their counterparts do today. I think it is time to change 
the name of our age from a€oeSecond Gilded Agea€D to
a€oeGreater Gilded Agea€D. Gabriel Zucman is on the case:

Gabriel Zucman: a€™ Wealth inequality update: In 1913, the top 0.00001% (a€’’Rockefeller, Frick, 
Carnegie, Baker) owned 0.85% of total US wealth Today the top 0.00001% owns 1.5% of total US 
wealth. Their share is sky-rocketinga€!
LINK: LINK: <https://twitter. com/gabriel_zucman/status/1455948767929135105> 
<https://gabriel-zucman.eu/files/SaezZucman2020JEP.pdf>

Gabriel Zucman @gabriel_zucman

Wealth inequality update: In 1913, the top 0.00001% (= Rockefeller, Frick, Carnegie, Baker) owned 
0.85% of total US wealth Today the top 0.00001% owns 1.5% of total US wealth. Their share is 
sky-rocketing (Source: gabriel-zucman.eu/files/SaezZucma€I updated using real-time Forbes data)

Wealth of the top 0.00001%, as a share of total US wealth

(Top 0.00001% = 18 richest American households today,


1.5%

4 richest households in 1913)

Q

November 1st, 2021

1.2%

0.9%


1.5%

(Top 0.00001% = 18 richest American households today,
4 richest households in 1913)

November 1st, 2021

1.2%

0.9%

0.6%

0.3%


0.0%

5:23 PM r™ Nov 3,2021

CO CO CO

r- r- co

CO   00  CO  CO  CO  00

CD   O   O  O   O  O

V-   5-  C\|  CXI   C\| CM

502Likes248Retweets

3) A very interesting take on how the inability to be sure that you will get to the job, or the 
appointment, greatly hobbles many peoplea€™ s ability to successfully maneuver day-by-day in our 
society of sprawl:

Alexandra K. Murphy, Alix Gould-Werth, and Jamie Griffin: Validating the Sixteen-Item 
Transportation Security Index in a Nationally Representative Sample: A Confirmatory Factor 
Analysis'. a€~We developed a preliminary Transportation Security Index (TSI): a 16-item measure 
that captures the experience of transportation
insecurity at the individual levela€l. We use confirmatory factor analysis to replicate and 
validate the 16-item TSI. Our results show that a slightly modified TSI 16 is an effective tool 
that can be used to uncover transportation insecurity across different samples. They also suggest 
that, counter to the results of our previous study,
transportation insecurity is a unidimensional condition that is experienced both materially and 
relationallya€l

LINK: 
<https://www.surveypractice.org/article/27185-validating-the-sixteen-item-transportation-securitv-in
dex-in-a-nationallv-representative-sample-a-confirmatorv-factor-analysis>

4) One of the shrewdest of all of the observers of China. Xi Jinping is now attempting to fight 
Chinaa€™ s Gilded Age, primarily, I think, to maintain the monopoly of the party as an ideological 
coalition vis-a-vis those who would turn the party into, well, an executive committee for managing 
the affairs of the nation on behalf of the plutocracy. But,
secondarily, the desire to make China a better society is there, and is strong. Pettis sees three 
problems with Xia€™ s a€oeCommon Prosperitya€D initiativesa€”they seem based on a false analogy 
between income inequality in China and in the U.S., they do not draw heavily enough on the 
government to manage the burdens of the redistribution process, and
it  assumes that a a€oeculture of philanthropya€D can be rapidly built among Chinaa€™ s rich. None 
of those seem reasonable things to bet on to Michael Pettis:

Michael Pettis: Will Chinaa€™s Common Prosperity Upgrade Dual Circulation?: a€~Will Chinaa€™ s 
Common Prosperity Upgrade Dual Circulation? Chinese leaders know that they want to discontinue the 
countrya€™ s existing growth model, but they havena€™ t yet landed on what the sustainable 
alternatives are.
Beijinga€™ s new common prosperity policy will only help shift domestic demand at the margins, but 
a full-fledged rebalancing will require a more radical transformation^!. There is a contradiction 
at the heart of the dual circulation formulationa€l. The goal of the common prosperity campaign, it 
seems, is to rebalance income
levels  through transfers from those who are rich to those who are nota€l. First, donations by 
foundations set up by Chinese businesses and wealthy individuals accounted for roughly 0.2 percent 
of GDP in 2017. (By comparison, charitable giving in the United States amounted to around 2.3 
percent of GDP in 2020 .)a€ I Second, by

forcing the private sector to bear the brunt of the adjustment costs for rebalancing Chinese income 
distribution, the common prosperity campaign risks undermining the dynamism of the Chinese 
economya€l. But the third reason is by far the most important one for why it would be prudent to be 
cautious about the projected success of
the common prosperity campaign: Beijing may be seeking to resolve Western forms of income 
distortion instead of Chinese forms of income distortion in Chinaa€™ s very different economic 
contexta€!

LINK: <https://carnegieendowment.org/chinafinancialmarkets/85571>

5) Another very good study strongly suggesting that current news-flow fears of a return to 
1970s-style inflation vastly overstate the true risks here:

Davide Brignone, Alistair Dieppe, & Martino Ricci: Quantifying Risks of Persistently Higher Us 
Inflation: a€~Using the ECB-Global model, this column estimates the impact on inflation of the 
fiscal stimulus to be limited. Three scenariosa€! a steeper Phillips curve, stronger fiscal 
multipliers, and rising inflation expectations. The
results suggest that the impact on inflation from these sources of risk is likely to be moderate, 
unless all of the risks materialise simultaneously, and the Fed does not depart from the assumed 
monetary policy patha€!

LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/quantifving-risks-persistently-higher-us-inflation>

6) Jane Jacobs, long ago, critiqued planners who thought that one kind of activity should be 
carried on (and one a€cekinda€D of people live) in any block or neighborhood. A healthy city has a 
wide mix of activities and people working cheek-by-jowl. Yes, there are negative externalities from 
local diversity of activities. But more often there are very strong
positive ones:

Addison Del Mastro: Main Street Manufacturing: a€~Operations like microbreweries and coffee 
roasteries were often zoned as light industriala€! located in industrial/office-type areas outside 
of downtown, often accessible only by car and by following a number of winding roads into the 
office parksa€l. Iita€™ s obviously not a
great idea to more or less force people to drive to a place where theya€™ 11 be drinking. Second, 
these kinds of businesses draw a lot of people, and are great ways to enliven main streets. Third, 
I get the sense that zoning hasna€™ t caught up to reality herea€l

LINK: <https://thedeletedscenes.substack.eom/p/main-street-manufacturing>
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


5) Another very good study strongly suggesting that current news-flow fears of a return to 
1970s-style inflation vastly overstate the true risks here:

Davide Brignone, Alistair Dieppe, & Martino Ricci: Quantifying Risks of Persistently Higher Us 
Inflation'. a€~Using the ECB-Global model, this column estimates the impact on inflation of the 
fiscal stimulus to be limited. Three scenariosa€! a steeper Phillips curve, stronger fiscal 
multipliers, and rising inflation expectations. The
results suggest that the impact on inflation from these sources of risk is likely to be moderate, 
unless all of the risks materialise simultaneously, and the Fed does not depart from the assumed 
monetary policy patha€!

LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/quantifying-risks-persistentlv-higher-us-inflation>

6) Jane Jacobs, long ago, critiqued planners who thought that one kind of activity should be 
carried on (and one a€cekinda€D of people live) in any block or neighborhood. A healthy city has a 
wide mix of activities and people working cheek-by-jowl. Yes, there are negative externalities from 
local diversity of activities. But more often there are very strong
positive ones:

Addison Del Mastro: Main Street Manufacturing'. a€~Operations like microbreweries and coffee 
roasteries were often zoned as light industrial^! located in industrial/office-type areas outside 
of downtown, often accessible only by car and by following a number of winding roads into the 
office parksa€!. Iita€™ s obviously not a
great idea to more or less force people to drive to a place where theya€™ 11 be drinking. Second, 
these kinds of businesses draw a lot of people, and are great ways to enliven main streets. Third, 
I get the sense that zoning hasna€™ t caught up to reality herea€!

LINK: <https://thedeletedscenes.substack.eom/p/main-street-manufacturing>
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

