Subscribe now


The Wedding of Aoife & Strongbow

FIRST: In a€oeAzhe Market vs. Social Justicea€d, Remember Azt A%e Ruling View of Social Justice Is 
Often (Usually?) Very Unjust Indeed:

There was an interesting note on Twitter about Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> yesterday 
AM:

Peter Baird: a€~DeLonga€™ s view of human rights: Hayek: only accrue to holders of valuable 
property; Polanyi: popular revolt adds a€Dmoral" rights . This seems to ignore society getting up 
in the am, splashing its face, and saying a€~what rights shall we affirm today?a€™ then watching 
Fox:

Peter Baird @ Remote West

@delong's view of human rights... Hayek: only accrue to holders of valuable property Polanyi: 
popular revolt adds "moral" rights ...seems to ignore society getting up in the am, splashing its 
face, and saying 'what rights shall we affirm today?' then watching Fox. @zachdcarter
6:26 AMT™ Oct 23,2022

4Like si Retweet

Well: yes. And also: no.

I did not intend to ignore that mode of "society" at alla€”hence the quotation marks around 
a€cemorala€D. A political movementa€™ s view of what a€oesocial justicea€D is can be something that 
is very unjust, and usually (almost always, by our lights?) is. The Polanyian-rights reaction 
against the marketa€’’against the catallaxya€™ s insistence that the only rights that count are 
property rightsa€”can take forms that are: reactionary, socialist, authoritarian,
social democratic, fascist, fundamentalist, nationalist, militarist, democratic, cultist, and 
probably more; moreover, such movements can often be captured or partially captured by those whose 
social power is based on the catallaxya€™ s past rewards to them gained by luck, force, and fraud.

Do remember: Jake Solla€™ s <https://t,co/VRln7S91 JZ> book begins with Aristotle, Cato, & Cicero 
scared of and trying to grapple with the consequences of the mercantile catallaxy that they see 
disrupting the social justiice of the city-state of the oligarchic republic via its elevation of 
those devoted to chrematistike over the proper wielders of social power
One big difference between Jakea€™ s book and mine is that the period he coversa€”well, my index of 
the value of the stock of human technology deployed-and-diffused in the world economy stands at:

• 0.2 in -300 (a€oeancient mode of production^ □, as Freddie from Barmen would say),

• 0.4 in 1400 (a€oelate feudala€D), and

• 0.8 in 1800 (a€oelate gunpowder-empirea€LJ). It then stands at:

• 1.6 in 1895 (a€oelate steampower/early 2nd Industrial Revolutiona€D),

• 3.2 in 1935 (a€oemass productiona€D),

• 6.4 in 1970 (a€oemass consumption^□),

• 12.8 in 2000 (a€oeglobal value chaina€D),

• and now we are moving into the a€ceinfo-biotecha€D economy.

It is not just one movement from status to contract and one grappling with the form and 
requirements of modernity. It is repeated technological revolutions that change how we live and, 
indeed, who we are. But it took 1700 years to go from ancient to feudal, 400 from feudal to late 
gunpowder-empire, but only 100 to go to late-steampower, and then 35 each for mass production, mass 
consumption, global value-chain, and on into the future. And with each
transformation of the mode-of-production trhe von Hayek-Polanyi tension takes a different form, and 
requires new ways ofa€! not of a€ cere sol vinga€d, but rather of a€oepapering it overa€D.

Because the changes in the forces-of-production hardware since 1870 have been so fast and so 
furious, the chances of being able to land on a rough cobbled-together running 
socio-econo-political software code to create a stable society are rather low. This is in contrast 
to what happened before, in the times that Solla€™ s book covers, when there was a lot of time to 
repurpose, old furniture, construct new, and in general adjust the relations-of-production (and -
communication, and -domination) software to the forces-of-production hardware.

No, this does not mean that back before 1870 things were in any sense at all "better". They were 
perhaps more stable, in the sense that the structure of society was rarely abandoned. But there was 
lots of a differnet form of instability, in the sense of different potential A©lite factions 
spending nearly all of their attention and their energy elbowing each other out of the way.

And, of course, back before 1870 the principal end toward which societal energy was directed was 
not advancing knowledge and deploying technology to uncover a€oethe knowledge of causes, and secret 
motions of things; and the enlarging of the bounds of human empire, to the effecting of all things 
possiblea€D. It was, rather, running the force and fraud mechanism by which the elite grabbed 
enough for its members and their families, since there was no
prospect of there being enough for all.

Share

One Image: Benjamin da€™Israeli, 1873:

Nicholas Gruen

@NGruen1


n nice quote at me start or (tuaeiong s long zutn-century

From amazon.com/Philosophical-...

How much has happened in these 50 years—a period more remarkable than
any, I will continue to say, in the annals of mankind. I am not thinking of the
rise  and  fall  of  Empires,  the  change  of  dynasties,  the  establishment  of
governments.  I  am  thinking  of  those  revolutions  of  science  which  have  had
much    more effect than any political causes, which have changed the position
and prospects of mankind more than all the conquests and the codes, and all
the legislators that ever lived.

—BENJAMIN DISRAELI, 18731

3:55 AM • Oct 24, 2022 • TweetDeck


Leave a comment

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Margaret Sullivan: There Are Only Five Media Stories: a€~Evils of Facebook... the tragedy of 
local newspapersa€™ decline... Fox News damage-to-society... a€~dona€™ t magnify political liesa€™ 
column... the mainstream mediaa€™ s intransigent flaws...

•  Phillip Coggan: Free Market a€” the boundary between state and the economy: a€~A timely and 
erudite history traces our ambiguous attitudes towards moneymaking and laissez faire tradea€!. Free 
Market: The History Of An Idea by Jacob Solla€!

•  Chad Orzel: Never Tell Me the Odds: a€~To repurpose a famous sports cliche, the chances of 
success for risks you dona€™ t take are identically zero. The odds of academic career success are 
long, but theya€™ re better than that. Sometimes ita€™ s worth just tossing the dicea€!

•  Dexter Roberts: Trade War: a€~Yeah, this is complete, total dominancea€!. Politburo Standing 
Committeea€! Xi himselfa€! Li Qiang, Zhao Leji, Wang Huning, Cai Qi, Li Xi, Ding Xuexianga€!. No 
designated successor. (Ding is 60, whereas heirs are typically appointed in their early to mid 
50s)a€!

• Xiao Zibang, Sarah Zheng, & Krystal Chia: The Seven Men Who Will Lead China Into Xia€™ s Third 
Term: a€~Li Qiang gets No. 2 seat despite chaotic Shanghai lockdowna€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Andrew B. Abel & Stavros Panageas: Running Primary Deficits Forever in a Dynamically Efficient 
Economy: Feasibility and Optimality: a€~Government debt can be rolled over forever without primary 
surpluses in some stochastic economies, including some economies that are dynamically efficient. In 
an overlapping-generations model with constant growth rate, g, of labor-augmenting productivity, 
and with shocks to the durability of capital, we show that
along a balanced growth path, the maximum sustainable ratio of bonds to capital is attained when 
the riskfree interest rate, r[sub]f, equals g. Furthermore, this maximal ratio maximizes utility 
per capita along a balanced growth path and ensures that the economy is dynamically efficienta€!

Azeem Azhar: Climate tipping points a€~One example of a huge grid-scale battery: CATL is building a 
1.4 GWh battery in Nevada for solar storage (enough to power more than 50,000 American homes for a 
day.) Why this matters: Shifting the narrative around the clean transition is critical to driving 
more adoption and greater investment. Here is the story I tell: the clean transition is happening 
rapidly, and it is getting cheaper and cheaper. There might be the
occasional bump in the road as supply wobbles and commodity prices rise, but the overall trend is 
ineluctable...

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


Visit the Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality chat


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 50% off a group subscription

