Subscribe now

Key Insights:

1. Getting the rate ofprofita€”the sums that are charged businesses for renting machines and 
renting space, and for access to the generalized social power to deploy resources that is 
financea€” right is a very, very important thing to do. Why? Because the market economy is a 
complicated institutional calculating machine for determining how to promote societal wellbeing. It 
cannot do its job if it cannot see the the constraints imposed on us by nature
and current technology. And having the market get the profit rate right is a very important part of 
that. To say a€ceita€™ s all ideologya€dor a€ceita€™ s all powera€\3or a€ceita€™ s all 
distributiona€dand go the full Sraffa production-of-commodities-by-means-of-commodities is to miss 
a truly powerful, relevant, and important insight. Thata€™ s the strongest statement of what the 
Cambridge, Massachusetts-MIT side was really getting
ata€”or ought to have been getting at, although they phrased it badly and inaccurately.

2. If we attempt to use toy mathematical models applied to macro aggregates to say anything 
quantitative about whether business owners are getting paid a€oetoo mucha€^or a€cetoo littlea€VA we 
will fail embarrassingly. Therefore we should never use toy models to do that.

3. To say that the market-equilibrium profit rate is the optimal one from the perspective of 
societal well-being is to commit the pseudo-pharisaical mistake of reversing the order of 
importance. Rather, recognize: the market was made for man, not man for the market.

4. The particular language in which the economists of the 1960s carried out this debate was 
extremely poorly suited to shed light. They cared deeply, they wrote angrily, and most of what they 
wrote was drivel. So: whenever you are having a discussion, if you want to learn or teach anything, 
first do this: try hard to figure out what issues really are, and then try hard to figure out what 
is the right language to talk about these issues.

5. As always, the key insight is: a€ceHexapodiad€U2

a€oelt was not called the a€~net of a million liesa€™ for nothinga€!a€D

Crypto: 0

As-Received-By: QQB shipboard ad hoc

Language-Path: Arbwyth->Trade 24->Cherguelen->Triskw
From: Twirlip of the Mists

Subject: Blighter Video thread
Keywords: Hexapodia as the key insight
Distribution: Threat of the Blight
Approved:    yes

Date: 8.68 days since Fall of Relay

I haven't had a chance to see the famous video from
Straumli Realm, except as an evocation. (My only

•             a          al                   a       •                                             
•             k.                • a        a


that    humans    have    six    legs?    I    wasn't    sure    from    the
evocation.    If    these    humans    have    three    pairs    of    legs,
then                                                                             I think there is 
an easy explanation for

—MORE—

login - mail


Share

THE WORLDJF UK CAMBRIDUEIHA D WON


2. — A pure economic theorist must wonder why emotions ran so
high over such an esoteric issue, which, after all, does not seem much
different  from  the  reswitching  of  activities  discovered  by  Irving
Fisher in 1907. Many explanations come to mind, and one certainly
cannot  dismiss  the  fact  that  Cambridge,  U.  K.,  had  caught  Cam­
bridge, Mass., in a rare instance of a technical blunder. Also,onemust
remember  that  Cambridge,  U. K., economists  tend to be primarily
interested  in  questions  of  political  economy,  and  if  reswitching
could be used to attack the concept of« capital», it is for some only a
short (but logically treacherous) step leading to attacks on « capita­
lism  »  and  «marginal  productivity».  Ironically,  reswitching  is
unimportant for these issues, one fact upon which Joan Robinson,
Samuelson, and Solow apparently can agree (9).


1 11V 1 lUUU^llUli ± U11VU1VI1

and the Theory of Capital

INTRODUCTION

In her paper with the above title1 Mrs. Robinson was annoyed at many of the practices
of academic economists. We have reason to be grateful for her annoyance, for she seems
to have written her article the way an oyster makes pearls—out of sheer irritation. Perhaps
her main target is the custom of regarding output as a function of inputs of labor and
“ capital She tells us that the student—the English student, at least—is told that output
is a kind of index-number, labor is a quantity of homogeneous man-hours, and then he is
bustled away from the scene of the crime before he thinks to ask in what units “ capital ”
is measured.

In the spirit of natural history I would like to record that the routine in at least some

American classrooms is slightly different, if no more enlightening. If I write Q — /(£,C),
I simply assume that there exists only one kind of physically homogeneous capital good,
and C, like L, is measured in unambiguous physical units. Of course, it’s not true that
only one kind of capital good exists, but then there’s also more than one kind of labor,
and  anyhow  this  is  neither  the  student’s  first  nor  last  course  in  economic  theory.  All
that matters is that it be made clear what part of the theory holds true in the general case.3
1 would go one step further. For many purposes it is remarkably useful to assume that
there exists only one physical commodity which can either be consumed or used as capital
in the production of more of itself. Then Q and C are measured in the same units except
that Q is a flow and C is a stock. This simple but fruitful model of capital accumulation


was one of the legacies to economics left by Frank Ramsey.3 But this is by the way.

The Production Function and the Theory
of Capital

INTRODUCTION

The  dominance  in  neo-classical  economic  teaching  of  the  concept  of  a  production
function,  in  which  the  relative  prices  of  the  factors  of  production  are  exhibited  as  a
function  of  the  ratio  in  which  they  are  employed  in  a  given  state  of  technical  know­
ledge,  has  had  an  enervating  effect  upon  the  development  of  the  subject,  for  by  con­
centrating  upon  the  question  of  the  proportions  of  factors  it  has  distracted  attention
from    the  more  difficult  but  more  rewarding  questions  of  the  influences  governing  the
supplies  of  the  factors  and  of  the  causes  and  consequences  of  changes  in  technical
knowledge.

Moreover,   the   production   function   has   been   a   powerful   instrument   of   mis­
education.  The  student  of  economic  theory  is  taught  to  write  0  =  f  (L,  C}  where  L  
is
a  quantity  of  labour,  C  a  quantity  of  capital  and  0  a  rate  of  output  of  
commodities.1
He  is  instructed  to  assume  all  workers  alike,  and  to  measure  L  in  man-hours  of  
labour  ;
he  is  told  something  about  the  index-number  problem  involved  in  choosing  a  unit  of
output  ;  and  then  he  is  hurried  on  to  the  next  question,  in  the  hope  that  he  will  
forget

to  ask  in  what  units  C  is  measured.  Before  ever  he  does  ask,  he  has  become  a  
professor,


and so sloppy habits of thought are handed on from one generation to the next.

The  question  is  certainly  not  an  easy  one  to  answer.  The  capital  in  existence  at
any  moment  may  be  treated  simply  as  “  part  of  the  environment  in  which  labour
works.”2   We  then  have  a  production  function  in  terms  of  labour  alone.  This  is  the
right  procedure  for  the  short  period  within  which  the  supply  of  concrete  capital  goods
does  not  alter,  but  outside  the  short  period  it  is  a  very  weak  Une  to  take,  for  it 
 means
that  we  cannot  distinguish  a  change  in  the  stock  of  capital  (which  can  be  made  over
the long run by accumulation) from a change in the weather (an act of God).

We  may  look  upon  a  stock  of  capital  as  the  specific  list  of  all  the  goods  in  
existence
at   any   moment   (including   work-in-progress   in   the   pipe   lines   of   production).   
But
this  again  is  of  no  use  outside  the  strict  bounds  of  the  short  period,  for  any  
change  in
the  ratio  of  capital  to  labour  involves  a  re-organisation  of  methods  of  production  and
requires  a  change  in  the  shapes,  sizes  and  specifications  of  many  or  all  the  goods
appearing in the original list.3

As  soon  as  we  leave  the  short  period,  however,  a  host  of  difficulties  appear.  Should
capital be valued according to its future earning power or its past costs ?

A SUMMING UP *
PAUL A. SAMUELSON

I. The simplest Austrian and more general models, 568. — II. Why re-
switchiner can occur. 571. — III. Reswitching in a durable-machine model.


573.  —  IV.  The  well-behaved  factor-price  frontier,  574.  —  V.  Unconventional
relation   of   total   product   and   interest,   576.   —   VI.   Unconventional   capital/
output  ratios,  577.  —  VIL  Reverse  capital  deepening  and  denial  of  diminish­
ing returns, 579. — VIII. Conclusion, 582.

The phenomenon of switching back at a very low interest rate
to a set of techniques that had seemed viable only at a very high in­

terest rate involves more than esoteric technicalities. It sho4   ws that

the simple tale told by Jevons, Bbhm-Bawerk, Wicksell, and other
neoclassical  writers  —  alleging  that,  as  the  interest  rate  falls  in
consequence  of  abstention  from  present  consumption  in  favor  of
future, technology must become in some sense more “roundabout,”
more “mechanized,” and “more productive” — cannot be universally
valid.

I. THE SIMPLEST AUSTRIAN AND MORE GENERAL MODELS

Figure I shows the simple picture of Bbhm-Bawerk and Hayek,
in which labor is applied uniformly for a shorter (or longer) period


of time and in consequence society gets a smaller (or larger) output

Rate of interest

Techniquel

Techniq




Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

References:

Roger E. Backhouse: MIT & the Other Cambridge 
<http://web.archive.org/web/20150906001312/http://paulromer.net/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/History-o
f-Political-Economy-2014-Backhouse-252-71 ,pdf>

Christopher Bliss: Capital Theory & the Distribution of Income 
<https://books.google.com/books?id=NzejBQAAQBAJ>

Edwin Burmeister: On the Social Significance of the Re switching Controversy

chttps ://www.j stor.org/stable/24696693>

Joan Robinson: The Production Function & the Theory of Capital <http://theme .univ-paris 1 ,fr/M 1 
/hpe/HPEM 1-TD4 .pdf>

Joan Robinson: Quotes <https://www.azquotes.com/author/32076-Joan_Robinson>

Joan Robinson: What Are the Questions? <https://www.j stor.org/stable/2722966>

Barkley Rosser: The Legacy of Joan Robinson 
<https://econospeak.blogspot.com/2016/05/the-legacy-of-ioan-robinson.html>

Paul Samuelson: A Summing-Up <https://www.jstor.org/stable/1882916>

Beatrice Sherrier: a€~Having fun re-reading the Solow-Robinson correspondence^! 
<https://twitter.com/Undercoverhist/status/101290173989957632Q>

Robert M. Solow: The Production Function & the Theory of Capital <https://academic .oup 
.com/restud/article/23/2/101/1538444>

Robert M. Solow & Joseph E. Stiglitz: Output, Employment, & Wages in the Short Run 
<https://www.jstor.org/stable/1879599>

&, of course:

Vernor Vinge: A Fire Upon the Deep <https: //books .google .com/books ?id=fCCWWgZ7d6UC>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

