
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:

What the stock market does this year tells you nothing
about what it will do next year

S&P 500 (1928-2020)


Total Shareholder Return (Percent)

Forthcoming September 6,2022, from Basic Books:

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Long Twentieth Century’. Paragraph 8: Much 
good did follow from that.

Silnuehino Towards Titania • An Rrnnnmir Hivtnrv nfthe I ano Twentieth Centuw Paranranh Q- Mv 
p.stimatp.a^”nr np.rhans mv vprv rnidp nprsnnal onpssa^”nf thp. avpraop wnrldwidp. narp nf what is 
at thp rnrp of hnmanitva^™ s ppnnnmir. orowth thp nrnnnrtinnal ratp. nf ornwth of mv indpv nf thp 
valnp nf thp stnr.k of nspfnl idpas ahnut maninnlatino naturp and nroaniyino humans that wprp


discovered, developed, and deployed into the world economy, shot up from about 0.45 percent per 
year before 1870 to 2.1 percent per year afterward, truly a watershed-boundary crossing difference. 
A 2.1 percent average growth for the 140 years from 1870 to 2010 is a multiplication by a factor of 
21.5. That was very good: the growing power to create wealth and earn an income allowed
humans to have more of the good things, the necessities, conveniences, and luxuries of life, and to 
better provide for themselves and their families. This does not mean that humanity in 2010 was 21.5 
times as rich in material-welfare terms as it had been in 1870: there were six times as many people 
in 2010 as there were in 1870, and the resulting increase in resource scarcity would take away
from human living standards and labor-productivity levels. As a rough guess, average world income 
per capita in 2010 would be 8.8 times what it was in 1870, meaning an average income per capita in 
2010 of perhaps $11,000 per year. (To get the figure of 8.8, you divide 21.5 by the square root of 
6.) Hold these figures in your head as a very rough guide to the amount by which humanity was
richer in 2010 than it was in 1870a€”and never forget that the riches were vastly more unequally 
distributed around the globe in 2010 than they were in 1870.

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Katie Martin: Investors Put d€~Policy Errora€™ at the Top of Their List of Concerns for 2022: 
a€~Market is more worried about rate rises that the potential economic impact of Omicrona€! chttps 
://www.ft .com/content/a8b307d 1 -2f23-4611-aab7-41 aa8a2bb087>

• Samuel Axon: After Months-Long Battle, Apple Takes the Due Date Off Its Return-To-Office 
Plans<ht\.ps:ll arstechnica .com/ 
gadgets/2021/12/after-months-long-battle-apple-takes-the-due-date-off-its-return-to-office-plans/>

• Thomas E. Ricks: Why Our Generals Were More Successful in World War II than in Korea, Vietnam or 
Iraq/Afghanistan chttps:// www.youtube.com/watch?v=AxZWxxZ2JGE>

• Hudson Institute: a€oeHistory of the Futurea€£2: A Symposium Celebrating Max Singer <https://www. 
youtube .com/watch?v=qTg9rpsrEoY>

• Max Singer: History of the Future: The Shape of the World to Come Is Visible 
7Waychttps://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/book-singer-history-of-the-futu
re.pdf>

• Max Singer: Passage to a Human World: The Dynamics of Creating Global Wealth chttps ://archive 
.org/details/passagetohumanwoOOsing 0/page/n5/mode/2up?view=theater>

• Kyle Harper: a€™Roman historian, proud to be an Okie from Norman. Author of Plagues upon the 
Earth: Disease and the Course of Human History (Princeton 2021)a€! 
chttps://twitter.com/Oklahomaharper>

• Kenneth Weinstein & al.: History of the Future: The Shape of the World to Come Is Visible Today: 
a€~Max Singera€™ s new booka€! argues that poverty, tyranny, and war will be largely eliminated in 
the future. Without the struggles that have plagued humanity throughout history, Singer says we 
will have to find new ways to shape charactera€!. Will people really be better off
when the whole world has become wealthy, free, and peaceful?a€! 
chttps://www.hudson.org/events/1063-a-book-discussion-on-history-of-the-future-the-shape-of-the-worl
d-to-come-is-visible-today-72011>

•  Alice Evans: a€™How did slavery affect gender? In Ancient Greece & Rome, a womana€™ s ability to 
marry & reproduce legitimate offspring for the oikos depended on distinguishing herself from 
(sexually available) slaves. Superb @Oklahomaharper, a€oeOn human bondagea€D & a€oeSlavery in the 
Late Roman Worlda€D chttps://t.co/0RmLQxz2t3>a€!

Alice Evans @ alice evans

How did slavery affect gender? In Ancient Greece & Rome, a woman's ability to marry & reproduce 
legitimate offspring for the oikos depended on distinguishing herself from (sexually available) 
slaves. Superb @Oklahomaharper, "On human bondage" & "Slavery in the Late Roman World"

I will argue that the possession of socially recognized and publicly protected sexual

112 ON HUMAN BONDAGE: AHER SLAVERY AND S(K:IAL DEATH

honor was an essential part of the experience of personal freedom for women in the
ancient world, confirming Patterson’s insights. A woman’s status as an eleuthera
distinguished her from women without sexual respectability, namely prostitutes
and   slaves. Prostitutes and slaves acted as the ideological opposites of the eleuthera.
At stake in the distinction between women with and without sexual honor was
the potential to marry and produce legitimate offspring. The sexual availability of
eleutherai was reserved for marriage, tor legitimate reproduction; thus, sexual
access   to eleutherai circulated only within the marriage market. Sexual access to
slaves and prostitutes circulated in the commodities market, as a fungible good,
exchangeable for money or gifts (Davidson 1998; Kurke 1999; the essays in
Faraone   and McClure 2006). For the woman in the classical world, the primary
experience of not being a commodity was being destined for a life of marriage and
reproduction; the substance of personal freedom, then, was not autonomy or


absence ot external control, but predestination to the heavy burdens that lay upon

female sexual honor in ancient society. The classic definition of personal freedom
in Roman law - the natural faculty to do what one wants without the hindrance of
force or law - had little relevance for women, w hose freedom meant access to a
type of life but not the choice to have it otherwise.4

Here we might find another confirmation that the naturalistic romances are a
sort of Rosetta Stone of ancient social ideology, for the heroine, the cleuthera, must
be willing to die for her sexual honor. Her sexual honor is equivalent to her life,
and its opposite is slavery' and death. It is a convention of the genre that she must
be w illing to die - volubly, histrionically - rather than surrender her corporal integ­
rity. She w ould die for her modesty, for her freedom. In the w ords of the latest of
the extant romances, Helidorus’ Ethiopian Tale, “Chastity is a glorious winding
sheet.”5 For the woman in the ancient world, sexual dishonor was the equivalent of
“social death,” a connection that plays out in the romances as now here else.

The integration of sexual honor and legal status in the classical world w as about
more than personal freedom for the elcnthera. It was about the order of the polis,
about the civic order, even in the age of empires. Sexual honor w as about civic
freedom - not the political rights and privileges accorded to men, but about the
power to reproduce the city. In the same period w hen the term clenthera acquires

306             The making of honorable society

The Roman prostitute was effectively the opposite of the honorable
woman, the mater familias, in the civil law.1  In Roman society the role
of   the mater familias was also constructed in opposition to the slave.
The slave was an equally important, and in many ways more immediate,
ideological foil to the mater familias. The resolution of this duality is
plain:   the mater familias was a woman with honor, while the prostitute
and the slave were quintessential!}' without honor. The system of female
sexual honor worked along a single spectrum. The free, honorable, sexually
modest woman was at one end, while ar the other was the dishonored,
unfree, and sexually available woman. These attributes were integrated so
that the honorable woman was described as free, the dishonored woman as
unfree and promiscuous. Chrysostom, for instance, regularly contrasted the
bodies of prostitutes with the bodies offree women: they were conceptual
opposites.1'  The  polarity  between  the  free  woman  and  the  prostitute
shows  that the construction of sexual honor conflated legal status and
sexual modesty. Nothing brings this out more clearly than the usage of
the word “free woman,” eleuthera, as a standard equivalent for respectable


woman or wire.

Second, the slave trade. Economic developments drove and reinforced institu­
tional developments in the archaic period, and chief among these is the expansion
of  the slave trade. A specialized trade in slaves clearly exists already in Homer, at
least in the Odyssey. At the end of Book one, we meet Eurycleia, whom Laertes had
bought in her youth for twenty oxen. And this passage points precisely to one of
the constraints on trade in early Greece, the lack of money. But with the introduc­
tion of coinage, the growth of commerce, and the development of more complex
and specialized economies with more varied demands for labor, chattel slavery and
the slavery trade significantly expand in the late archaic and especially classical peri­
ods of Greece. The institutionalization of female sexual honor developed dialecti­
cally with the expansion of slavery in the Mediterranean world.

Third, the ideology that informs the meaning of cleutbera as a sexually respect­
able woman was shaped by the practice and institutionalization of prostitution in
the ancient world. The Greek world in the late archaic and early classical period saw
take shape rhe basic outlines of what was to prove a very enduring sex industry.
There  developed  a  two-tier  flesh  trade  around  hetairai,  courtesans,  and  pornai^
common  prostitutes.  The  distinctions  between  the  courtesan  and  the  common
prostitute were a blend of fantasy and reality, but in the context of this discussion
what   is important is what they shared: exclusion from the circle of honor, ineligibil­
ity  to reproduce legitimate offspring for the oikos. At times the betaira was a sexual

Table 7.1 The binary division of female sexuality

Sexuality structured by marriage    Sexuality structured outside marriage


Able to beget heirs
Modest

Free

Not able co beget legitimate offspring
Promiscuous

Servile

12:32 PM r™ Dec 17,2021

37Likes 11 Retweets

• Joe Weisenthal: d€™ The Fed is quite literally ahead of the curve. The Feda€™ s own dots indicate 
more hikes over the next three years than what the market is pricing

@conorsen @TheStalwart thought this was one of Powell's better answers, long and variable lags are 
no longer really true. As we saw in Jan 2019, you can tighten/ease just by talking,


CHAIR POWELL. So, on the first part of your question, which is, why not stop
purchasing now, I would just say this, we've learned that we're -- in dealing with balance sheet

issues, we've learned that it's best to take a careful sort of methodical approach to make
adjustments. Markets can be sensitive to it. And we thought that this was a doubling of the speed.
We’ll    -- We're basically two meetings away now from finishing the taper. And we thought that
was  the appropriate way to go. So we announced it and that's what will happen. You know, the
question of long and variable lags is an interesting one. That's Milton Friedman's famous
statement.  And I do think that in this world where everything is - or the global financial connect

— markets are connected together, financial conditions can change very quickly. And my own
sense is that they get into -- financial conditions affect the economy fairly rapidly, longer than
the traditional thought of, you know, a year or 18 months. Shorter than that, rather. But in
addition, when we communicate about what we're going to do, the markets move immediately to
that.  So, financial conditions are changing to reflect, you know, the forecasts that we made and --
basically, which was, I think, fairly in line with what markets were expecting. But financial
conditions don't wait to change until things actually happen. They change on the expectation of

things happening. So, I don't think it's a question of having to wait.

6:26 PM a~™ Dec 17, 2021

Paragraphs:

Peter Sarris: New Approaches to the a€~Plague of Justiniana€™: a€~This viewpoint is meant as a 
contribution to debate over the nature and significance of the a€~Justinianic Plaguea€™ , which 
struck Western Eurasia between the sixth and eighth centuries CE, and the methodological challenges 
posed by attempting to reconcile historical evidence with that derived from the realm of the
Natural Sciences. In recent years, major advances have been made in our genetic understanding of 
the Justinianic Plague. Yet growing scientific interest in the disease has coincided with a 
concerted effort amongst some historians to seek to downplay its historical importance. This 
article surveys our current state of historical and scientific understanding with respect to the 
sixth-century pandemic,
responds to the recent attempts to argue that the disease had only a minimal impact on the 
societies that it struck, and considers how historians should respond to the burgeoning scientific 
evidence in order to take study of the plague forward. For co-operation between geneticists, 
environmental scientists, archaeologists and historians, it argues, offers the chance to transform 
our understanding of
how, when and where the plague spread and to assess its impact across the Afro-Eurasian world as a 
whole, and not just on the Mediterranean, for which we have our best written sourcesa€!

LINK: <https://academic .oup .com/past/advance-article/doi/10.1093/pastj/gtab024/6427314>

Economist: Unearthing the Truth'. a€~In its prime, from around 1200 to 1550, Great Zimbabwe was 
home to about 10,000 people. The state covered 1,779 acres, more than twice the area of New Yorka€™ 
s Central Parka€!. Items found at Great Zimbabwe have long astonished archaeologists. A Ming 
dynasty teapot, a Persian pot inscribed with Arabic script, glass from Syria, cowrie shells
from the Indian Oceana€”all attest to its connection to an international trading networka€!. 
Cross-shaped copper ingots similar to those found in Congo and Zambia today, and metal gongs akin 
to those found across west and central Africaa€!. The remains visible today were the heart of a 
vibrant city-state. Constellations of polygamous families lived in multigenerational homesteads 
built from
dhaka (a gravel and clay mix). Residents ate grains such as millet and sorghum, as well as beef 
from cattlea€!. Much of Great Zimbabwe remains unexcavated. When Mr Chirikure dug up the car park 
used by visiting vehiclesa€”and the monkeys who defecate on thema€”he found, among other things, 
thumb pianos, prompting the realisation that the area outside the main walls was populated
too .restrial laser-scanning, structure-from-motion photogrammetry and drone imagerya€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/interactives/christmas-specials/2021/12/18/great-zimbabwe-archaeology>

John Crespi: Is Inflation d€oeNon-Transitorya€tt: a€~I am still on Team Transitory. Wea€™ re 
looking at food supply chains and seeing things that I just dona€™ t think will be an issue latter 
part of next year. 2019a€“2021, we went from eating over half our food away from home to eating 
over half our food at home. We also had big ships that could move bulk ag products around the world
all of a sudden had to start moving Pelotons. 2021a€“2022, you dona€™t just flip a switch and watch 
it run back(for?)ward again. Though the logistics are known, there is enough uncertainty around 
omicron, that processors, distributors and warehouses dona€™t want to be caught running full steam 
ahead only to have to flip the switch a second, third, fourth time. Here is a simple little
example. When you are eating half your food away from home, (most) restaurants and institutions 
dona€™ t want shelled eggs. When you are eating at home, foodies dona€™ t want buckets of liquid 
eggs. In 2020, you couldna€™ t just put the liquid back in the shell, seal it up, and put it on the 
shelf (there werena€™ t even enough egg containers). The engineering on going back to what you
did   in 2019, is known, but you dona€™t want to get caught making the wrong decision if omicron 
shuts things down againa€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/is-inflation-non-transitory/comments>

Josh Kovensky: CNN: Rick Perry Pitched Meadows On Plan To Steal Election Even Before Results Were 
In: a€~Investigatorsa€! believea€! Rick Perrya€! to Mark Meadowsa€l. a€oeHEREa€™ s an AGRESSIVE 
(sic) STRATEGY: Why can t (sic) the states of GA NC PENN and other R controlled state houses 
declare this is BS (where conflicts and election not called that night) and just send
their own electors to vote and have it go to the SCOTUSa€Da€!

LINK: 
<https://talkingpointsmemo.com/news/cnn-rick-perry-pitched-meadows-on-a-plan-to-steal-the-election-e
ven-before-the-results-were-in>

Jehan: Umami Exists & MSG Is Its Messenger: a€~Why do we even have glutamate receptors though?a€! 
Ita€™ s one of only 5 basic tastesa€!. Our sour taste broadly registers pH and there are over 600 
bitter-tasting compounds, so ita€™ s more like salty and sweet, which are sensitive to a small 
class of desirable nutrients. The best explanation seems to be that ita€™ s used as an analog for
nroteina€l a pood shortcut to meatiness, which leads me to mv bippest takeawav: Put MSG on 
stuff!a€l Aside from food hist tastinp better and foolinp neonle that von know how to cook, von pet 
two bip benefits: Yon can use less salt, too much of which is nrobablv bad for von. You can nut it 
on meat substitutes, wherebv the nerformance ceilinp poes from a^nethat could nass for a real


burgera€D to a€cedamn that was good, I will now crave this instead of cheeseburgersa€Da€!
LINK: chttps://www.atvbt.com/msg/>

Edward Said (1994): Review of Eric Hobsbawma€™ s d€ceAge of Extreme sd€U2 a€~Only rarely does 
Hobsbawm convey what it was (or is) like to belong, say, to an endangered or truly oppressed class, 
race or minority, to a community of artists, to other embattled participants in and makers (as 
opposed to observers) of a historical moment. Missing from the panorama Hobsbawm presents is
the underlying drive or thrust of a particular era. I assume that this is because he thinks 
impersonal or large-scale forces are more important, but I wonder whether witnesses, militants, 
activists, partisans and ordinary people are somehow of less value in the construction of a 
full-scale history of the 20th century. I dona€™ t know the answer to this, but I tend to trust my 
own hunch that the view
from within, so to speak, needs some reconciling with the overview, some orchestrating and 
shadinga€!

LINK:


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: Edward Said's Review of Eric Hobsbawm's "Age of Extremes"

Edward Said (1995): Contra Mundum: a€~Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914a€“1991 by 
Eric Hobsbawm. Joseph, 627 pp., A£20, October 1994,0-7181-3307-2: A powerful and unsettling book, 
Eric Hobsbawma€™ s Age of Extremes brings to a close the series of historical studies he began in 
1962 witha€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

