Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)This was an excellent hour-and-a-half event. These "Research on Tap" events have been some of the 
best that we have done here at Equitable Growth. And this, I think, was an
especially good show. You will profit enormously from watching and listening to it:

Equitable Growth: Research on Tap: Investing in an Equitable Future

LINK: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Q227k4Xp58s>

2) Very interesting evidence that those of us who have been seeing a low rather than a high 
multiplier as governing the effect of direct-transfer fiscal expansion this winter and
spring are likely to be correct. Thus I now see it as more likely that fears of an explosion of 
inflation of any kind this year or simply whistling past the graveyard:

Carmen Sanchez Cumming & Raksha Kopparam: What the U.S. Census Household Pulse Survey Reveals About 
the First Year of the Coronavirus Recession, in Six Charts:
a€~Eight months after the CARES Act was enacted, a second $600 Economic Impact Payment was sent to 
most U.S. households. By this time, multiple waves of coronavirus cases
damaged employment opportunities and the general livelihood of many U.S. workers and their 
families. One of the results was more debt: Approximately 30 percent of adults
reported having increased credit card debt, taking out loans, or asking for financial help from 
friends and family between June and December 2020. When the $600 stimulus
payments arrived, households across all races and income groupsa€”but especially Black, Latinx, and 
low-income householdsa€”used this money to begin paying off the debt they
had accumulated rather than spending it on household expenses. The disparities in use of the two 
stimulus payments highlight the importance of providing timely reliefa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/what-the-u-s-census-household-pulse-survey-reveals-about-the-first-year
-of-the-coronavirus-recession-in-six-charts/>

3) There was a substantial infrastructure gap before the coming of the Great Recession. Since the 
start of the Great Recession, it has been an absolute disaster as far as public
investment in America is concerned. And we are now greatly poorer for it:

Equitable Growth: More than 200 Economists to Congress: Seize a€oehistoric opportunity to make 
long-overdue public investmentsa€D to boost economic growth: a€~Led by
Hilary Hoynes, Trevon Logan, Atif Mian, William Spriggs, statement implores Congress to a€oeinvest 
in a prosperous and equitable future a€Da€ I

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/press/more-than-200-economists-to-congress-seize-historic-opportunity-t
o-make-long-overdue-public-investments-to-boost-economic-growth/>

4) I would have expected the large surge of job growth in March to have also significantly 
diminished the pace at which workers lost their jobs and applied for unemployment
benefits. Apparently it did not. I am coming to the conclusion that I do not understand what is 
going on in Americas labor market right now. That disturbs me greatly:

Kate Bahn: a€~For the week ending April 3, 740,787 workers filed for regular unemployment benefits. 
While the U.S. labor market is showing signs of a recovery after adding
more than 900,000 jobs last month, UI claims remain alarmingly high. States reported that another 
151,752 workers filed for initial PUA, which extended UI to some workers who
are not eligible for regular benefits. In total, 892,539 workers filed initial PUA or regular 
unemployment benefits last weeka€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/LipstickEcon/with_replies?lang=en>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Alexis de Tocqueville said that one of the things that made America great was that while people 
pursued self interest, they pursued self interest "rightly understood". Here JPMC
CEO Jamie Dimon argues that JP Morgan Chase should and does pursue shareholder value maximization 
"rightly understood":

Jamie Dimon: Letter to Shareholders: Annual Report 2020: a€~We should not be buttonholed by the 
debate about whether there are a€cefiduciarya€D reasons to think of
a€oeshareholder valuea€D narrowly and to the exclusion of those who work at the company, our 
clients and communitiesa€!. To a good company, its reputation is everything. That
reputation   is earned day in and day out with every interaction with customers and communities. 
This is not to say that companies (and people) do not make mistakesa€”of course
they                                                                                 do. Often a 
reputation is earned by how you deal with those mistakes. While all businesses are different, there 
are some fundamentalsa€!. Banks, in particular, have to be
rigorous about standards. Unlike many companies that will simply sell you a product if you can pay 
for it, banks must necessarily turn customers down or enforce rules that a
customer may not like (for example, covenants). This makes open and transparent dealings even more 
importanta€!. We must always strive, particularly in tough times, to earn the
trust of our customers and communitiesa€!. If you live in a small town and run a corner bakery, it 
is very easy to understand the value of being a responsible community citizen.

Most businesses on a€oeMain Streeta€D keep the sidewalk in front of their store clean so people 
dona€™ t slip and falla€!. A bakery or a restaurant will often donate surplus food
at the end of the day to a local homeless sheltera€!. Doing their part to make the community a 
better place is both the moral thing to do and a driver of better commercial outcomes
for the towna€! LINK: 
<https://reports.ipmorganchase.com/investor-relations/202Q/ar-ceo-letters.htm>

2) History does not repeat, but it does rhyme. Bill Janeway attempts to drill down and draw the 
lessons for today from the fact that Roosevelta€™ s New Deal was so
extraordinarily successful:

Bill Janeway: Lessons from the First New Deal for the Next One: a€~FDRa€™ s New Deala€! was 
complicated and conflicteda€!. FDRa€™ s own statement of purposea€!.
a€oeThe country needs and unless I mistake its temper the country demands bold persistent 
experimentation. It is common sense to take a method and try it If it fails admit it
frankly   and try another. But above all try somethinga€!a€D Successive experimentsa€! 
characterized the New Deala€! illustrate the conflictsa€”even contradictionsa€”thata€!
result from improvising policy responses to crisisa€!. Three prime lessonsa€!. (Re)Building State 
Capacitya€!. The new agencies created during the famous First Hundred Days
were starting from scratch. For example, the Public Works Administration^! hired some 6,000 staff 
in two months. The Deputy Administrator, Henry M. Waite, subsequently
recalled: a€oeFirst they hired lawyers, many lawyersa€”more than 100 for the Washington office 
alonea€! After the lawyers came the engineersa€! Added to all these were the
platoons                                                                                  of 
accountants, clerks, stenographers, and typists, until there were more than 2,300 jammed into the 
Interior Department building. Another 3,700 new recruits staffed the
PWAa€™ s 10 regional offices.a€D The same was true of all the other alphabet soupa€!. Strategic 
Missionsa€!. FDRa€™ s New Deal encompassed three strategic missions:
recoverya€! reform of particular aspectsa€! and regime change in the fundamental structure of the 
American political economya€!. Today: The immediate strategic priority facing
the Biden Administration embodies no conflict: to accelerate Recovery from the pandemic in order to 
Restore economic prosperitya€!. Measures such as expanded child and earned
income tax credits may be formally time limited, but they suggest this Administration knows how to 
exploit crisis for progressive ends, very much in the spirit of the second phase
of FDRa€™ s New Deala€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/guest-post-bill-ianeway-on-lessons>

3) The plague year has been marked by both bold policy successes and extraordinary, horrible, and 
pitiful policy failuresa€’’which continue today with the failure of global
coordination of vaccine production and distribution. History will, I think, judgea€’’and not 
kindly:

Monica de Bolle, Maurice Obstfeld, & Adam S. Posen: Economic Policy for a Pandemic age: An 
Introduction: a€~A year ago, there were 132,492 confirmed cases of
COVIDa€“19 and 4,917 deaths worldwide, of which the United States accounted fora€! 43 deaths. 
Nowa€! The world lost 8.3 percent of a yeara€™ s combined income, with the
distribution                                                                                  of 
economic losses mapping largely to where the infection was least controlled, and the poorest in 
each country suffering the most for the failures of the Group of
Twenty (G20) governmentsa€!. Cooperative forward-looking policy action will materially improve our 
chances of truly escaping todaya€™ s plague and making future plagues less
costlya€!. Nowhere are the policy implications of the pandemic age more evident than in the area of 
vaccine distribution^!. Guard against inequities in disease incidencea€!.

Mitigate the aggregate economic costs of pandemicsa€!. The comparatively good experience in East 
Asia and the Pacific shows what may be possiblea€!. Where the leaders failed
even to attempt significant collective action, notably in vaccine production and distribution, 
lives and livelihoods were indeed unnecessarily lost. Agreements on transparent
common standards of behavior, all governments pulling in the same direction or forswearing the same 
bad actions simultaneously, mattera€!

LINK: <https ://www.piie .com/sites/default/files/documents/piieb21 -2 .pdf>


4) The Financial Times Editorial Board is 100% behind Bidena€™ s proposed corporate tax reform:

Financial Times Editorial Board: A Step Forward on Global Corporation Tax Reform'. a€~US proposal 
to break deadlock should be embraced by Europea€!. The mooted
compromise woulda€! be a victory for multilateralism and break the deadlocka€!. The global system 
of corporation taxa€! has long needed an overhaul. It was created for an age
when capital investment meant spending on physical assets such as factories or farms with a 
presence in a defined location. But it has struggled to cope with the rise of
a€oeintangiblesa€na€!. This has encouraged a a€oerace to the bottoma€Da€l. Bidena€™ s latest offer 
is based on twin pillars suggested by the Organisation for Economic Co­
operation      and Developmental establish[ing] a a€oetaxing righta€D for countries based on the 
portion of sales of a€ceconsumer-facinga€D companies in their territorya€! create a
new global minimum ratea€! [to] preventa€! a€ cebegg ar-thy-neighbour a€Da€ I. A pacta€! would 
allow both the Europeans and Americans to get what they want. It would also
enable Biden, and his Treasury secretary Janet Yellen, to show that the hard edges of globalisation 
can be smoothed better through engagement with allies than the go-it-alone
a€oeAmerica Firsta€D policy of his predecessora€!. India is also toughening its taxes on foreign 
tech companies. Europe should now embrace the US proposal and make the most
of    the opportunitya€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/3811d39f-c4be-481b-9713-5246d501604Q>

5) Chinaa€™ s recent policy actions do not look to me like the rational acts of a 
geostrategista€”like something driven by a government that assigns primacy to external politics
and that both understands the situation and has rational goals. Rather, it smells to me like 
something driven by a government focused on internal politics, and that thinks potential
opposition can be disarmed or defocused by playing a strong nationalism card. The idea is to 
a€oebusy giddy minds with foreign quarrelsa€D, as Shakespearea€™ s King Henry IV
Lancaster advised his son Prince Hal to do in order to distract people from the illegitimacy of the 
Lancastrian dynastya€™ s claim to the throne. Pre-WWI Germany had much the
same ideaa€’’distract attention from questions of the elitea€™ s warrant to rule and of 
distribution by stirring up disputes with other nations. That ended very, very badly.
Wilhelmine China could end very, very badly as well. And I find myself remembering the Germans in 
1914 saying: a€oeof course Britain would not go to war over a technical and
temporary violation of Belgiuma€™ s neutrality !a€D I hope history does not rhyme with respect to 
the status of the Chinese island of Taiwan:

Economist: China Is Betting That the West Is in Irreversible Decline'. a€~CIts gaze fixed on the 
prize of becoming rich and strong, China has spent the past 40 years as a risk-averse
bully. Quick to inflict pain on smaller powers, it has been more cautious around any country 
capable of punching back. Recently, however, Chinaa€™ s risk calculations have
seemed  to changea€!. Chinaa€™ s foreign ministry declares that horrors such as the Atlantic slave 
trade, colonialism and the Holocaust, as well as the deaths of so many Americans
and Europeans from covida€“19, should make Western governments ashamed to question Chinaa€™ s 
record on human rights. Most recently Chinese diplomats and propagandists
have denounced as a€oelies and disinformationa€n reports that coerced labour is used to pick or 
process cotton in Xinjiang. They have praised fellow citizens for boycotting

foreign brands that decline to use cotton from that region. Still others have sought to prove their 
zeal by hurling Maoist-era abuse. A Chinese consul-general tweeted that
Canadaa€™ s prime minister was a€oea running dog of the USa€Da€!. Chinese leaders, if their own 
words and writings are any guide, think that assertiveness is rationala€!. China
is increasingly sure that America is in long-term, irreversible declinea€!. ChinaaC™ s rulers are 
majoritarians. Their hold on power involves convincing most citizens that
prosperity, security and national strength require iron-fisted, one-party rulea€!. ChinaaC™ s 
rulers are duly preparing for a protracted struggle. The risks are cleara€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/china/2021/04/Q3/china-is-betting-that-the-west-is-in-irreversible-declin
e>

7) I do remember the late Lee Atwater fiercely denying that modern Republicans were racists and 
white supremicistsa€”if they were, he said, they would be trying to roll back the
Voting Rights Act, and trying to disenfranchise American Africans. Well, John Roberts and his posse 
at the Supreme Court rolled back the VRA, and the writers of National

Re vie wa€ ’’including one, Kevin Williamson, whom the honchos of the Atlantic Monthly really 
wanted to hire for their magazinea€”are not apologetic about how too many
youngs, urbans, and Blacks are voting, and how this should be stopped:

Scott Lemieux: Time to Set the a€oeDays Since National Review Published Article Explicitly Calling 
For the Intentional Disenfranchisement of Votersa€dMeter Back to Zero'.
a€~The lines of communication between the luminaries at Americaa€™ s premier journal of vote 
suppression since 1957 appear to be crossed. On the one hand, you have the
Respectable Republican Elite assertions that the restrictions that Georgia Republicans placed on 
the vote at the behest of Donald Trump dona€™ t actually restrict the vote at all,
Scouta€™ s honor, I have a study from a professor at Trump University to prove it. But, this being 
the National Review, they can hardly be expected to keep up the pretense for
even    a couple of weeks, so herea€™ s Kevin Williamsona€™ s latest entry, a€oewe should have 
fewer but a€~bettera€™ voters if you know what I mean and I know you do, and
what I mean is whiter and older and more rurala€Da€!. Bill Buckley must be pleased that his spirit 
lives ona€!

LINK: 
<https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2021/04/time-to-set-the-days-since-national-review-published-a
rticle-explicitly-calling-for-the-intentional-disenfranchisement-
of-voters-meter-back-to-zero>

8) The attempt continues to construct a less-dysfunctional public sphere than the evolving 
techno-Silicon Valley one, in which the money is made by scaring and radicalizing
viewers. Now it is SubStacka€™ s turn in the barrel. All platforms that draw sharp lines between 
acceptable and unacceptable behavior wind up being gamed, to their substantial
detriment. a€ceGestalta€D and a€oewe know it when we see ita€D seem to be the only sustainable and 
healthy moderation practices:

Rick Paulas: Substackd€™ s Graham Linehan Conundrum'. a€~In June of 2020, Twitter permanently 
banned Graham Linehan for a€oerepeated violations of our rules against
hateful conduct and platform manipulation.a€Da€! Linehan made the logical next step for anyone 
looking to rid themselves from the tyranny of editorial constraint. He started a
Substacka€!. Ita€™ s been obviousa€! Linehan would be a big hurdle for Substacka€™ s 
techno-libertarian view on content moderationa€!. Linehana€™ s posts have always been
something extraa€!. Platform rulesa€! [a]re written vague enough that Substack can interpret them 
however they want. Is posting screenshots from a dating app a from of doxxing?
Does Linehana€™s constant misgendering constitute attacks based on gender and/or sexual 
orientation?a€! Substacka€! [has] already answereda€! simply by allowing Linehan to
continuea€!. What remains to be seen is if those working with/for Substack can force the company to 
change its mind. As Feinberg put later, Substack currently feels a€oeup for
grabsa€D: a€oeNothing about Substack right now is inevitable.a€! There is nothing intrinsic to the 
idea of a newsletter platform that ensures it swings to the right. There are no
algorithms here favoring angry disputation and reactionary s-a€”-stirringa€!a€D Whether or not 
Substack writers can actually force the company to bend in any direction other
than reactionary s—stirring will likely be answered by how long Linehan is allowed to use their 
platform. Every post that goes by without the company taking a stance is one more
notch in the a€cenopea€D columna€!

LINK: <https://domstack.substack.eom/p/substacks-graham-linehan-conundrum>
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

