Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Nilanjana Roy: Churails, Djinns & Rakshasasd€ ”Indiad€™ s Monsters Go Mainstream'. a€~The 
countrya€™ s writers have used science fiction and fantasy to tackle earthly issues a€” and the 
rest of the world
is catching upa€! <https://www.ft.com/content/d707694a-b362-4b96-b3bf-cQ638c606450>


• Andrew Cunningham & Lee Hutchinson: Andrew & Lee Continue Watching The Wheel OfTimea€”& Ita€™ s 
Getting Real'. a€~The showa€™ s latest episode gives its characters a minute to breathe, then
goes biga€! 
<https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2021/ll/wheel-of-time-book-reader-recap-episode-4-who-is-the-dragon-
reborn/>

Paragraphs:

Robert Shrimsley: Along for the Ride at Boris Johnson Land'. a€~In Peppa Pig World, everything 
works. Streets are safe, schools are good, healthcare excellent, there are novel forms of transport 
and, presumably, the
speeches all come with numbered pages. Ia€™ m not sure Peppa Pig would say the same about Boris 
Johnson Land if she were invited to give next yeara€™ s CBI speech. But then his amusement park is 
still something of a
work in progressa€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/399255ad-5e3c-45e0-8cb5-32d361f50998>

Nick Gruen (2009): Adam Smith is to Markets as Jane Austen is to Marriage'. a€~Whether we take Adam 
Smith as an apostle of capitalism, or as a trenchant critic of the abuse of power, privilege and 
wealtha€“for he was
botha€“his view of the nascent capitalism of his time should interest us, if for no other reason 
than for its freshnessa€!. Smith gazed upon and theorised capitalism, or as he called it 
a€oecommercial societya€D, as it was just
emerginga€!. I propose the following conceit as a sub-theme: Adam Smith is to markets as his 
near-contemporary Jane Austen is to marriagea€!. Not unlike Jane Austena€™ s novels, Smiths great 
books were a tour de force
in    the eighteenth-century rhetorical tradition, with the threefold task of instructing, 
delighting and persuading their audience. And much of that persuasion was not advice on government 
policy but rather the presentation of
the market as a rich medium through which human life was lived, with an invitation to observe and 
denounce folly and vice and to embrace the more difficult but rewarding path of virtuea€!. Pride 
and Prejudice is about
different ways of seeing: The mana€™ s and the womana€™ s; thought and feeling; art and nature. 
What appears as Darcya€™ s prideful arrogance to Elizabeth is not, in her final realisation 
improper pride. It is in the
service                                                                                             
         of the code of noblesse oblige. As a gentleman, Darcy will never complain and never 
explain in response to Wickhama€™ s malicious falsehoods. It is beneath his dignity. Elizabetha€™ s 
naturalness in assessing
people informs her prejudice against Darcy and nearly leads to the disaster of her more fully 
succumbing to Wickhama€™ s charms. The happy resolution is a paradigm of eighteenth-century 
moderation and compromise
between perspectivesa€!. Smith saw markets as mediating the same kind of synthesis of alternative 
perspectives (needs) in which the whole became more than the sum of its partsa€! a quintessentially 
human and humanising
institutional for conversation, compromise and connectiona€l. Though it will often perhaps mostly 
be dominated by mercenary motives, the market connection, often between strangers, is, to use 
Smitha€™ s telling
expression, every bit as fit and proper to its own circumstance and context. Dialogue and mutual 
accommodation is our best instrument of wisdom, of virtue, and our best chance at happiness. Mere 
self-love is not sufficient
for ita€!

LINK: 
<https://clubtroppo.com.au/2009/08/07/adam-smith-is-to-markets-as-jane-austen-is-to-marriage/>

Izabella Kaminska: The metaverse is Just the Latest Incarnation of Las Vegas'. a€~Facebooka€™ s 
reinvention aims to create a standardised virtual reality where the house always winsa€l. There is 
no better metaphor for
whata€™ s going on than the story of how Las Vegas was turned from a barren Nevada wasteland into a 
hedonistic escape from the harsh realities of The Great Depression in the 1930sa€l. Key was US 
president Herbert
Hoovera€™ s greatest legacy, the Hoover Dama€l. The architects of Las Vegas realised early on was 
that the Hoover Dama€™ s development woulda€! attract a large but desperate workforce to a highly 
unappealing region
of the country, where not much else was easily available. Once there they could be captureda€!. Las 
Vegasa€™ a€! hedonistic offerings would woo workers like moths to a flame. But rather than offering 
salvation, or
sustainable wealth, Las Vegas only delivered them to another extreme form of exploitation. A 
scenario where the house always wins while the usera€™ s pockets are plundered, their dreams are 
often crusheda€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/739235bc-c418-4895-a426-3bd245ec6a00>

Florian Ederer: a€™ David Romer expressed it best'. "David Romera€™ s Rules for Making It Through 
Graduate School and Finishing Your Dissertation: a€~Out in Fivea€™: Dona€™ t clutter up your life 
with other
activities; just write. Dona€™ t carry out a thorough and comprehensive search of the literature; 
just write. Dona€™ t attempt to make sure that every page you write shows the full extent of your 
professional skills; just write.
Dona€™ t write a well-organized, well-integrated, unified dissertation; just write. Dona€™ t think 
profound thoughts that shake the intellectual foundations of the discipline; just write. If you 
dona€™ t have a paper started by
the spring of your third year, be alarmed. If you dona€™ t have a paper largely drafted by the fall 
of your fourth year, panic. Have three new ideas a week while you are getting started. Dona€™ t try 
to game the profession,
work on what interests you. Good papers in economics have three characteristics: (i) A viewpoint; 
(2) A lever; (3) A resulta€!

LINK:

Florian Ederer @florianederer
David Romer expressed it best.

David Romer's Rules for Making It Through
Graduate School and Finishing Your
Dissertation

’’Out in Five”

• Don’t clutter up your life with other activities; just
write.

• Don’t carry out a thorough and comprehensive


search of the literature; just write.

•  Don’t attempt to make sure that every page you
write shows the full extent of your professional
skills; just write.

• Don’t write a well-organized, well-integrated,

unified dissertation; just write.

•  Don’t think profound thoughts that shake the
intellectual foundations of the discipline; just
write.

•  If you don't have a paper started by the spring of

your third year, be alarmed.

•  If you don't have a paper largely drafted by the fall
of                                   your fourth year, panic.

•  Have three new ideas a week while you are getting
started.

•  Don’t try to game the profession, work on what
interests you.

• Good papers in economics have three

characteristics:

o A viewpoint.

o A lever.

o A result.

10:17 PM r™ Nov 24,2021

156Likes40Retweets

Phil Libin: mmhmm: a€~Video callsa€! was never the interesting part. Ita€™ s the tip of the 
iceberg. The really interesting part is how do you manage a distributed live work culture and 
situation? How do you shift from
everything being synchronous in real time to being asynchronous? How do you live in this kind of 
hybrid realitya€i. The exciting shift really isna€™t so much about people getting off video, ita€™ 
s about people
transitioninga€!to a€™how do I thrive in this new world?a€™ a€! We are thinking through how do you 
shift from synchronous to asynchronous life? How do you live in a fundamentally hybrid world? I 
show off a lot of our
upcoming features that change how people can present, consume and interact in the first keynote on 
our website. It shows a bunch of these concepts that show where we think the product is headeda€!. 
a€™ Do in person
whata€™   s best in person. Do on video whata€™ s best on video .a€™ Those two things arena€™t a 
trade off. Video is not a poor substitute to being in person, ita€™ s a different kind of thinga€!. 
We are very clear. We are
trying  to optimize for impact. Wea€™re not trying to optimize for money and wea€™re not trying to 
optimize for a number of usersa€!

LINK:

num


YUI

One Year Wiser

mmhmm and Phil Libin

mmhmm is Phil Libina€™ s fifth startup and he learned a lot from the first four. One of those 
startups was Evernote, which he co-founded and led as CEO for 8 years, mmhmm started from a joke of 
an idea in May 2020 but
quickly evolved into a real business with the launch of their closed beta in July, just two months 
later. Last week, exactly a year after tha€!

Read more

2 years ago A- 6 likes A- Tyler Swartz
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

