Subscribe now

Noah Smith & Ezra Klein: Interview: Ezra Klein, journalist and author: Noah: I still remember when 
I started reading Ezra Klein, way back in 2005, living in my little one-room
apartment in Osaka and thinking about maybe going to grad school. It was Ezra who first opened my 
mind to ideas about urbanism, housing and transit a€” who made me realize
that  the functional city I saw around me was the result of deliberate policy choices. His 
intellectual but casual writing style was also an inspiration for me to start blogging. Fast-
forward a decade and a half, and I dona€™ t think ita€™ s a very controversial statement to say 
that Ezra Klein is one of the most important journalists in America...

Highlights: Ezra Klein:

Ia€™ m a Californiana€!. The state has terrible problems that neither its wealth nor its liberalism 
have come close to solving (and, in some cases, theya€™ ve worsened them). A
lot of those problems are rooted in scarcity and the difficulty of building any thinga€’’houses, 
high-speed rail, green energy projectsa€”here. So an ongoing confrontation with the
problems of the state I love is pretty core to my journey here (and, of course, recognizing that 
these problems are mirrored in many other blue states). Another is that Ia€™ ve spent
the  last few years trying to understand what decarbonization really demandsa€!. An America that 
decarbonizes is an America that builds, and builds fast. We do not, now, have that
competency. If you care about decarbonization, you have to care a lot about buildinga€!

Ia€™ ve watched the way politics plus technology can do what politics alone cannot. Since 2010, 
wea€™ ve underperformed on passing climate policy, by a lot, compared to what
I woulda€™ ve hoped. But the policies, in America and elsewhere, that subsidized wind and solar and 
battery research and deployment have way, way outperformed
expectationsa€”theya€™re the only reason we have any hope of non-catastrophic climate outcomes 
today. Similarly, the pandemic hit, and within a year, the politics supporting
distancing      and lockdowns and solidarity was clearly collapsing. It was vaccines and other 
therapeutics that really came through (though of course therea€™ ve been problems with
political polarization around vaccines, too)a€!

a€0 And if so, what can knock us out of this zero-sum special-interest mindset?

Mancur Olson and the public-interest types have gotten a lot of people confuseda€!. He was too 
focused on people carving up the pie, and not nearly focused enough on post­
material or even pre-material concerns. People who want to sustain the nature of their community or 
fear that developers care little for ecosystems or simply don't want to annoy all
of their voters by focusing on institutional reform aren't focused on redistribution. I will spare 
you a long rant about how much I loathe the metaphor of the "the pie." But I will say I
think the most common way of misunderstanding politics, both on the left and the right, is to apply 
an overly narrow materialist analysis. I would in many ways prefer that political
motivations were more materialist, because positive-sum settlements would be easier to constructa€l

I tend to be more pessimistic than many on the possibilities for persuasion, particularly when 
people are dug into their positions. A lot of what can change, if it can change, will have
to happen through institutional or procedural shiftsa€! granting certain kinds of affordable 
housing projects presumptive clearance or fast-track status if they meet a set of objective
criteria. That effectively disempowers local oppositiona€!. I think you'll need a lot of policies 
like that. But you can't pretend any of these policies exist wholly outside of
politicsa€!.                                                                                You 
have to think seriously about how far you can go, and where you can have real space for community 
input, and how you can bring people along, and how you can
understand what they will accept and what benefits or even compensation they can be offereda€!

People are the heroes of their own stories. People respond rationally to real abuses and problems 
they see. A lot went wrong to create the counter-processes we now see. I've been
critical of the ways the California Environmental Quality Act or the Clean Air Act can sometimes be 
weaponized, but that has to stand alongside an appreciation for why those bills
were passed into law, and the disasters they stop even today.

It's just a mistake to not try and understand extremely widespread sentiments. I think it's telling 
that you see extremely strident rhetoric on building more and building faster out of
the A16Z crowd, and you also have Marc Andreessen's name on a letter opposing multifamily housing 
in Atherton. Recognizing how natural and widespread some of these
impulses are, how they vie for primacy even in the minds and households of people who hold a 
broadly pro-development politics, is just table stakes...

Muska€!. Even if he just continues on his current coursea€!. That [Twitter] is so thoroughly 
Muska€™ s robs it of the illusion of being, in any real way, a demos. On the other
hand, therea€™ s really no alternative to Twitter. If therea€™ d been something that was plausibly 
usable and fun, Twitter would be in much more trouble than it is. Ia€™ ve tried
Mastodon, and while I honor what theya€™re trying to do therea€! ita€™ 11 never be a replacement 
for Twitter. The biggest questiona€! is whether someone builds something
capable                                                                                of 
harnessing the interest in an alternative. Ia€™m halfway surprised Meta hasna€™t opened up a 
barebones clonea€!

I really miss the basic functionality of RSS (and the functionality it still provides for 
podcasts): Ia€™ d like a place where I could simply sign up to see when people or institutions I
choose to follow release new stuffa€!. Ia€™ d like to see some kind of writerly ecosystem 
re-emerge, where therea€™ s more room for conversations to play outa€”Twitter ate that
side of the blogosphere, but did so in the worst, most toxic waya€!. Right now we have too few 
behemoth platforms trying to do too much and doing it too poorly. Ia€™ d like a lot
more platforms trying to do fewer things really wella€!. The bareness of the social media cupboard 
has been a surprisea€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


