Subscribe now

Ernest Gellner (1997): Reply to Critics: a€~The criticismsa€! one of them might be called the 
Argument from Identity. It runs roughly as follows: my vision of nationalism grossly underrates the 
emotional intensity of national identification and perhaps, more generally, the role of identity in 
human life in general. Their nation means so dreadfully much to men! Love
of onea€™ s country, love of onea€™ s nation, is marked by a depth and intensity of passion, which 
is shamefully travestied by a theory which would make it a mere consequence of the labour market 
situation in an occupationally mobile society in which work is semantic rather than physical. Did 
men die, suffer, kill, write poetry, merely so as to enhance their career
prospects?a€!

Here Perry [Anderson] lets me have it straight from the shoulder, and does not hesitate to speak ad 
hominem. Well, he does get it right in part, but only in part. He refers earlier in the essay to 
the difference between cultivated middle classes in Berlin under Bismarck and Prague under BeneAj 
which would account for the difference of tone between Weber and me (and
of course Ia€™ m greatly flattered by such a comparison)a€!. Perry is right, an utterly prosaic 
element and humour are indeed very important in Bohemian life, and this reached me through Czech 
literaturea€!. It certainly influences my attitude to nationalism and everything else, and may help 
explain the a€~low jokesa€™ (P.A.a€™ s phrase). But on the crucial
factual issue, Perry gets it absolutely wrong: I am deeply sensitive to the spell of nationalism^!. 
The psychological characterization with which he supports his misguided argument happens to be 
factually up the creeka€!.

Bureaucratic Life: Agrarian life, for the great majority of its participants, is heavily routinized 
and involves contact with only a small number of social partnersa€!. Precise, finely honed 
articulation is not requireda€! [and] its practice would be bizarre and offensive. Modern life is 
quite different: the range of contacts is very large and so is the range of possible
messages between interlocutors. Hence both partners must speak the same idiom, and they must be 
trained to be able to articulate and comprehend context-free messagesa€”no mean skill, one which 
presupposes prolonged training. Modern life is contact with bureaucrats: shop assistants, railway 
clerks, etc., etc. It is this which pushes people into nationalism, into the
need                                                                                                
                                                                      for the congruence between 
their own a€~culturea€™ (the idiom in which they can express themselves and understand others) and 
that of the extensive and interconnected bureaucracies which constitute their social environment. 
Non-congruence is not merely an inconvenience or a disadvantage: it means perpetual humiliation. 
Only if such a congruence does
obtain can one feel a€~at ease in onea€™ s skina€™ a€!.

The social situation of a peasant was in no way aggravated by the fact that he speaks an idiom 
distinct from that of his bailiff, landlord, shopkeeper, innkeeper, priest, and local political 
overlord. They know each other so well that they communicate only too easilya€!. All this changes 
when men move into an economically and politically centralized, mobile,
anonymous and egalitarian world. The highly variegated and single-shot ad hoc relationships in such 
a world are function-related and negotiated rather than hierarchically pre-determined. So the 
functionally essential base-line egalitarianism (all are in principle equal, inequalities are 
temporary consequences of the state of play, like positions in a football league table)
of  mobile, occupationally unstable societies is one of the elements in an argument which leads to 
the need for a shared, standardized, politically underwritten a€~nationala€™ culture. To take part 
in the game at all, as a gleichberechtigter participant, you need to be acceptable and trained at 
quite a high level in a complex culture with well-defined rules, capable of
engendering an infinity of context-free messagesa€!.

My theorya€! is straightforwardly causal. Political and economic forces, the aspirations of 
governments for greater power and of individuals for greater wealth, have in certain circumstances 
produced a world in which the division of labour is very advanced, the occupational structure 
highly unstable and most work is semantic and communicative rather than physical.
This situation in turn leads to the adoption of a standard and codified, literacy-linked 
(a€~Higha€™) idioma€! and reduces persons who are not masters of that idiom (or not acceptable to 
its practitioners) to the status of humiliated second-class members, a condition from which one 
plausible and much-frequented escape route led through nationalist politicsa€!.

Far from down-playing identity in human motivation, I would go further and say that it is far more 
fundamental and important than desire. Human beings as such seldom have aims or desires, over and 
above a certain very basic and coarse minimuma€!. Men play out a role, they do not pursue aimsa€!. 
You might say that the theory credits men with a certain
a€~aima€™ , namely, the avoidance of perpetual humiliation^!. A more natural way of putting the 
point is to say thata€! a man whose culture diverges from that of the surrounding bureaucracies 
simply is not allowed to play out his rolea€”he is ever interrupted and never hearda€!. No wonder 
he is a nationalist^!.

Industrialism a€~casts a long shadowa€™ ahead of itselfa€! the image of an affluent, powerful 
commercial society, in which traders and producers are not profoundly subjected to a non-economic 
but exploitative ruling class. Thus for instance, Greek navigators and traders on say the island of 
Hydra, when they supported and financed the Greek nationalist revolution,
must have been fully aware that traders in, say, Marseilles were safer, freer and richer than they, 
and the idea that they would share these advantages in a Greek, non-Ottoman state, if they 
succeeded in creating it, could hardly have been long in coming. It did not require theoretical 
ideas about nationalism. Other Levantine traders sought Western protection by seeking
citizenship of outside powers and sheltering under the a€~capitulationsa€™ . It was perfectly 
logical for Greek traders in areas where they were endowed with an extensive Hellenic hinterland, 
to seek, a so to speak, collective capitulation in the form of a nation-statea€!.

There are no significant differences, as far as I can see, between my position on nationalism and 
that of Michael Mann. Apparent disagreements are in part simply terminological: I used the term 
a€~industrializationa€™ in a broader sense which includes the earlier commercialization of society, 
which only also become a€~industriala€™ in a narrower sense (power
machinery, large-scale production) later, thereby however allowing the social changes already 
initiated by commercialism to be preserved, extended and to become entrenched. It is, however, true 
that I did not stress sufficiently (without however being unaware of) the importance of a certain 
kind of centralizing state for both cultural homogeneity and for the emergent
awareness of the importance for each individual of partaking in the culture of the state and 
nationalism.

A process of this kind presumably accounts for the cultural unification of Han China, for the 
Latinization of the Western Roman Empire and the Hellenization of the Eastern and Byzantine empire. 
This process in the Hapsburg empire, with the replacement of Latin by German, initially led to a 
Landespatriotismus, at first intertwined with a linguistic (a€~ethnica€™)
nationalism which, however, in the end replaced it altogether. Political centralization, the 
imposition of a bureaucracy with standardized recruitment procedures and written idiom and its 
replacement of power-holders with a local power base, unquestionably constitutes part of the 
preconditions of nationalism. A state committed by its very manner of operation to
cultural Gleichschaltung is not merely an effect of a new socio-economic system, but also an 
important independent cause. On this point, I am glad to have learned much from Michael Manna€™ s 
work, and thanks to him, am unlikely to commit this error again in the future. One should also add 
Protestantism (and its emulation in other denominations and faiths) as a
similarly important precondition^!.

McNeill observes that though my book is entitled Plough, Sword and Book, I am really only concerned 
with the book and pay little heed to coercion. It is certainly true that I do not go into details 
concerning the Varieties of Coercive Experience, and certainly do not possess a mastery of this 
area remotely comparable to McNeilla€™ s. But my failure to go into details
is not only due to ignorance, but also to the fact that I hold that the agrarian political 
predicament is, au fond, very similar: the stability of technology and the nature of coercive 
equipment force men either to submit to the concentration of power or to combine in ritually and 
otherwise stifling communities (or indeed, both of these at once). This thesis, which seems to
me important and deserving of sustained scrutiny, explains why, unlike McNeill, I do not think the 
escape from the idiocy of rural life could easily have happened anywhere, and similarly I do not 
think, as Macfarlane does, that cultures which avoid the agrarian trap could easily emerge without 
any a€~miraclea€™ , or could even have persisted in a kind of perpetual
lineage of liberal puritya€!.

Agarian society is defined by food production and storage plus a fairly stable technology, and 
hence by the absence of sustained innovation, hence no mass-production. From this it follows that 
it must be Malthusian. It must value offspring, or at least male offspring, as a source of labour 
and military strength, but at a certain point cannot sustain population growth.
From this, consequences follow for its organization and ethos. Its members cannot escape the 
ever-present threat of hunger by expanding production, because the precondition of sustained, 
open-ended expansion, namely a growing technology based on science, is absent. That exit being 
barred, the only possible strategy for individuals and groups within agrarian
society is to try and improve their position within it. In Agraria, when famine comes, men starve 
according to ranka€!. The logic of this situation is reflected in the value systems of agrarian 
societies: a€~honoura€™ , i.e. preoccupation with status above all else (in the Middle Ages, as 
Tocqueville put it, nobility was beyond price), high regard for aggressiveness and
martial skill, contempt for work. Add to the rule of the Red, the rule of the Black: when writing 
is added to food production, the storage of ideas and morality in writing freezes the system 
further, and makes it self-perpetuatinga€!.

Agraria is doomed, by the very logic of its situation, to remain what it is. We know, in fact, that 
we have broken out of it: if the argument showing that this cannot be has some cogencya€’’which to 
my mind it hasa€”then we must be puzzled concerning the nature of the explanation^!. For McNeilla€! 
the breakthrough was on the agenda, deep in the social genes of
Eurasian society, and was a matter of time and chance just where and when it would happen. Whilst a 
Chinese breakthrough is imaginable, I for one cannot follow McNeill in visualizing it in Malaya. It 
takes more than an indented coastline and some traders and pirates to make the modern world. It is 
attractive to think of Penang as another Venice, but Venice was not
enougha€!.

The whole thrust of Macfarlanea€™ s work is to see modernity (liberal individualism) not as an 
escape from or reaction against a dark stifling hierarchical dominationa€! but as continuous with a 
pure pasta€! an heir to those seventeenth-century English radicals who looked back to the liberties 
of a pre-Norman Anglo-Saxon pasta€!. For Macfarlane, not only early
medieval Western Europe, but some forager societies are modern, and an astonishing passage even 
goes as far as to hint that a path might lead from hunter-gatherer societies to (modern) Los 
Angelesa€!. The aspiration is endearinga€!.

For my part, I hold the thesis of Neolithic Whigs, persisting bulldog-wise from the birth of 
agriculture to the steam engine to be quite outstandingly implausible, and the Monte Carlo 
alternative^’’freedom emerged by accident through agrarian diversity, its number had as good a 
chance as any other to turn up on the agrarian roulette-wheela€’’almost as improbable:
the miraculousness of individualist liberty in Agraria is not a consequence of it being one of a 
set of equally viable alternatives, but a consequence of its going against the very grain of 
agrarian life, and special circumstances not merely had to allow its birth, but help it get around 
the hump, to pass the Cape, as the French saya€!.

Ian Jarvie is a thinker to whom my personal debt is quite specially greata€!. It might be best to 
proceed to what Jarvie himself calls a a€~deep quarrela€™ , namely the location of the transition 
to the rational or critical attitude. Popper locates this birth somewhere among the Pre-Socratics, 
whereas I connect it with the rise of industrial society (in a very broad sense of
the term). This is of course far more than a dispute about dating. What is at issue is the 
relevance of sociologya€!.

If the essence of the scientific method is something as simple as trial and error, and this has 
always been with us, ever since the amoeba, then why did trial and error need to be reinvented? Why 
did humans, whom the invention of language enabled to disconnect the idea from its bearer and thus 
to practice trial and error faster, more effectively, and more painlessly,
than pre-human practitioners of trial and error who could only eliminate error by being themselves 
personally eliminateda€”why did beings blessed with this great advantage, tumble back into a 
a€~closeda€™ way of thinking which evades trial and ignores error? Popper the optimistic 
evolutionist seems to me to be at loggerheads with the pessimistic prophet of the
Open Society. He needs a theory of the Closed Society, and one which is not circular and does not 
simply explain it by the yearning for security, for the closed tribal womba€!.

The charge that both Malinowski and I idealize the Hapsburg empire, and perhaps the British empire 
as well. For my own part, I am fully aware of the under-current of brutality, at what you might 
call the sergeant-major level of society, which co-existed, in intimate symbiosis, with both an 
orderly Rechtsstaat and with the GemA'Atlichkeit. All the same, it was moving
in the right direction, and in some places, such as Prague and Cracow, the order and creativity 
were more in evidence than the brutality, and it was all incomparably better than the two 
totalitarian systems which, after two decades, followed the collapse of the Empire. Nothing Chris 
can throw at me will lead me to abandon my political slogana€’’Better Franz Josef than
Josef! I am a card-carrying member (or would be if someone found me a card) of the party founded by 
Jaroslav HaAfek, author of Svejk, namely, the Party of Mild Progress Within the Limits of the 
Lawa€!

LINK: <https://newleftreview.org/issues/i221/articles/ernest-gellner-reply-to-critics>
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

