Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...
Share

First: Microprocessors as a Leading Sector

How important a leading sector can possibly be depends on (a) what share of the economy it starts 
out at, (b) what is its average price elasticity of demand, and (c) how fast its rate of technical 
progress turns out to be.

If you simplify and assume you have a real income elasticity of one, the boost to properly-measured 
real income from technological progress is roughly equal to the speed of the proportional read 
price decline of the commodity times the share of total purchases spent on that commodity. That 
means that for a commodity with a price elasticity of demand of l/2a€”so that total revenue spent 
on the
commodity is proportional to the inverse of the quantity produceda€”the maximum possible gain, no 
matter how far and fast technological progress proceeds, is simply twice the initial spending 
share. (At the limit, when making the good is free, the real income surplus you gain is simply 
twice of the value of your initial spending on it: all the resources used to produce that, you can 
now redirect
to other purposes, plus there is an equal amount from the surplus created as the quantity demanded 
grows when the price declines.) If the price elasticity of demand is 1, then the spending share is 
constant, so that the boost is constant over time if the rate of technological progress and thus of 
price decline is constant.

And if you have a commodity for which the price of demand is greater than one, like microprocessors 
appear to be? Then the rate at which the surplus accumulates grows over time. And that is where we 
seem to be right now:

Pushkar: Chip Wars: a€~Even though TSMC commands an enormous manufacturing scale and market 
valuation, it is not entirely at liberty to set the direction and cadence of Moorea€™ s Law on its 
owna€!. Its technology roadmap is heavily influenced by the product roadmaps and requirements of 
its largest customers and the roadmaps and capabilities of its suppliers
like ASML and Applied Materialsa€!. Fifteen years ago, Intel annual revenues were 3X larger than 
those of either Google or Amazon, while Intel made nearly 2X the revenue of Apple! Microsoft was 
the only one of these 4 companies with a revenue higher than Intel. Today, these four companies 
earn 10X more in combined revenue than the three largest chipmakers !a€!

A consistent cadence of technological progress has set apart the semiconductor industry from any 
other in human history and has underpinned nearly all aspects of technological evolution; indeed, 
of all human progress over the last 50 years. The mobile wave of computing flattened the 
semiconductor world order and created a multi-polar industry wherein the predictable
pace of progress is no longer driven by a single entity alone; rather this progress will now 
require close collaboration between multiple large and disparate corporations and governments 
alike. It will also require massive capital outlays, beyond the reach of any single entity alone. 
And finally, it will require collaboration across international borders while maneuvering
around geopolitical hotspotsa€!

LINK:



One Picture:

Oregon Major Reservoir Storage Summary as of March 1, 2022


120

60

0

53 -

40

20

0 _

402

300

150

426

300 ■

150 ■

0

Detroit

10%

Phillips Lake

50

25

0


300

150

0

279

200

100

0

315

240

120

21% of Capacity

46% of Median

Lookout Point

26% of Capacity

56% of Median

Hills Creek

38% of Capacity

71% of Median

Lost Creek

32% of Capacity

46% of Median

79% of Capacity

90% of Median

Upper

49% of Capacity

75% of Median

47% of Capacity

80% of Median

1420

1000

500

0

500

250

0

169

120

60

3% of Capacity

9% of Median

Brownlee

M% of Capacity
M% of Median

Owyhee

23% of Capacity

54% of Median

Warm Springs

10% of Capacity

34% of Median


Applegate     Klamath Lake

62% of Capacity

7% of Capacity

Wickiup

148

100

50

0

Prineville


61% of Median

84% of Median

14% of Median

52% of Median

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Tim Duy: Powell Sticks With the Hawkish Script: a€~I am not so confident, although I guess it 
depends on your definition of soft-landing. I only think of 1995 and 2019 as soft landings. In any 
event, I still think it most likely that we are past the point of no return on this issue. By the 
end of the year, the choice between recession and inflation will be stark, putting a
stagflationary outcome in play. On that question specifically, Powell is cautiously optimistic...

• FRED: Nonfarm Business Sector: Labor Productivity (Output per Hour) for All Employed Persons: a€™ 
6.62%a€! <https: //fred .stlouisfed .org/graph/?g=M AnB>

• Lorena Hernandez Barcena & David Wessel: How Does the Fed Define a€oeMaximum Employmenta€UT 
<https://www.brookings.edu/blog/up-front/2022/02/23/how-does-the-fed-define-maximum-emplovment/>

• Jean-Baptiste JeangA’ne Vilmer: Putin Loses No Matter How This Plays Out, But We Might 
7bo<https://warontherocks.com/2022/03/putin-loses-no-matter-how-this-plays-out-but-we-might-too/>

•  Bill Browder: a€™ The elephant in the room. The U.K. and US committed in 1994 to protect the 
territorial integrity of Ukraine in exchange for Ukraine giving up its nuclear weapons. Now that is 
being threatened, we have a moral imperative to at least set up a no-fly zonea€! 
<https://twitter.eom/i/timeline>

•  Carole Cadwalladr: a€™ The Germans are seizing yachts. The French are seizing yachts. Meanwhile, 
Britain is letting oligarchs quietly put their affairs in order before slipping out of the country. 
If you were furious about the Downing Street parties, you should be sick to your stomach about 
thisa€!

Carole Cadwalladr @carolecadwalla

The Germans are seizing yachts. The French are seizing yachts. Meanwhile, Britain is letting 
oligarchs quietly put their affairs in order before slipping out of the country. If you were 
furious about the Downing Street parties, you should be sick to your stomach about this

Mike Galsworthy dYt°dYt! @mikegalsworthy

The Germans have now seized oligarch Alisher Usmanova€™ s yacht. Usmanov also owns Sutton Place in 
the UK. Is @BorisJohnson going to keep pace with the EUa€! or is he, very mysteriously, dragging 
his feet on tackling oligarchs? https://t.co/0MALqV0bmn
11:56 AM r™ Mar 3,2022

21,51 !Likes9,092Retweets

Jo Walker: Parsimony is when a wild animal virus escapes from a lab and then causes an outbreak at 
an unconnected wild animal market: a€oejust because we pulled a dead guy covered in bite marks out 
of shark-infested waters doesna€™t disprove the possibility that he got mauled by a lion and then 
decided to take a swima€Da€! <

Jo Walker dYETi.D^Da^i.D @VaccineJo

just because we pulled a dead guy covered in bite marks out of shark-infested waters doesn't 
disprove the possibility that he got mauled by a lion and then decided to take a swim
10:14 PM r™ Mar 3,2022

53Likes5Re tweets

•  Mueller, She Wrote: a€™ THREAD: as promised, here is my breakdown of the 1/6 committee filing 
asserting that donald trump and John Eastman violated federal criminal lawa€!


THREAD: as promised, here is my breakdown of the 1/6 committee filing asserting that donald trump 
and John Eastman violated federal criminal law. 1/
10:13 PM r™ Mar 3,2022

6,753Likesl ,920Retweets

•  Aram Zucker-Scharff: a€™ Individualized user tracking & targeting generates negative societal 
outcomes for no real societal value other than cheaper ads. Which is not good!a€!

Aram Zucker-Scharff @ Chronotope

@mchowla @pbannist @humanpropensity @SimonJHarris @KyleDozeman I'm not claiming ad tech is a net 
negative on society. This is not an attack for working on ad tech. I work on ad tech. I'm claiming 
individualized user tracking & targeting generates negative societal outcomes for no real societal 
value other than cheaper ads. Which is not good!
12:00 AM r™ Mar 4,2022

• Brian Tyler Cohen: a€™ NEW: Both Georgia and Moldova apply to join the European UnionaCI

Brian Tyler Cohen @briantylercohen

NEW: Both Georgia and Moldova apply to join the European Union.
4:35 PM r™ Mar 3,2022

83,206Likes 10,446Retweets

Paragraphs:

Arjun Appadurai: The Dawn of Everything?'. a€~What is the argument of the book?a€! Our ancestors 
werea€! self-conscious political actors, playing with different models of social life, 
experimenting with forms of trading, kinship, farming and transportation which would best suit 
their ecological niches and their built-in preference to live as they pleased.a€! [But] if many 
million human
beings from the Arctic to Amazonia, and from the Balkans to East Asia, had invented and 
deliberately chosen, defended and sustained social designs to prevent permanent stratification, 
exploitation and oppressiona€! how do we account for the steady drift, later a sprint, towards 
cities, classes, taxes, exploited labour surpluses and permanent elites, in the whole of the known 
world?a€! States,
charisma, bureaucracy. It is not surprising that an invented question (why do free people 
eventually get seduced into unfreedom) leads to an artificial answer (because they allowed 
bureaucrats to get a nose inside their tents)a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.facebook.com/34603097/posts/manv-of-vou-have-heard-about-this-book-by-david-graeber-and
-david-wengrow-here-i/10101201176454897/>

Ellen loannes: Vox Sentences: a€~a€oeWea€™ ve reached a new moment in the fight against Covid-19 
where severe cases are down to a level not seen since July of last year,a€D Biden said during 
TuesdayaC™ s State of the Union address. However, he stressed that although the new plan is aimed 
at making the crisis less acute, a€oewe never will just accept living with Covid-19, wea€™ 11
continue to combat the virus, as we do other diseases.a€D The new plan will expand access to 
Covid-19 oral antiviral treatmentsaCI along with rapid testsa€!. All the new initiatives will 
require new funding from Congress, which will go toward increasing vaccine manufacturing 
capability; replenishing the national stockpile of tests, masks, and antiviral pills; and 
increasing monitoring
capabilities to detect variantsaC!

Steve Saideman: Irredentism 101: a€~Efforts by groups or countries to reunify lost territories with 
a homelanda€!. This is a bad move for Russia and the Russian people and much worse for Ukraine. 
Whether it pays off politically for Putin is not clear. Many irredentist efforts are gambles that 
do not pay off very wella€!. In sum, irredentism means war, and it is not easy to deter or prevent.
Ukraine is screwed, and there is not much we can do about it but make it costly a€!

LINK: <http://saideman.blogspot.com/>

Ian Millhiser: Amy Coney Barrett Is Not Being Honest About What the Supreme Court Is Up to: a€~The 
rhetoric of judicial restraint is potent, so it is understandable why Barrett wants to tap into 
that potencyaC!. Barrett is hardly the only justice to engage in such rhetorica€!. Gorsuch recently 
published an entire book claiming that judges should rely almost exclusively on the text of a 
statute or
constitutional provisional. Thomas frequently calls for radical shifts in the lawa€! to restore the 
a€oeoriginal understanding^□ of the Constitution^!. Alito, the Courta€™ s most partisan justice, 
recently attributed his new, entirely atextual limits on the Voting Rights Act to having taken 
a€oea fresh look at the statutory texta€Ua€!

LINK: 
<https://www.vox.com/2022/2/19/22934915/supreme-court-justices-not-honest-amy-coney-barrett-notre-da
me-abortion-voting-rights>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA....
Share

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Subject: Prospects for World Peace & Prosperity Through World Law?

Until last week, I thought that the prospects for world peace and prosperity through world law were 
on the decline. I gave a talk back in 2013 about how the European Union had fumbled ita€”had failed 
to deal properly with the Great Recession, and so it was losing energy and credibility. And that 
was my viewa€”up until last week. It seemed as though cosmopolitanism and democracy were on
the retreat, and that we were not doing well at strengthening the "peace interest" that Karl 
Polanyi first identified as a principal feature of the 1815 to 1914 version of the 19th century.

I may be imagining things. But now it seems to me as though everything has changed. Brexit has 
crystallized, even for many of those were formally its cheerleaders, as much more a demonstration 
of what not to do then what to do, as Britain finds itself we cannot just economically but 
politically and morally as well. And the invasion of Ukraine has made everybody keenly aware of how 
much
and how important it is for them to be Europeans united, in a way that has not been the case since 
the end of the Cold War:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

HOISTED FROM THE ARCHIVES: European Union: A Talk from 2013

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA... European Union: A 
Talk from 2013 Brad DeLong: European Union: A Talk from 2013: My problem this morning is that I 
have four starting points. Or maybe my problem is that I have five starting pointsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 1 comment A- Brad DeLong



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: Karl Polanyi: The Hundred-Years' Peace

Tremendously insightful, remarkably and bone-headedly wrong, massively stimulatinga€”and perhaps 
relevant for the failure of the economic peace interest of our day to constrain Muscovite 
adventurisma€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

The Persistent Structures of Antiliberal Thought

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publicationa€’T really would like to collect enough from it to 
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- 7 comments A- Brad DeLong



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Sleepwalking into History

CONDITION: War in Ukraine: I want to believe that this is not stage-managed to make Putin look 
dominant, but in fact reflects the shakiness of Putina€™ s internal position. I want to believea€! 
Anton Troianovski: a€™ Another extraordinary televised Kremlin meetinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- 5 comments A- Brad DeLong

