Subscribe now

CONDITION: Data Dependent!

Lael Brainard is sensible!:

Kristine Aquino: Doves & Hawks: a€~Federal Reserve Vice Chair Lael Brainard articulated a view that 
the central bank should exercise caution in its rate-hiking campaign. In comments on Monday, 
Brainard advised the Fed should move forward "deliberately" and in a "data-dependent manner" to 
gauge how previous rate hikes are working
through the economy. This contrasts with strategists at Goldman Sachs, who said ita€™ s too early 
to price in a dovish pivot from the Fed. Cecilia Mariotti and her team warned two-year yields would 
need to peak to see a top in Fed hawkishnessa€!

FIRST: Amazon Review Average of a€oeSlouchinga€C at 4.4

Plus: All-in-all, with a few notable exceptions, the reviews of Slouching Towards Utopia 
<bit.ly/3pP3Krk> are very nice indeed. For example:

Claude Ury: Library Journal: a€~This volume, partly an economic history but mostly a thorough 
record of the global economya€™ s connection with politics, is destined to become a classica€!


&:

Customer reviews

* * * * ir 4.4 out of 5

70 global ratings

5 star

4 star

3 star

2 star

1 star

62%

22%

11%

2%

2%

I do find myself curious about my three and four-star reviews. Unfortunately, only one of each of 
them has comments attached:
CanReader 3.0 out of 5 stars :: Gives an economic history, but no new ideas for actually moving 
towards utopia

This book provides an economic history with an emphasis on the United States from 1870 to 2010. It 
is well written and I mostly reading it as an opinionated economic history from an American 
perspective.

The title "Slouching Towards Utopia" might lead you to expect more, such as what could be done to 
improve the economic system or at least define some elements of a desired utopia. The book does 
little new in that direction.

Well! They are right! I wish I could have done better!
&:


RSA 763K subscribers: The twentieth centurya€™ s sharp upward curve of economic and technological 
progressa€!. DeLonga€™ s magnum opus, Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>, was an instant NYT 
bestseller, and has been universally lauded as the must-read account of 20th century economics. 
Join us as we explore why true
economic and human progress is a complicated game of snakes and ladders, and what we need to do to 
create a better world...

Share

Must-Read: a€oeDark Oily Mustachea€C Department:

Circling back around to this, which I found very nice indeed:

Steve Donoghue: Slouching Towards Utopia by J. Bradford DeLong: a€~These historical asides are so 
winningly conversational that they very much help to make the booka€™ s 600 pages surprisingly easy 
reading. Part of this is likewise attributable to DeLonga€™ s semi-ironic adoption of a a€oegrand 
narrativea€D (even though Ludwig
Wittgenstein considered such grand narratives a€cenonsensea€D), which he doesna€™ t exactly hide 
under a bushel. One of the main reasons why humanitya€™ s progress towards utopia has been more of 
a slouch than a march, you might ask? DeLong cites many factors (this is not a simple book, much 
though you at times get the
impression    its author would have liked it to be), but his central villain is gently indicated 
when he refers to the market economy as a€oethat Mammon of Unrigtheousness.a€D The free market 
economy pops up repeatedly in these pages, always wearing a dark, oily mustache like Daniel 
Day-Lewis deep in character as a homicidal maniac.

People are no sooner starting to feel some free-range autonomy, able to smile and play with their 
children and lay away a little nest egg for the future, when suddenly up pops the market economy to 
ruin everythinga€!. The crucial economic watershed in DeLonga€™ s long century was the enactment of 
one of the single worst acts of public
pillaging since Alaric sacked Rome: the neoliberalist fantasy-religion of supply-side economicsa€!

As a (somewhat reformed) left-neoliberal myself,
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Must-Read: Nuclear Blackmail

This is very good:

Robert Farley: <sarcasm>a€~As an anti-imperialist and an anti-nuclear activist, I believe that the 
possession of nuclear weapons gives a country the right to seize any chunk of any neighbor at any 
given time.a€™ </sarcasm>


To treat the issue a bit more seriously:

•  It should be obvious to everyone that the international community ought not roll over in a case 
in which a nuclear power has seized chunks of its neighbor and then resorts to nuclear threats to 
hold that territory.

•  This would be the kind of Bad Precedent that the term "bad precedent" was invented for. It would 
be catastrophic for nuclear arms control, non-proliferation policy, etc.

An intellectually coherent policy could probably be constructed around "negotiated settlement under 
threat, combined with aggressive sanctions regime designed for quasi-permanent containment .a€D 
This would recognize the gravity of the situation while also recognizing Russia's grave 
transgressions against international law and norms of
international society. And it's possible that there are folks out there who are advocating 
something along these lines. I don't agree that we should roll over for every Russian nuclear 
threat but the argument has some weight.

Unfortunately, most of the folks I'm seeing call for negotiations based on Russia's nuclear threats 
also tend to be extremely squishy on the idea that Russia should be asked to pay any costs at all 
for the destructive invasion of its neighbor.

I've agreed from the start that this war will end in negotiation, while at the same time 
maintaining that the nature and character of negotiation will be determined by the military 
situation. But negotiation does not mean that Russia gets what it wants territorially, or that 
Russia escapes the long-term consequences of the war that it started. The re­
integration of Russia into international society (at least in terms of its relationship with 
Europe, which Russia has historically regarded as a core interest) is a long-term question that 
won't be decided at the negotiating table with Ukraine. Things won't go back to the way they were. 
Progressive foreign policy thinkers who used to care about
international law, nuclear proliferation, and norms of appropriate international behavior should 
keep this in minda€!

Leave a comment

Other Things That Went Whizzing Bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Martin Sandbu: Central banks are risking the best jobs market in a generation: a€~They are about 
to address a cost of living shock by willingly inflicting a hit to growtha€!

•  Rana Foroohar: The new rules for business in a post-neoliberal world: a€~Laissez-faire economics 
in the US is slowly being replaced by a more intensive policy focus from start to finisha€!

•  Dexter Roberts: Trade War: a€~The IMF has described China as a a€oeglobal outlier.a€D The 
countrya€™ s gross domestic savings as a percentage of GDP is 44 percent, compared with an average 
of 22.5 percent among OECD members. Over the long term, much of this is believed to be 
precautionary savingsa€!. China faces the distinct prospect of
following the path of countries such as Russia, South Africa and Brazil that have struggled to 
achieve the status of a high-income nationa€!

• Eric Topol: The marked contrast in pandemic outcomes between Japan and the United States: 
a€~Comparing Japan, the country that has fared the best, with the United States, one of the worst 
pandemic outcome results, leaves us with a sense that Prof Ian MacKaya€™ s "Swiss cheese modela€D 
is the best explanation. Ita€™ s not just one thing. Masks,
consistent evidence-based communication (3Ca€™ s) with attention to ventilation and air quality, 
and the outstanding uptake of vaccines and boosters all contributed to Japana€™ s successa€!

Give a gift subscription

Twitter & a€~Stack:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

HOISTED FROM AzE ARCHIVES: Lee Atwater, Lyndon Johnson, Sam Rayburn, and Joseph Bailey...

Lee Atwater, Lyndon Johnson, Sam Rayburn, and Joseph Bailey... Back in 1981, Lee Atwater said: Now 
you don't quote me on this. You start out in 1954 by saying 'n_gger, n_gger, n
Read more

4 months ago A- Brad DeLong
Get 25% off a group subscription

AJs:

gger'. By 1968... that a€!

Margaret Thatcher identified one "enemy within" Britain: the leaders and the militants of the 
Mineworkers Union who tried to shut down coal production, but did not dare ask their members for a 
strike vote.
Liz Trussa€™ s a€ceenemiesa€D appear to consist of 80% of the population of the United Kingdom, 
plus all foreigners:

Camilla Cavendish: The Truss revolution is eating itself: a€~The prime minister is pursuing 
iconoclasm for its own sake and zealotry with no credoa€!. [The] Truss, it was a gift to her 
narrative, that Britain is being held back by an a€oeanti-growth coalitiona€D of eco-loons, 
a€oemilitant unionsa€U, a€oeBrexit deniersa€D, a€cetalking
headsa€D and the oppositiona€!. I wasna€™ t surprised by her failure to apologise for disastrous 
economic mismanagement, or by her patronising nursery-school lecture that we can all get a bigger 
slice if we grow the pie. What spooked me was her portrayal of anyone who disagrees with her as an 
enemya€”an enemy of growth, an enemy


ot the statea€i. It was vindictive ot truss to purge the cabinet ot its tew remaining talents 
because they didna€™ t give her suihciently tull-throated backing in the leadership contest. It was 
also foolish. She has made an enemy ot Michael Gove, who has already forced her to U-turn on 
cutting the top rate of tax, and now aims to stop her

cutting welfare. Her mantra is a€cedelivera€D, but few of her ministers have a clue how to actually 
expedite a€oemore roads, faster broadband, affordable childcarea€Da€!

I confess I really do not get this. Within a limited domaina€”say, a circular bus route within a 
corporate complex, a shopping mall, or a downtown bus routea€”our computer power is now 
sufficiently great to make the self-driving problem a solvable one. Yet there is next to no 
deployment:

Max Chafkin: Even After $100 Billion, Self-Driving Cars Are Going Nowhere: a€~They were supposed to 
be the future. But prominent detractorsa€’’including Anthony Levandowski, who pioneered the 
industry a€’’are getting louder as the losses get bigger: The first car woke Jennifer King at 2 
a.m. with a loud, higha€‘pitched hum. a€oelt
sounded like a hovercraft,a€D she says, and that wasna€™ t the weird part. King lives on a dead-end 
street at the edge of the Presidio, a 1,500-acre park in San Francisco where through traffic isna€™ 
t a thing. Outside she saw a white Jaguar SUV backing out of her driveway. It had what looked like 
a giant fan on its roofa€”a laser sensora€”
and bore the logo of Googlea€™ s driverless car division, Waymo. She was observing what looked like 
a glitch in the self-driving software: The car seemed to be using her property to execute a 
three-point turna€!

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

