Subscribe now

FIRST:

So Friday morning I woke up with the sniffles in Carbon County, Montanaa€”east northeast of the 
Yellowstone-Grand Teton National Park complex. No fever. Full senses of smell and taste. No 
coughing or perceived shortness of breath (after accounting for the altitude: I was at 5,500 feet 
instead of the sea level I am used to).

There was no reason to go to the doctor or the clinic or the hospital. The odds that I had caught 
SARS-COVID-2 seemed low. About 1-in-30 days I wake up with (non-allergy) sniffles. In the second 
week of August, the rate at which people caught the plague was perhaps 1-in-1000. Vaxxed dropped 
those odds for me against Delta by 2/3. Masked cut them in half again. Being very 
prudenta€’’perhaps overly soa€”about indoor exposure dropped them by 2/3
again. So we are talking a l-in-18000 chance I had caught the plague vs. a l-in-30 chance it was 
just a sniffle day. As a good disciple of the Reverend Thomas Bayes, that gave me only a l-in-600 
chance of having caught a case of the plague.

Still, l-in-600 is not zero. Thus it did seem prudent for me to get and take a fifteen-minute 
at-home COVID-19 test. For one thing, if I tested positive I would not want to get on my scheduled 
airplane two days later. I would want to call Hertz, tell them I would return the car Tuesday in 
Oakland, and drive, eating from drive-throughs and tent-camping on the way.

So I called up the Beartooth Market. The people said such a thing as a rapid home-COVID testa€”the 
kind of thing you can order on Amazon for free prime two-day delivery from Quidel chttps 
://www.amazon.com/dp/B093ND7LX4> or HTBIO chttps ://www.amazon.com/dp/B09BL6XSX 1 > or Abbott 
chttps://www.amazon.com/dp/B094LVQZ JL> or Anhui Deep Blue Medical Technology chttps ://ww 
w.amazon.com/dp/B09C 1 TWZCD>, or pick up at pretty
near every Bay Area drugstore, or at most Bay Area supermarketsa€”was simply not the kind of thing 
they would sell in their medications section.

They seemed offended to be asked.

The local drugstore said that no, there was no demand for it, so they had never carried it. Perhaps 
I should call the clinic? I said: a€oelta€™ s coming backa€D.
They said: a€oeYes, we know.a€D

So I called the Beartooth-Billings Clinic. They did not answer their phonea€”it rolled over to the 
emergency room. The emergency room people said they would transfer me back. The phone rolled over 
again. The emergency room people said that they did not have any boxed-up tests that they could 
give me to take back to the AirB&B and then take, but that they were sure the clinic did and would 
be happy to assist me.
I called the clinic again. The phone rang and rang again. The phone rolled back to emergency again.

So I, unwisely, went to the clinic. Inside were three receptionists on phones with masks on. But 
one had her mask below her nose. I started to have a bad feeling.

I stopped in the doorway, 15 feet away from everyone. I addressed the room: fully vaxxed, mRNA, no 
fever, sniffles, prudent to take a rapid test, do they have a box I can take back to the AirB&B so 
I could test there without potentially exposing anyone at the clinic?
A fourth woman said, a€oeCome with mea€D.

a€ceBut you dona€™ t want me in here,a€D I said. Nevertheless I followed hera€”I am not sure why. 
For some reason I thought that she was leading me to where the test boxes were. She was not. She 
led me into an examination room, and turned to leave and shut the door.

I realized she had never answered my question. a€oel shouldna€™t be here,a€D I said. a€oel take it 
you do not have test boxes to give out?a€D

a€oeYou have to stay in here,a€oe she said. a€oeYou are potentially infectious.a€D The prospect of 
spending four hours in this room in an understaffed clinic to no purpose loomed in front of me.
I returned to the reception room. a€oeCan you give me a rapid-test box so I can test myself 
someplace not in here, where I should not be?!a€D I asked.

Silence. a€oeWe can schedule you for a drive-through test tomorrow afternoona€D, someone said. I 
left. And I left Carbon County, Montana.

Exactly twenty-four hours later, I was in Teton County Wyoming. I roll into Smitha€™ s Food and 
Drug. a€oeHow many test kits do you want?a€D the woman behind the counter asks. a€oeWe have Abbot 
Binax.a€D
Let the record show that the test was negative. And a follow-up was negative as well.

Let the record also show that Teton County, WY, voted 67%-30% for Biden-Harris over Trump-Pence, 
while Carbon County, MT:, gave Biden-Harris 34% and Trump-Pence 63% of their votes. Teton had, over 
the period 2014-18, an average annual household income of $84,000, while Carbon was $53,000.1 saw 
one a€cemask up, Montana!a€D sign in Carbon County. Otherwisea€”well, consider this sign on the 
front door of the Red Lodge, MT, Senior Center.
The Senior Center: a€oeMasking Is Not Required. Please Consider the Benefits of Masking: Will help 
keep our business open. Masking will protect you. Masking will protect people who are not 
vaccinated. Help stop the Spread.a€D

I also saw one a€oeMask up, Montana! Adventure on!a€D billboard by the side of a highway.
I am not one who thinks that Blue Americaa€”of which Teton County is a parta€”is perfect.

Usually, in fact, I am very happy to snark at the glamping culture of Teton Countya€’’people who 
will ascend more than 100 feet of vertical only in a chairlift.

But the one-dose-or-more vaccination rate in Teton is 83.5%, while the one-dose-or-more vaccination 
rate in Carbon is only 42.5%. I wona€™t say that Blue America today excels in that type of civic 
virtue that Alexis de Tocqueville saw in the America of two centuries agoa€”that of 
a€oeself-interest, but rightly understooda€D that communal prosperity was a force multiplier for 
your individual prosperity, and so you should both invest in communal prosperity
and both exert and receive social pressure to act in a public-spirited way even if you would, if 
you had the Ring of Gyges, not be public-spirited. But in Blue America the embers of civic virtue 
are still warm. There is wealth for people to spend protecting themselves. People take a somewhat 
longer view. And there is not a large key minority of easily-grifted morons in thrall to cynical 
right-wing politicians and sociopathic media barons who see scaring the pants
off their right-wing audiences as a key profit opportunity.

The Delta wave of the plague has started to sweep across America. We do not have good models of it. 
We do not understand why the wave peaked as low and then fell as quickly as it did in Britain, with 
so few deaths. We can hope for a similar miracle here.
But hope is not a plan. The Delta plague wave will brush relatively lightly past Teton County, 
Wyoming. I fear what it will do to Carbon County, Montana.

Background:

New deaths attributed to Covid-19 in US, UK and Israel

Seven-day rolling average of new deaths (per 100k)

0.20

US

0.18


0.16

0.14

0.12

0.10

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

2021

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from Johns Hopkins CSSE, World Health Organization, UK 
Government coronavirus dashboard, Government of Peru, Public Health France FINANCIAL TIMES

and the Swedish Public Health Agency.

Data updated August 14 2021 8.14pm BST. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

New confirmed cases of Covid-19 in US, UK and Israel

Seven-day rolling average of new cases (per 100k)



2021

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from Johns Hopkins CSSE, World Health Organization, UK 
Government coronavirus dashboard, Government of Peru, Public Health France
and the Swedish Public Health Agency.

Data updated August 14 2021 8.14pm BST. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

FINANCIAL TIMES


New deaths attributed to Covid-19 in US, UK and Israel

Seven-day rolling average of new deaths (per 100k)

US

Israel
UK


2020

Jan
2021

Mar           May           Jul


Source: Financial Times analysis of data from Johns Hopkins CSSE, World Health Organization. UK 
Government coronavirus dashboard, Government of Peru, Public Health France FINANCIAL TIMES

and the Swedish Public Health Agency.

Data updated August 14 2021 8.14pm BST. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

New confirmed cases of Covid-19 in US, UK and Israel

Seven-day rolling average of new cases (per 100k)

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10



VERY BRIEFLY NOTED:

• Arnold Schwarzenegger: Dona€™ t Be a Schmuck. Put on a Mask 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/08/schwarzenegger-schmuck-mask-vaccines/619746/>

• Brad DeLong: Worthy Reads on Equitable Growth, August 10a€“16, 2021 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/brad-delong-worthy-reads-on-equitable-growth-august-10-16-2021/>

•  Uri Simonsohn, Leif Nelson, & Joe Simmons: Evidence of Fraud in an Influential Field Experiment 
About Dishonesty'. a€~the authors of the 2020 papera€! posted the data of their replication 
attempts and the data from the original 2012 papera€!. A team of anonymous researchers downloaded 
it, and discovered that this field experiment suffers from a much bigger problem than a 
randomization failure: There is very strong evidence that the data
were fabricateda€! <http: //datacolada ,org/9 8>

• Erwin Chemerinsky & Aaron S. Edlin: Californiaa€™ s Impending Recall Election Is 
Unconstitutional<https://www.nytim^.com/2021/08/11/opinion/california-recall-election-newsom,html>

•  Aaron Rupar: a€~NIH Director Dr. Francis Collins paints a dire picture of the Covid situation: 
a€oel will be surprised if we dona€™t cross 200,000 cases a day in the next couple weeksa€L 90 
million people are still unvaccinated and sitting ducks for this virusa€! wea€™re in a world of 
hurta€Da€!

Aaron Rupar @atrupar

NIH Director Dr. Francis Collins paints a dire picture of the Covid situation: "I will be surprised 
if we don't cross 200,000 cases a day in the next couple weeks ... 90 million people are still 
unvaccinated 1&] sitting ducks for this virus ... we're in a world of hurt"

1:50 PM F™ Aug 15,2021

5,13 8Likes2,01 ORetweets

•  James Millward: a€~Worth reading: especially note Faira€™ s point that 80a€“90% of US investment 
in Afghanistan ended upa€! siphoned by contractors: C. Christine Fair: "Pakistan and the United 
States Have Betrayed the Afghan People: Washington ignored Islamabad funding and supplying the 
Taliban. Now Afghans are paying the pricea€!


James Millward g±3eLTaD¥ @JimMillward

Worth reading: especially note Faira€™ s point that 80-90% of US investment in Afghanistan ended up 
back in US economy, siphoned by contractors

foreignpolicy.comPakistan and the United States Have Betrayed the Afghan People Washington ignored 
Islamabad funding and supplying the Taliban. Now Afghans are paying the price.
1:36 PM r™ Aug 17,2021

1,830Likes655Retweets

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

PARAGRAPHS:


My view: even inertial inflation in the 1970s was not inertial inflation outcomes, but rather 
inertial inflation expectations. One sign of this: when the crunch came, in 1982-3, the contractual 
features of the economya€’’overlapping multiyear contracts and sucha€”that people had pointed to as 
evidence of inertia in the inflation process itself did not hold. Contracts were reopened. Plus how 
much local inflation fell during the Volcker deflation appears to have
depended very little on what was going on locally, but rather on nationwide expectational shifts 
<https ://bcf.princeton.edu/events/emi-nakamura/>:

Paul Krugman: Who Knew Used Cars & Shipping Containers Would Matter So Much?'. a€~The thing 
abouta€! sluggishly moving prices is that once they do get movinga€! it takes something big, like a 
severe recession, to stop them from just continuing to risea€!. Back in 1975 Robert Gordon 
proposeda€! an inflation measure that excluded food and energya€”a rough cut at the distinction 
between inertial and non-inertial pricesa€!.
Gordona€™ s suggestion proved so useful that a€oecore inflationa€Da€! became a standarda€! guidea€! 
a huge practical successa€!. Bua€! excluding food and energy was always a quick-and-dirty 
approximation^!. As best I can tell, a fair number of people are still looking at the standard 
measure of core inflationa€! and concluded that we really do have a fundamental problem. They could 
be right, and Team Transitorya€! could be
wrong.  But you cana€™ t settle that argument by looking at a number thata€! is now a clearly 
inadequate measure of thea€! concepta€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/13/opinion/us-transitory-core-inflation.html 
?referringSource=articleShare>

I was astonished back in March 2020 that the CDC had so catastrophically failed in its job of 
monitoring the situation that we were flying blind into the plague. And I am even more astonished 
now that the CDC has, again so catastrophically failed in its job of monitoring the situation that 
we were flying blind into this approaching plague wave:

Drew Armstrong, Rebecca Torrence, & Fiona Rutherford: Covid Breakthrough Cases: Bloomberg 
Identifies 100,000 Cases as Delta Rises: a€~CDC Scaled Back Hunt for Breakthrough Cases Just as the 
Delta Variant Grewa€<a€<a€<a€<a€<a€<a€!. a€oeWea€™re in a war on the front lines and we need to 
know how delta is moving through populations and whata€™ s about to happen,a€D said Dean, the 
former California official
who is now chief executive officer of the Public Health Company Group Inc., which develops and 
sells services to monitor and fight outbreaks. a€oeDoing an academic study is valuable, but ita€™ s 
going to take time to get that intelligence,a€D Dean said. a€oeWe cannot wait for certainty to act 
right nowa€Ua€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-07-3Q/cdc-scaled-back-hunt-for-breakthrough-cases-just
-as-the-delta-variant-grew>

This is, I think, likely to be key: a€oeChinaa€™ s state-backed semiconductor industry [is] still 
lagging far behinda€! TSMCa€! because catering to private customers teaches TSMC how to do a lot of 
things really efficiently and creatively and well, while companies like SMIC simply have to please 
the government officials handing them loans and resourcesa€!. The companies that the U.S. 
press-ganged into making war materials under FDR had spent many
years honing their crafta€! before WW2 broke outa€!a€d:

Noah Smith: How Might Chinaa€™ s Industrial Policy Fail?: a€~How could this industrial policy fail 
ata€! making China a more industrially and technologically powerful nation? If you come from 
Orthodox Economics World, this is barely a question worth askinga€!. Everyone knows governments 
cana€™t pick winners, etc. etc. In the real world, people who study this sort of thing do find 
cases where governments were very good
at picking winnersa€! South Koreaa€™ s Heavy and Chemical Industry policya€!. What does the market 
have to teach companies about how to increase comprehensive national power? Intuitively, maybe not 
much; in practice, maybe a lota€!. Perhapsa€! catering to private customers teaches TSMC how to do 
a lot of things really efficiently and creatively and well, while companies like SMIC simply have 
to please the government
officials handing them loans and resources. The market exerts a special kind of discipline. Even 
the companies that the U.S. press-ganged into making war materials under FDR had spent many years 
honing their craft under a basically laissez-faire system before WW2 broke outa€!. Dan Wang 
believes that China will rise to the challenge of its own Sputnik moment; I, being less of an 
expert, am more noncommittala€!

LINK:

Noahpinion

How might China's industrial policy fail?

"Un zeppelin sobrevolando las pirAjmides (Guiza, 1931)" by Recuerdos de Pandora, CC BY-SA 2.0 More 
and more evidence continues to pop up to support my theory about China and its tech companies. Most 
significantly, Chinaa€™ s State Council issued a documenta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 19 likes A- 11 comments A- Noah Smith

Will someone please tell me why the mRNA vaccinesa€™ power against the Delta variant of the 
COVID-19 plague appears to wane so quickly? And yet the booster shot still be so effe:

Eric Topol: a€~Over 1 million people in Israel have now received 3rd shot boosters. So far, all 
indicators support they are working to restore vaccine effectiveness vs infections to high levels, 
suppression of new casesa€!
LINK:

Over 1 million people in Israel have now received 3rd shot boosters. So far, all indicators support 
they are working to restore vaccine effectiveness vs infections to high levels, suppression of new 
cases Thanks @BarakRaveh and @dvir_a for posting the graphics

More than Im Israelis receive third Covid booster
vaccine

Mamta Badkar in New York


More than im Israelis have now received the Covid-19 booster shot, roughly two weeks
after the country began administering the jab to combat the Delta variant-propelled surge
in coronavirus infections.

PM of Israel O
@lsraeliPM

Approximately two weeks after the start of the third dose
inoculation campaign, the State of Israel crossed the
threshold of one million people who have been
inoculated with the third dose of the vaccine.
facebook.com/lsraeliPM/post...

10:22 AM • Aug 16, 2021                            ©

Q2 65 See the latest COVID-19 information on Twitter

More than half the population that is eligible for the booster shot — about 1.9m people
who are over the age of 50 and five months past their second Covid vaccine dose — has
received the jab. Israel has been administering vaccines at night and during the sabbath
to  keep up the pace of vaccinations.

“Inoculating one million people with the third dose in two weeks is a very nice
achievement but it is not enough,” Nitzan Horowitz, health minister, said. “Only if we
continue inoculating people with the third dose - and citizens who have yet to be
vaccinated at al) - at a rapid pace, will we overcome the crisis without resorting to
lockdowns."

Israel in .July began administering the third Pfizer Covid jab to immunocompromised
people, before it had been approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. The FDA
last week authorised a third dose of mRNA Covid-19 vaccines for immunocompromised
adults in an effort to protect them from the more transmissible Delta variant.

Recently


CO

Dose 3 cases in Israel

Status

&                                                                        Unvac

Q.

Dose2

■♦* Doso3

6:53 PM r™ Aug 16,2021

1,094Likes358Retweets

You need to have a very good story about why it is that your a€cedemanda€D and a€cesupplya€D curves 
slope the same way before you dare claim that your larger-than-OLS 2SLS point estimates are 
anything other than p-hacking or dumb luck:

Yiqing Xi: aSThe 2SLS estimates are often much bigger than the OLS estimates. We replicated >60 
papersa€! and find troubling patterns of weaker IVs, wrong inference, and failure of exclusion 
restrictions. (1) Researchers often miscalculated! first-stage Fd!. (2)d! classical asymptotic 
standard errorsa€! severely underestimate 2SLS uncertainties. Severe p-hackingd!.. (3) The 2SLS 
estimates are often much bigger than the OLS
estimates. Their discrepancy is negatively correlated with the strength of the IVsd!

LINK:

Yiqing Xu @xuyiqing

(3) The 2SLS estimates are often much bigger than the OLS estimates.

FIGURE 3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OLS AND 2SLS ESTIMATES

Mean = 14 3

Median = 26

LU


6:53 PM r™ Aug 16,2021

1,094Likes358Retweets

Jul 19           M 26            Aug 02           Aug 99

Date

You need to have a very good story about why it is that your a€cedemanda€D and a€cesupplya€D curves 
slope the same way before you dare claim that your larger-than-OLS 2SLS point estimates are 
anything other than p-hacking or dumb luck:

Yiqing Xi: aSThe 2SLS estimates are often much bigger than the OLS estimates. We replicated >60 
papersa€! and find troubling patterns of weaker IVs, wrong inference, and failure of exclusion 
restrictions. (1) Researchers often miscalculated! first-stage Fd!. (2)d! classical asymptotic 
standard errorsa€! severely underestimate 2SLS uncertainties. Severe p-hackingd!.. (3) The 2SLS 
estimates are often much bigger than the OLS
estimates. Their discrepancy is negatively correlated with the strength of the IVsd!

LINK:

Yiqing Xu @xuyiqing

(3) The 2SLS estimates are often much bigger than the OLS estimates.

FIGURE 3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OLS AND 2SLS ESTIMATES


OLS Coef / Bootstrapped OLS SE

(a) Scat terplot

I 2SLS Coef/OLS Coef I (log scale)

(b) Ratio Histogram

9:34 PM r™ Aug 14,2021

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newsletterd! here:

Subscribe now

Thered™ s a free email list. Thered™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

