
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Earl J. Hamilton (1934): American Treasure & the Price Revolution in Spain, 1501a€ “1650 
<https://archive.org/details/americantreasure0043hami>

• Charles P. Kindleberger (1998): Economic & Financial Crises & Transformations in 
Sixteenth-Century Europe <https://ies.princeton.edu/pdf/E208.pdf>

•  Mike Doming: Infrastructure Bill: CEOs Hope Biden-Congress Deal Can Fix Logistics Issues'. 
a€~Tortured logistics at one factory in Pennsylvania reveal the economic toll of strained highways 
and portsa€!

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-08-04/infrastructure-bill-ceos-hope-biden-congress-dea
l-can-fix-logistics-issues?sref=UTbvKgk5>

• Benjy Sarlin: a€™ If Tennessee cana€™ t honor Nathan Bedford Forrest, who CAN they honor?a€oe 
sounds like a parody of the most glib offensive thing a coastal liberal elite could ever say about 
a state:
Randy McNally: a€D Without historical context, we would have no Tennessee heroes, only villains. No 
Christian saints, only sinners. The left-wing activists who are pushing an anti-American, 
anti-history
agenda here in Tennessee and across the nation will not stop with Nathan Bedford Forresta€!

LINK:

Benjy Sarlin @BenjySarlin

"If Tennessee can't honor Nathan Bedford Forrest, who CAN they honor?" sounds like a parody of the 
most glib offensive thing a coastal liberal elite could ever say about a state

Randy McNally @ltgovmcnally

Without historical context, we would have no Tennessee heroes, only villains. No Christian saints, 
only sinners. The left-wing activists who are pushing an anti-American, anti-history agenda here in 
Tennessee
and across the nation will not stop with Nathan Bedford Forrest.

6:48 PM r™ Jul 22,2021

1,242Likes222Retweets

Matt Oa€™Brien: a€™ In December 2008, at the absolute depth of the financial crisis, Casey Mulligan 
thought unemployment was going up so much because people were choosing not to work to try to qualify
for mortgage modifications^!

LINK:

Matt O'Brien @QbsoleteDogma

In December 2008, at the absolute depth of the financial crisis, Casey Mulligan thought 
unemployment was going up so much because people were choosing not to work to try to qualify for 
mortgage
modifications economix .blogs .nytimes .com/2008/12/3 l/wana€! https://t.co/PdhmxYEj7d

Jeff Stein @JStein_WaPo

Trump econ official Casey Mulligan says he opposes WH eviction ban, arguing taking $ from 
developers leads to less housing: a€oeTherea€™ s an old expression that the best way to make people 
starve is to
make food free. The best way to make people homeless is to make housing free"

11:33 PM r™ Aug 3,2021

119Likes 17Retweets

Paragraphs:


Peter F. Drucker: Modern Prophets: Schumpeter and Keynes'. a€~Schumpetera€! will shape the thinking 
and inform the questions on economic policya€!. When Keynesa€™ s masterpiece, The General Theory of
Employment, Interest and Money, came out in 1936, Schumpetera€! told his students to read the book 
and told them also that Keynesa€™ s work had totally superseded his own earlier writings on money. 
Keynes, in turn,
considered Schumpeter one of the few contemporary economists worthy of his respect. In his lectures 
he again and again referred to the works Schumpeter had published during World War I, and 
especially to
Schumpetera€™     s essay on Rechenpfennige (that is, money of account) s the initial stimulus for 
his on thoughts on moneya€!.. Politically Keynesa€™ s views were quite similar to what we now call 
a€ oe [neoliberal] .a€D
His     theory had its origins in his passionate attachment to the free market and in his desire to 
keep politicans and governments out of it. Schumpeter, by contrast, had serious doubts about the 
free market. He thought that an
a€oeintelligent monopolya€D-the American Bell Telephone system, for instance-had a great deal to 
recommend itselfa€!. Schumpeter always maintained that Marx had been dead wrong in every one of his 
answersa€! [but]
asked    the right questions, and to Schumpeter questions were always more important than 
answersa€!. Keynes, for all that he broke with classical economics, operated entirely within its 
framework. He was an heretic rather
than  an infidel. Economics, for Keynes, was the equilibrium economics of Ricardoa€!. SchumpeteraCI 
starts out with the assertion that the central problem of economics is not equilibrium but 
structural change. This then led
to SchumpeteraC™ s famous theorem of the innovator as the true subject of economicsa€!. 
Schumpetera€™ s a€ceinnovatora€D with his a€recreative destructiona€D is the only theory so far to 
explain why there is
something we call a€ reprofit .a€Da€! The question in SchumpeteraC™ s economics is always, Is there 
sufficient profit? Is there adequate capital formation to provide for the costs of the future, the 
costs of staying in business,
the  costs of a€recreative destructiona€D? This alone makes Schumpetera€™ s economic model the only 
one that can serve as the starting point for the economic policies we needa€!. No one in the 
interwar years was more
brilliant, more clever than Keynes. Schumpeter, by contrast, appeared pedestrian-but he had wisdom. 
Cleverness carries the day. But wisdom endureth.

LINK: <http://druckersociety.at/filesZp drucker_proph_en.pdf>

Chad Orzel: Journalism Is the Problem'. a€~Ia€™ m swinging more toward the scientistsa€™ side of 
this, though, after the collective response of journalists across a wide range of media covering 
the Covid pandemic,
particularly the post-vaccine phase. This has been, to put it mildly, a catastrophic sa€”show, and 
the reason why is embedded in those same norms of story tellinga€!. The charitable interpretation 
of this is that it stems from
innumeracy: journalists arena€™ t understanding the difference between the probability of infected 
people being vaccinated and the probability of vaccinated people being infected, and that sort of 
thingaC!. The less
charitable interpretation is the one Bergstrom puts forth in his thread, namely that this is 
cynical clickbait on the part of journalists. Theya€™re going with headlines that are actively 
irresponsible because they need people to
click  on the stories to get ad revenuea€l. As innumerable people have noted, the stories about the 
Provincetown study (and all the other flawed reports) generally contain the actual correct 
information^’’that the outbreak was
relatively small and quickly contained thanks to the much lower rate of infections among the 
vaccinated. Ita€™ s just buried way down in the twelfth paragraphs!. This isna€™ t a social-media, 
clickbait-driven problem.

This is print newspaper, Strunk and White kind of stuffa€i. Therea€™ s a parallel here to the 
debacles of the 2016 election, when media flocked to the Trump campaign and overhyped the Clinton 
email pseudo-scandal for the
same sorts of reasons. I dona€™ t think that reporters (outside of a few pundits) genuinely had it 
in for Hilary Clinton, I just think their professional norms pushed them in a direction that worked 
to her detriment and
Trumpa€™  s benefit, which had disastrous consequences. Which was pretty much the defense offered 
when people complained about the mediaa€™ s role in the election outcome: that they didna€™ t do 
anything that
wasna€™    t standard practicea€!

LINK:

Counting Atoms
Journalism Is the Problem

I am not a journalist, but Ia€™ ve spent a fair amount of time being paid to write things for media 
companies, much of it during my long run at ScienceBlogs (RIP). This was a group that brought 
together a mix of
professional journalists writing about science and scientists writing about their own fields, and 
there were a lot of arguments between the two gra€!

Read more

2 years ago A- 3 likes A- Chad Orzel

Charles Gaba: Herea€™ s Why the Site Has Been so Vaccine-Centric the Past Few Weeks'. a€~If youa€™ 
ve gotten your first shot, make sure to get the second one when youa€™re supposed to do so (3 weeks 
later for
Pfizer, 4 weeks later for Moderna). And keep masking up in public whether youa€™re vaccinated or 
not in order to help protect those who are immunocompromised and for kids under 12 years old who 
cana€™t take the
vaccine (or at least not yet, for children) until we finally get out of this nightmarea€!

LINK: <https://acasignups.net/21/08/02/heres-why-site-has-been-so-vaccine-centric-past-few-weeks>

Matthew Yglesias: a€™Ifeel like we should all talk more about how conservatives^™ dream is to make 
America more like this much poorer, rinky-dink little country in Central Europe [Hungary]. 
Hungarya€™ s GDP
per capita is closer to Mexico than France, less than half of the United States. Like how much do 
you have to hate immigrants to envy this? Paprikaa€™ s not that great. I suppose Hungary (under 
Communism) does compare
somewhat favorably to Estado Novo Portugal.

LINK:

Matthew Yglesias @mattyglesias

I feel like we should all talk more about how conservatives' dream is to make America more like 
this much poorer, rinky-dink little country in Central Europe.

•► BUDAPEST


(/FOX

ZNEWS

6:00 MT                                       TONIGHT

1:15 AM r™ Aug 3,2021

3,733Likes615Retweets

Richard Fausset: As Virus Cases Spike in Arkansas, the Governor Backtracks on Masks'. a€~Gov. Asa 
Hutchinson signed a law banning mask mandates. Now he wants to unravel ita€!. Hutchinson, a 
relatively moderate
Republican, did not see much harm in it at the time. a€oeOur cases were at a very low point,a€D he 
recalled in a news conference on Tuesday. However, he added, a€oeln hindsight, I wish that it had 
not become law.a€Ua€l
Hutchinson has backtracked, and is now urging state legislators to undo part of the law so school 
districts may adopt mask mandates before students return to their classrooms en massea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/03/us/covid-arkansas-mask-mandate,html?referringSource=articleShare
>

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

