Subscribe now

FOCUS: Old-Style Blogging Should Be New Again!

So says John Scalzi:

John Scalzi: How to Weave the Artisan Web: a€~Everyone should start blogging again. Own your own 
site. Visit all your friends' sites. Bring back the artisan, hand-crafted Web. Sure, it's a little 
more work, but it's worth it. You don't even need to stop using social media! It's a "yes, and" 
situation, not a "no, but" onea€!. 1. Create/reactivate your own site, owned by you, to hold your 
own work. 2. When you create that site, write or
otherwise present work on your site at least once a week, every week. 3. Regularly visit the sites 
of other creatorsa€!. 4. Promote/link the work of othersa€!.

Now, why should we bring back that artisan, hand-crafted Web? Oh, I dona€™ t know. Wouldna€™ t it 
be nice to have a site thata€™ s not run by an amoral billionaire chaos engine, or algorithmically 
designed to keep you doomscrolling in a state of fear and anger, or is essentially spyware for 
governments and/or corporations?a€!. Yes, it will take some worka€!. Ita€™ s an actual project. But 
look at this way: You have just spent years
building an audience on a platform someone else owns. Why not take a little time to do it for y 
ourself?a€!

For my own site, I use WordPressa€!. Not every one needs or wants their own site, and thata€™ s 
fine. But if you dona€™ t want to bother with creating your own site, you can still decide to visit 
the sites of people who create them, and not just stay within the bounds of 
Twitter/Facebook/Instagram/TikTok, etca€!

A very, very nice call to action by a very skilled and eloquent writer. He is, of course, at some 
level, completely correct. But calls to virtuous collective action need to be carefully crafted to 
not ask more of the audience than it will be willing to deliver. In this case, that means that we 
need to have an accurate theory of what caused the Fall of the Blogosphere in the first place. Why 
did the audiencea€”and, yes, the creators tooa€”succumb to the Siren song, and
wind up doomscrolling through clickbait so that their glued-to-the-screen eyeballs could be sold to 
advertisers convincing them that the worse is actually the better product as they sell their fake 
diabetes cures and crypto grifts?

When I talk to people, they shrug and say "attention economya€D and a€oehuman rapid, response, 
dopamine loopsa€D. Some of them then go on to say: we hope that Apple's advertising tracking 
transparency will save us all by putting enough sand into the gears of the advertising-attention 
machine that we humans can then escape from it. After all, when humans are given a choice, the 
overwhelmingly do not want advertisers to be able to hack their brains not
necessarily for their benefit. The revealed preference is that people do not want this at all.

But a€oeHelp us, Tim Cook! You are our only hope!a€D is a very weak reed to rely on here.
Share


ONE IMAGE: Consider What Having This Stuff in Your Twitter Timeline Would Do to Your Brain:

Tweet                                   <- Tweet

Les Knight, the founder of the Voluntary' Human
Extinction movement. Mason Trinca for The New York

Times


Science girl © @gunsnrosesgirl3 • 5h

I think Im de-boosted or something as people are saying they haven't
seen my tweets for a long time.

If you see this please leave me an emoji or your favourite gif. Thank you
I love you all WW

Q 3,279          tT 736          Q? 21.3K         X

Elon Musk 9
@elonmusk

Replying to @gunsnrosesgirl3

Will look into it

2:17 AM • Nov 26, 2022 • Twitter for iPhone

Get Paid Writing @getpaidwrite * Nov 25
Replying to @elonmusk

I think the Right needs to start funding more artists, filmmakers and
writers instead of politicians and super-PACs.

You don't win a naval war without any ships, and you can't win a
culture war without any culture.

We've been reacting too long. Time to go on the offensive.
Q 2,388      tl 4,265       O 46.2K

Elon Musk & @elonmusk - Nov 25
Replying to @getpaidwrite

I am neither conventionally right nor left, but I agree with your point.

The woke mind virus has thoroughly penetrated entertainment and
is pushing civilization towards suicide.

There needs to be a counter-narrative.

Earth Now Has 8
Billion Humans.

Thic Mnn

Q 2,440 tl 2,446 Q 13.2K X

Elon Musk 0

@elonmusk

Replying to @elonmusk and @getpaidwrite

He is infected with a mental version of this physical
virus

686 Retweets 76 Quote Tweets 18.5K Likes                                 Q 11.2K tl 22.1K Q 131.4K

tl                               Elon Musk 0 @elonmusk • 6h

Replying to @elonmusk and @getpaidwrite

That the mind virus is pushing humanity towards extinction is not


Tweet your reply

hyperbole

Bitcoin Archive §      0 @BTC_Archive • 2h
Replying to @elonmusk and @gunsnrosesgirl3

Elon - for 7 months my friend @AitcoinGordon has a 'shadow ban' and


Leave a comment


MUST-READ: For Many, Believing in Consequentialism Has Very Bad Consequences!:

As I sometimes say, while consequentialism is certainl true as a philosophical doctrine, the 
consequences of peoplea€™ s believing and acting on it are very frequently destructive and dire:

Matthew Yglesias: Black Friday mailbag: a€~he main claims associated with Effective Altruism 
continue to be true and are not significantly undermined by the revelations about Sam 
Bankman-Frieda€!. He wasna€™t a meaningful funder of global health or animal welfarea€!. I also 
dona€™ t think these events should influence our thinking about consequentialism as a philosophy 
except insofar as they confirma€! doing deceptive
schemes a€oebecause it will have good consequencesa€D generally failsa€!. I have significantly less 
confidence in the wisdom and integrity of certain high-profile EA leaders and the institutions they 
runa€!. This is a big blow to EA as a set of human institutions rather than as a set of abstract 
propositionsa€!.

Having a broad base of donors turns out to be intellectually healthy compared to relying on a whale 
who becomes, in effect, too big to fail. The upshot of this needs to be re-engagement with the 
older idea that even without giving your life over to full-time work in some special EA cause area, 
you can contribute meaningfully to making the world a better place by being thoughtful and 
generousa€!

Give a gift subscription

OA34er Thing Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Noah Smith: China's pivot is a bit of a mess: a€~President Xi Jinping has made a remarkable 
pivot, recalibratinga€! Covid controls and the harsh crackdown on real estate developersa€!. When 
we take a closer look at this pivot, we see that not all is going according to plana€!

•  David Singh Grewal: A World-Historical Gamble: The Failure of Neoliberal Globalization - 
American Affairs Journal The year 2022 was not supposed to see the threat of nuclear conflict among 
major powers and the return of war to the European continent...

•  Sam Freedman: YIMBYs, NIMBYs and the Battle for the Soul of the Tory Party: a€~Three internal 
Tory rows this week neatly illustrated the thesis of my last piece a€“ that the government is 
trapped in a doom loop by its own voter coalition. Helpfully they were on the three topics I 
discussed in that piece: Brexit, immigration, and planninga€!

•  Stephen Diehl: Stephen Diehl: Crypto is the a€~commoditisation of populist anger, gambling and 
crimea€™ a€oeCrvptocurrencv is a giant scam, although a complicated scama€%o.a€%o.a€%o.a€%oa€D So 
begins Stephen Diehla€™ s diatribe... blogging about cryptoa€™ s failings. That won him a following 
a€” but also harassment, including death threats. aCceThe past three years have been hell,a€D he 
says, naturally shy. a€oelta€™ s not easy
being a crypto sceptica€D...

•  AndrA©s Velasco: The Unbearable Uselessness of Crypto: a€~Thanks to FTX's collapse, the world 
may have woken up to the grim reality that the crypto "industry" is nothing but a get-rich-quick 
lie, wrapped in hype, bobbing on an ocean of libertarian technobabble. Will anyone do something 
about it?a€!

•  John Scalzi: a€~Honestly life on Twitter has gotten much better since I switched to DGAF 
blocking. Be mildly annoying to me? That's a block. Look at me wrong? Blockeroonies. Like a post 
from a racist shitbag and I see it? Blocktown, population you. It's gloriousa€!

•  Josh Marshall: a€ceLove the way Trumpers have transformed this terma€! a€oeAlphaa€n, to the 
extent the term has any meaning, is the guy who the other guys get behind. Girls are into him. 
Charisma. Big man on campus, etc. For Trumpers it's become a guy who makes sure you know he totally 
only eats a€!steaksa€! and sits around at the sports bara€”no women, just guysa€”a€!and complains 
abt how everythings bullshit...

•  Duncan Black: Sure, Sounds Good, Run With That: a€~Washington Post reporters don't have to pass 
on gibberish "excuses" as if they were factual, but that's objectivity, baby: Josh Dawsey: a€oeA 
lot of Trump peoplea€! aghast at the dinner with Ye and Nick Fuentesa€!. He lives in Florida, with 
little traditional vetting and staffing.a€D Um, uh, it's a staffing issue. Sure, chief, gonna write 
that one down.
Get 50% off a group subscription

AJs:

Matthew Klein: How to Get Recent History All Wrong: a€~A new book identifiesa€”and 
misunderstandsa€”the structural forces behind todaya€™ s geopolitical chaos: The past few decades 
have not been kind to the democracies of the North Atlantica€!. Could the West have realistically 
avoided any of this? Or was it always going to be helpless in the face of a€oestructurally driven 
shocks, the effects of which have cascaded from one place to another and
between the geopolitical, economic, and domestic political spheres,a€D as University of Cambridge 
professor Helen Thompson puts it in Disorder: Hard Times in the 21st Century?a€\ If specific 
politicians and technocratsa€”and the intellectuals who influence thema€”make mistakes, then there 
is hope. The world has the potential to learn from their choices and do better in the futurea€”or 
at least make new, different mistakes. If not, then the most it can aim
for  is the peace of mind that comes from understanding that there are no alternativesa€!

Louis Ashworth: Exploring Elon Muska€™ s Semaformantics Because somebody has to, we suppose: 
a€~Teslaa€™ s Elon Musk and SemaforaC™ s Ben Smith have been having a fight on Twitter, a website 
the former owns. (Alphaville sighs, looks out of window, considers life choices, begins typing.)a€! 
SBF believed he or some part of his empire held $43mn of Twitter on November 10tha€!. Musk says 
SBFa€! could not have held a Twitter stake beyond
October 28tha€!. Explanation a) Musk is broadly correct, but made an error: SBF did roll over a 
(small) stake. However, that position may now have been completely closed, meaning SBF does, now, 
own a€ceO%a€Da€!. Explanation b) SBFa€! thought hea€™ d rolled over a chunk of Twitter stock but 
actually forgot to do it because he was busy playing League of Legendsa€!. Given Musk is trying to 
make this whole thing about journalistic ethics, it is
probably within his power to completely clear things up here if he wanted to. Thata€™ d be coola€!

Jane Yoon: Lex in-depth: the cost of Americaa€™ s ban on Chinese chips: a€~The new US technology 
rules will hurt Chinaa€™ s chipmakers. But they will also add to inflationary pressures on many 
products: These sweeping new rules could have unintended consequences that are just as far 
reachinga€!. Washington wants to thwart China in its aim of producing advanced semiconductors, 
bearing the shorthand definition of 3-14 nanometre (nm) process
technologya€!. Advanced chips and the factories making them have become a substitute for arms and 
armies in the east-west stand-off because they are a critical component of our modern livesa€! the 
foundation of next-generation technology from self-driving cars and 5G internet to cloud services 
and artificial intelligence. However, American policymakers are unlikely to have fully appreciated 
the corollary of splitting the world semiconductor supply chain in
two:    far higher costs for western manufacturers and their customers. The advice a€oedig two 
graves, before you set outa€D applies to anyone bent on revengea€!

Sam Freedman: Doom Loop: a€~UK budgets and fiscal statements are an elaborate game in which 
governments pretend to be fiscally conservative and the markets pretend this is credible. Liz Truss 
and Kwasi Kwarteng refused to play.... Jeremy Hunt and Rishi Sunak have played the game 
perfectly.... By putting on the expected performance he allowed himself to deliver a statement that 
was in fact not very conservative at all.  Given the context and the

constraints of Tory party politics Hunt did about as well as possible. His ritual dance of pretend 
fiscal conservatism gave him the space to uplift benefits in line with inflation; raise some key 
areas of public spending over the next two years; and limit immediate further tax rises to the rich 
and energy windfalls.  It felt like being told to calm down by someone whoa€™ s just totalled your 
cara€!

Gillian Tett: How magical thinking enabled the rise of FTX a€” and led to its fall: a€~I got 
chatting to some crypto evangelistsa€! the joys of decentralised financea€!. What about the 
exchanges?, I askeda€!. More, not fewer, concentrations of powera€!. FTXa€!. Concentration of 
power, coupled with a lack of oversight, has caused massive customer losses, because funds were 
funnelled around with no accountability^!. Peering at the wreckage, we need to
ask not just how FTX created an $8bn hole in its balance sheet but also why these dangerous 
contradictions were ignored for so long. Why did so many have a blind spot?a€! Humansa€! are wired 
to embracea€! mystical explanations for things we do not understand; we need hope in a scary world. 
Digitisation has not changed thata€!. Contradictory creation myths are found in most 
professionsa€!. But the FTX saga shows howa€! doublethink can have hugely
damaging repercussionsa€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

