I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: Something Useful for Me, & Coordinated!

So Why Doesna€™t the Democratic Party Technostructure Send Me Something Like This Every Week?

a€oeArange of resources in discussing the Inflation Reduction Act:

• Letter from 126 economists supporting the Inflation Reduction Act

• Statement from bipartisan Treasury Secretaries supporting the Inflation Reduction Act

• Statement from bipartisan IRS commissioners supporting the Inflation Reduction Act

•  Congressional Budget Office score or the legislation, showing more than $300 billion in savings 
over the budget window, including deficit reduction in 2023 and 2024

• Analysis by the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, showing deficit reduction of up to $2 
trillion over two decades

• Tweet thread by Chye-Ching Huang on the false claim that the bill raises taxes on the 
middle-class

• Tweet thread by Jean Ross on the false claim that the bill will hurt domestic manufacturing

• Tweet thread by David Kamin on the false claim that the tax enforcement funding will be focused 
on middle-class Americans

•  HHS analysis finding that the uninsured rate fell to an all-time low in the first part of 2022, 
in significant part due to the AC A improvements extended in the Inflation Reduction Act 
(additional graphics here)

•  As President Biden wrote in his May 2022 Wall Street Journal op-ed: a€oeWe will likely see fewer 
record job-creation numbers, but this wona€™t be cause for concern. Rather, if average monthly job 
creation shifts in the next year from current levels of 500,000 to something closer to 150,000, it 
will be a sign that we are successfully moving into the next phase of recoverya€”as this kind of 
job growth is consistent with a low
unemployment rate and a healthy economy.a€D

• The economy created an average of 164k jobs per month in 2019 a€“ the year before the pandemic 
began.

•  There were 7 months during Donald Trumpa€™ s presidency when the economy created fewer than 100k 
jobs per month. In fact, exactly 3 years ago a€“ in July 2019 a€“ the economy created just 78k 
jobs.a€D

When was it back in The Daya€! 1985? 1987? 1989?a€! that every morning the fax machine at the NBER 
(a non-partisan thinktank) would burble out the a€oeDaily Line for Republican Newsmakersa€D for 
Marty Feldstein and company. The a€oeeveryone talking about the same thinga€D echo effect wasa€”and 
still isa€’’effective for the Republicans.

The bold paragraph raises a big question: since we are manifestly not (yet) a€oesuccessfully moving 
into the next phase of recoverya€l [with moderated] job growth is consistent with a low 
unemployment rate and a healthy economya€!a€D, should we be worried? And I think the answer is 
clearly no. The inflation gauge you should be watchinga€”the Core PCEa€”is not very elevated:

FRED    Personal Consumption Expenditures Excluding Food and Energy (Chain-Type Price Index)

11

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0


1965         1970         1975         1980         1985         1990         1995         2000     
    2005         2010         2015         2020

We will see how much it comes down as plague- and war-driven supply-chain disruptions come to an 
end. We will see what effects the remarkable tightening of financial conditions that have taken 
place over the past six months will have on the economy:

FRED^ — Market Yield on U.S. Treasury Securities at 10-Year Constant Maturity, Quoted on an 
Investment Basis

— Market Yield on U.S. Treasury Securities at 2-Year Constant Maturity, Quoted on an Investment 
Basis

2011         2012         2013         2014         2015         2016         2017         2018     
    2019         2020         2021         2022

If I were the Federal Reserve, I would be strongly tempted to stand pat, with the yield curve on 
the point of inversion, until the data becomes clearer and there is some new signal arising out of 
the Core PCE.

The level of the Core PCE, after all, is only 1/2 x 6/4 x 3% - 3/4% = 1.5%-points above what it 
would have been had the Federal Reserve hit its 2% inflation target throughout the plague years. I 
know of no theory about what the neutral rate of inflation ought to be that would suggest that such 
a level-jump in response to such a series of structural shocks should be thought of as excessive.
Share

One Video:

Noah Smith: Video interview: Olivier Blanchard on Inflation


Video interview: Olivier Blanchard on inflation

Olivier Blanchard is among the most respected macroeconomists of our times, and one of the most 
cited macroeconomists in history. He was a professor at MIT for a long time (now emeritus), and 
served as the chief economist at the IMF from 2008 to 2015. He is now a senior fellow at the 
Peterson Institute for International Economicsa€l
Read more

7 months ago A- 57 likes A- 24 comments A- Noah Smith
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Dan Pfeiffer: Why John Fetterman is So Good at Messaging: a€~John Fetterman talks to his voters 
the way he talks to his friends. Human to humana€!. Fetterman also talks directly to voters. His 
campaign frequently posts videos on Instagram and elsewhere of the candidate talking directly to 
the camera about the campaign or reacting to the news. These videos are lightly produced and 
therefore feel more authentica€!

<https://messagebox.substack.eom/p/whv-iohn-fetterman-is-so-good-at>

• Jonathan Chait (2018): New Trump Economist Kudlow Has Been Wrong About Everything 
<https://nvmag.com/intelligencer/2018/03/new-trump-economist-kudlow-has-been-wrong-about-everything.
html>

• Twitter: mDAUFAQ 
<https://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/0001418091/000119312522213Qll/d389634ddefal4a.htm>

•  Nico Voigtlaender & Hans-Joachim Voth: Persecution Perpetuated: The Medieval Origins of 
Anti-Semitic Violence in Nazi German: a€~Pogroms during the Black Death are a strong and robust 
predictor of violence against Jews in the 1920s, and of votes for the Nazi Partya€! <https: //ww 
w.nber.org/papers/w 17113>

•  Michael Mignano: The End of Social Media: a€~Last week, Meta announced that the Facebook 
newsfeed would be shifting towards an algorithmic, recommendation-based model of content 
distributional the end of social media as wea€™ ve known ita€!. Platforms like the massively 
popular (and still growing) TikTok and YouTube put far less emphasis on friends and social graphs 
in favor of carefully curated, magical algorithmic experiences
that match the perfect content for the right people at the exact right time. This is recommendation 
media, and ita€™ s the new standarda€! <https://everv.to/p/the-end-of-social-media>

• Sam Kim & Chris Anstey: Semiconductor Shortage Seems to Be Easing 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022a€“08a€“Q6/semiconductor-shortage-seems-to-be-easing
-new-economv-saturdav?cmpid=BBD080622NEF>

•  Michael A. Cohen: Arizona Primary Election Results Show Trumpa€™ s GOP Destruction: 
a€~Republicans are clinging to Trumpa€™ s election lies in battleground states. Theya€™ re about to 
regret ita€! 
<https://www.msnbc.com/opinion/msnbc-opinion/arizona-primarv-election-results-show-trump-s-gop-destr
uction-nl297676>

AJs:

This is, to put it bluntly, exactly right. You cana€™t steer between Scylla and Charybdis unless 
you know how to read the currents, and core inflation is the best way to read the currents:

Paul Krugman: Wonking Out: The Meaning of Falling Inflation: a€~The majority of gas stations in the 
United States are already charging less than $4 a gallon, and declining wholesale prices suggest 
that retail prices still have further to fall. Food prices are also coming downa€!. Policymakersa€! 
should respond to the good inflation news by keeping calm and carrying ona€!. The concept of 
a€cecorea€D inflationa€’’distinguishing
between volatile prices, like food and energy, and slower-moving prices that have a lot of 
inertiaa€”has been highly successful since the economist Robert Gordon introduced it in the 1970s. 
Time and again, the Fed has steered through crises by ignoring critics who wanted it to panic over 
blips in inflation caused by temporary jumps in commodity prices.a€!

LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nvtimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit_pk 
.20220805&instance_id=68584&nl=paul-krugman&productCode=PK&regi_id=64675225&segment_id=100604&te=l&u
ri=nvt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2F379a87e4-916b-5589-b90e-21cc87968c6c&user 
id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

The major reason to fear that Adam is wrong here is that back in the before times better 
information, technologies, greatly raised the financial value of being close to the information 
core so that you could have personal contact with those at the heart of the communications network. 
That suggests that there are important ways in which "remoteness" is very much second class. Until 
we understand what those ways are, I have to fear that Adam is wrong here:

Adam Ozimek: On Jobs, Remote Work, & Housing: a€~Remote work is a general purpose technologya€! 
spillovers throughout industriesa€! indirect impacts. And housing stock is one example, but there 
are so many types of capital that need to adjust in the long run. There are so many organizational 
forms that are going to changea€!. Ia€™ m not saying the aggregate economic impact is going to be 
bigger than or as big as
electrification, but ita€™ s that kind of fundamental changea€!

LINK:

Adam Ozimek On Jobs, Remote Work, and Housing

Listen now (34 min) I Dear readers, Ita€™ s a pretty good week for my conversation with Adam 
Ozimek, an economist whose recent work focuses on the intersection between labor markets and 
housing. Adam is an evangelist for remote work a€” perhaps in part because he lives near Lancaster, 
Pennsylvania, the sort of affordable mid-size city within a couple of hours of very major cities 
ta€!
Read more

6 months ago A- 12 likes A- 1 comment A- Josh Barro


Very nice thing to assign. Put this in the tickler file:

Victor Stango & Jonathan Zinman: We Are All Behavioral, More or Less: A Taxonomy of Consumer 
Decision Making'. a€~We examine how 17 behavioral biases relate to each other, to three standard 
measures of risk and time preferences, to cognitive skills, personality, and demographics, and to 
outcomes in household finance, well-being, and health. Most consumers in our nationally 
representative panel data exhibit multiple biases,
with substantial cross-person heterogeneity. Biases are positively correlated within person, 
especially after adjusting for measurement error. From that correlation structure, we reduce our 20 
bias and standard preference measures to four behavioral common factors. Each BCF reflects a group 
of related biases re: beliefs, decision quality, discounting, or risk/uncertainty attitudes. The 
first two BCFs also strongly correlate with each other
(positively) and cognitive skills (negatively). The first three BCFs and cognitive skills strongly 
correlate with various outcomes in the expected directions. Our results support processing-based 
models where basic limitations in cognition and/or attention produce multiple biases, and have 
several other implications for theory and practicea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.restud.com/paper/we-are-all-behavioral-more-or-less-a-taxonomy-of-consumer-decision-mak
ing/>

WAIT? WHAT? What makes an achievement a€oebipartisana€n when the least-crazy and most-vulnerable 
20% of the Republican senators (and fewer house members) peel off? CHIPS, infrastructure, gun 
safety, indeed BBBa€”they ought to have passed 80-20, all of them:

Economist: Joe Biden Has Disappointed Everyone'. a€~Biden can point to a series of bipartisan 
accomplishments, now including a bill to subsidise Americaa€™ s semiconductor industry on top of 
the first gun-safety legislation in almost 30 years and a $1.2trn infrastructure lawa€!. Mr 
Bidena€™ s patience for talks and tolerance for compromise, not qualities associated with the 
previous president, have also yielded breakthroughs (for
now, within his party) on fighting climate change and restraining drug costsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/united-states/2022/08/04/joe-biden-has-disappointed-everyone?etear=nl 
today _2>

In general, Democrats do well when they convince the working class in the middle class that they 
have interests in common with minorities in equitable growth. Democrats do badly when the working 
class in the middle class conclude that growth is not equitable and that they need to stop on 
minorities .In general, Democrats do well when they convince the working class in the middle class 
that they have interests in common with minorities in equitable growth.
Democrats do badly when the working class in the middle class concluded that growth is not 
equitable, and that they need to stomp on minorities who are getting more than their fair 
sharea€”that social democracy seeks to treat people equally, and since peoplea€’’minorities and 
such from the perspective of many, and working-class people from the perspective of many 
othersa€”are unequal, that is a wrong and bad thing to do. Manchin appears to have largely
avoided the consequences of that:

Greg Sargent: The Huge, Hidden Bonanza in Getting Joe Manchin to Yes'. a€~After insisting that 
extensive spending would be inflationary, he now takes credit for scrubbing out allegedly 
inflationary effects, as the deal puts $300 billion into deficit reduction. To counter GOP screams 
about raising taxes, Manchin says hikes will hit only the wealthy, noting that Wall Street has 
a€oebeen on a hell of a ride.a€D Manchin, you see, is only
for rebalancing an economy badly unbalanced by elite rigging. And on climate, Manchin says he backs 
investment in the technologies of a greener future, but without an abrupt abandonment of fossil 
fuelsa€l. This would be our biggest investment in our climate future evera€!. If Manchin can sell 
this package on his own chosen terms in West Virginia, that hints at new possibilities for 
Democratsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/07/28/how-joe-manchin-got-yes-why-that-holds-hidden-pr
omise/>

I think the consensus is that the mythical founding father of a€oeClaremonta€n, Harry V. Jaffa, 
would be very unhappy with what those who claim to be his intellectual grandchldren are doing. It 
is not just a hint of the a€oedehumanizing rhetoric that fascist propagandists employa€D:

Laura K. Field: What the Hell Happened to the Claremont Institute?'. a€~a€oeYou dona€™t see this on 
Fox or any of the other stationsa€D but you can see it in a€oethe data.a€Ua€! [John] Eastman became 
very animated, pumping his fists and yelling: a€oeWe no longer live in a self-governing republic if 
we cana€™t get the answer to this question! This is bigger than President Trump! It is the very 
essence of our republican form of
government, and it has to be done! And anybody that is not willing to stand up to do it does not 
deserve to be in the office! It is that simple!a€Ua€!

In the aftermath of January 6, Michael Anton has continued to defend his work hyping the election 
fraud narrative, albeit in an incredibly awkward and self-denying waya€! the extent to which his 
claims about voter fraud rely on alleged a€oestatistical anomaliesa€D and a€oehistorical 
anomaliesa€Da€; seems a bit at odds with the old one: According to Flight 93 standards, Trump 
represented something unprecedented, world-historical,
and super-risky; but apparently things didna€™t get strange enough by 2020 to account for anything 
weirda€!.

[Glenn] Ellmers offers advice to his readers: a€oelf you are a zombie or a human rodent who wants a 
shadow-life of timid conformity, then put away this essay and go memorize the poetry of Amanda 
Gorman.a€D Gorman is the young black poet who spoke movingly at President Joe Bidena€™ s 
inauguration. Ellmersa€™ s line here is vicious on its face, and John Ganz rightly describes it as 
a hint of a€oethe kind of dehumanizing
rhetoric that fascist propagandists employ.a€D But it also ought to be read in the context of 
Claremont and racisma€!

LINK: <https://www.thebulwark.com/what-the-hell-happened-to-the-claremont-institute/>

American fascism in 2022:

David Weigel & Isaac Arnsdorf: Hungary Leader Viktor Orban Addresses CPAC Dallas Amid a€~Mixed 
Racea€™ Blowback'. a€~a€oeThe West is at war with itself,a€D Orban said. a€oeThe globalist can all 
go to hell. I have come to Texas,a€D he added, stumbling over a famous slogan attributed to Texas 
legend Davy Crocketta€!. Orbana€™ s latest controversy: a speech in which he railed against Europe 
becoming a€oemixed
race,a€D saying that Europeans did not want to live with people from outside the continent. One of 
his own close advisers resigned in protest, calling the speech a€oepure Nazi.a€D But Orban has 
found defendersa€! Donald Trumpa€! Tucker Carlsona€! J.D. Vancea€!

LINK: <https://www.washingtonpost.eom/nation/2022/08/04/viktor-orban-cpac-dallas-speech/>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Get a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

