Very Briefly Noted:

• Brad DeLong (2019): Carville-Hunt d€oeTwo Old White Guysa€dPodcasf. I said a€~pass the batona€™, 
not a€™bend the kneea€™ a€! LINK:

<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2019/03/carville-hunt-two-old-white-guys-podcast.html>

Paragraphs

1) Ben Thompsen's idea that writers have "value" seems to me to be simply wrong. What has value is 
"easiest way to tap into this element of the Zeitgeist". That usually gets
attached to a single writer because we are social network animals who tell and listen to stories. 
But that is a matter of time, chance, opportunity, and market structured”as well as
insight, fluency with prose, and ability to produce regularly and to meet deadlines. Ben Thompsen 
has the last four and happened to hit the sweet spot with respect to the first floor,
plus adding a lot of sweat equity and taking a big gamble. More power to him. But he should not 
think that he has unique or large a€oevaluea€D. To see the business of the
sovereign writer as being to sift gold nuggets out of the sand fundamentally mistakes what is going 
on:

Ben Thompson: Sovereign Writers & Substack'. a€~Media has reason to fear Substacka€! not that 
Substack will compete with existing publications for
their best writers, but rather that Substack makes it easy for the best writers to discover their 
actual market valued!. The mediaa€™ s revenue problems
are a function of the Internet unbundling editorial and advertising^!. Mediaa€™ s impending cost 
problema€”as in they will no longer be able to afford
writers that can command a paying audiencea€”is a function of the Internet making it possible to go 
directa€! Substack is [just] one of many tools
competing  to make this easiera€!.

This explains three other Substack realitiesa€!.Substack is going to have a serious problem 
retaining its most profitable writers unless it substantially
reduces its 10%a€!. Substack isa€! [not] threatened by Twitter and Facebooka€!. Social networksa€! 
want to own the reader, but the entire point of the
sovereign writer is that they own their audience. Substacka€™ s real threat will be lower-priced 
competitorsa€!. It would be suicidal for Substack to kick
any successful writers off of its platform for anything other than gross violations of the law or 
its terms of serviced!.

Substack Pro is a good idead!. What would be truly valuable is helping the next great writer build 
a businessd!. Ideally these writers would be the sort of
folks who would have never gotten a shot in traditional mediaa€!. I am by no means an impartial 
observer here; obviously I believe in the viability of the
sovereign writer. I would also like to believe that Stratechery is an example of how this model can 
make for a better world: I went the independent
publishing  route because I had no other choice (believe me, I tried). At the same time, I suspect 
we have only begun to appreciate how destructive this new
reality will be for many media organizationsd!.

Substack is not in control of this process. The sovereign writer is another product of the 
Internet, and Substack will succeed to the extent it serves their
interests, and be discarded if it does not.

LINK: <https://stratechery.com/2021/sovereign-writers-and-substack/>

2) a very large number of journalists who want to know better, and their bosses, very much want 
Biden to say good things about Trump which are (a) false, (b) ludicrous, and (c)
never anything they would ask Trump to do if positions were reversed. I wonder why:

Kate Riga & Josh Kovensky: No, Trump Doesna€™ t Deserve Credit For Planning Vaccine Distribution'. 
a€~With the COVIDa€“19 vaccines starting to
bring the pandemic to an end, former President Trump has stepped in to take credit for the feat. 
Whata€™ s surprising is that hea€™ s been aided in this by
the Washington Post and New York Times, both of which have run articles this week arguing that the 
speed-up in the vaccine rollout under President Biden
only builds off of a plan put into place by Trumpa€!. Thata€™ s flat wronga€!. Trumpa€! lacked a 
plan for the a€oelast milea€D of distribution, leaving
that to the states while lobbying Congress not to pass much-needed funding that would spur state 
and local governments to get the vaccine into armsa€!.

The Trumpa€! plan to distribute the vaccinea€! [was] a€oelet the states figure it out.a€Da€! 
Trumpa€! left the country witha€! a partnership with
pharmacies to vaccinate nursing homesa€”the only real footprint of a federal plan to deliver 
vaccine into peoplea€™ s arms. And even that foundereda€!.
Whata€™ s more is that that one plan only covered the first phase of distribution: nursing home 
residents and hospital workers, who received inoculations
from  the medical facilities at which they workeda€!

LINK: <https://talkingpointsmemo.com/news/trump-covid-vaccination-distribution-biden>

3) For a€oehigh quality votersa€D read a€oewhite votersa€D:

Jonathan Chait: a€~Everybody Shouldna€™ t Be Voting,a€™ Republican Blurts Out'. a€~Representative 
John Kavanagh, a Republican legislator who
chairs Arizonaa€™ s Government and Elections Committee and is shepherding through a bill to make 
voting more cumbersome and therefore rare,
described his partya€™ s motives with blundering candor; a€oeTherea€™ s a fundamental difference 
between Democrats and Republicans,a€D he told
CNN. a€ceDemocrats value as many people as possible voting, and theya€™re willing to risk fraud. 
Republicans are more concerned about fraud, so we
dona€™ t mind putting security measures in that wona€™ t let everybody vote a€” but everybody 
shouldna€™ t be voting a€! Not everybody wants to
vote,  and if somebody is uninterested in voting, that probably means that theya€™re totally 
uninformed on the issues. Quantity is important, but we have
to look at the quality of votes, as wella€Da€!

LINK: 
<https://nvmag.com/intelligencer/article/evervbodv-shouldnt-be-voting-republican-vote-suppression-na
tional-review-history.html>

4) Those who always thought J.D. Vance was a con artist, come down and collect your chips!:

Steve M.: The Worst Senate Race'. a€~J.D. Vance, author of Hillbilly Elegya€\ Ohio Senate seata€!. 
Peter Thiel has given $10 million to a Vance super
PACa€! Newsweek op-eda€! a€oeNno one seems to care that many migrants test positive for COVID every 
day and will directly compete with our
struggling service sector workersa€!. Why are we promising amnestya€! whena€! vicious transnational 
drug cartels use that promise to sell desperate
people                                                                     on the promise of 
crossing the border?a€! Scott Lemieux writesa€!.

If youa€™re wondering why J.D. Vance was throwing out some preemptive racisms, well here you go: 
a€~Josh Mandel, a
candidate in the 2022 Republican primary in the U.S. Senate, had a post removed by Twitter on 
Thursdaya€!

Of the various types of illegals flooding across the border, will more crimes be committed bya€! 
Muslim
Terrorists or Mexican Gangbangersa€!.

However, therea€™ 11 be a third major candidate in the primarya€! Jane TimkenaCI describes herself 
as the a€Done candidate in this race who was hand-
picked by President Trump to run the Ohio Republican Party."a€! The first words in her first 
campaign ad are: a€oePresident Trump won Ohio twice
because  he stood up and fought for hard-working Americans. Ia€™m Jane Timken, and Ia€™m running 
for the U.S. Senate to defend the Trump
agendaa€!.a€D

Ita€™ 11 be a three-person racea€! all be trying to out-MAGA, out-meme, and out-xenophobe one 
another. It wll be a race to the bottom, the worst Senate
primary in Americaa€!

LINK: <https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2021/03/the-worst-senate-race.html>

5) Scott Lemieux: Rich Lowry upholds National ReviewdC™ s Longstanding Policy on Voting Rights'. 
a€~Verbatim Rich Lowry: a€oeThat many Democrats say that the filibuster
should fall for this bill is a symptom of the fevered state of the partv, which despite holding or 
winning everv elected branch of the federal government has conjured out of nothing a


vast conspiracy to stop people from voting that allegedly justifies one of the most blatant federal 
power grabs in memory .a€D Arizona Rep. John Kavanaugh, defending propose
Republican vote suppression measures: a€oeTherea€™ s a fundamental difference between Democrats and 
Republicans^ Democrats value as many people as possible voting, and
theya€™re willing to risk fraud. Republicans are more concerned about fraud, so we dona€™ t mind 
putting security measures in that wona€™ t let everybody vote a€” but
everybody shouldna€™ t be voting a€Da€ I

LINK: 
<https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2021/03/rich-lowry-upholds-longstanding-national-reviews-longs
tanding-policy-on-voting-rights>

6) John Ganz: Some Thoughts on Free Speech & Cancel Culture'. a€~One of the many ironies of the 
interminable debates over cancel culture and free speech is that cancel culture
is not a phenomenon of censorship so much as one of unrestricted free speech. The fear is not that 
one will be censored, so much as one will be denounceda€!. Social media allows
anybody a platform for accusation and calumny and allows anyone to join with them to form 
associations. I think most people agree open criticism of others and freedom of
association   is just part of having a free society. But who, then, decides when criticism is 
unfair or even calumnious? Or when associations are mobs and seditious conspiracies rather
than public-spirited groups?a€!

We have a long tradition in this country of free, even raucous, criticism and attacks on public 
figuresa€!. Wea€™ ve now seen very ordinary attacks on politicians branded as
a€oecancel culture,a€D which is an attempt to make alien and new a very old tradition in our 
democratic society. Ita€™ s attempting to a€oecancela€n criticism in advance, if you
willa€!. We have entered a kind of state of universal hypocrisy on these subjects. Everyone is glad 
to see their enemies skewered: no one really comes to the defense of principle.
Or maybe they feel that principle is best defended through a faction, to which allowances must be 
made for the sake of political expediency a€!

LINK: <https://johnganz.substack.eom/p/some-thoughts-on-free-speech-and>

7) Charles I. Jones: Time Series Tests of Endogenous Growth Models'. a€~According to endogenous 
growth theory, permanent changes in certain policy variables have permanent
effects on the rate of economic growth. Empirically, however, U.S. growth rates exhibit no large 
persistent changes. Therefore, the determinants of long-run growth highlighted by
a specific growth model must similarly exhibit no large persistent changes, or the persistent 
movement in these variables must be offsetting. Otherwise, the growth model is
inconsistent with time series evidence. This paper argues that many AK-style models and R&D-based 
models of endogenous growth are rejected by this criterion. The rejection of
the R&D-based models is particularly stronga€! LINK: 
<https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/6016/78f3aecbbeac6be9d2154b593376e12b12c7.pdf?

ga=2.165174207.1051621454.1616040529-2146537243.1615524750>

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

