Subscribe now

CONDITION: Over the Moon:

Martin Wolf <https://www.ft.com/content/634cl974-bc76-4f56-9548-274816dcc638> has chosen Slouching 
Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> as one of his Economics 
Books of the Year!:

a€oeln 1870 a major shift took place for humanity. With the coming of the industrial research lab, 
the modern corporation, and truly cheap ocean and land transport and communication, we went from a 
world in which economic patterns formed a semi-stable backdrop of grinding mass poverty into one 
where the economy was constantly revolutionizing itself.a€D J Bradford DeLong, professor at the
University of California, Berkeley, tells this remarkable story with verve. Alas, it is also, in 
his opinion, now over.

& Andrew Kelly says that it is not only a€oean important book built on many years of research and 
thinkinga€D. It is a€oealso a terrific reada€”a model for economics books.a€D

Andrew Kelly @pandaemoniumnow

Delighted to see @delonga€™ s book as one of the economics books of the year in the FT. Ita€™ s an 
important book built on many years of research and thinking. Ita€™ s also a terrific read - a model 
for economics books.

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic
History of the Twentieth Century

by J Bradford DeLong, Basic Books £30

“In 1870 a major shift took place for humanity.
With the coming of the industrial research lab, the
modern corporation, and truly cheap ocean and
land transport and communication, we went from

a world in which economic patterns formed a semi­

stable backdrop of grinding mass poverty into one
where the economy was constantly revolutionizing
itself.” J Bradford DeLong, professor at the
University of California, Berkeley, tells this
remarkable story with verve. Alas, it is also, in his


VJpilllVJllj 11VJVV

8:13 AM r™ Nov 23,2022

It is not letters of fire that inscribe themselves directly on the mind permanently via their 
Truth. It is almost surely not a treasure for all timea€”even though knowledge of the past is an 
aid to the interpretation of the future, which in the course of human things must resemble if it 
does not reflect it. But what it is, it is.
Share

FOCUS: The Roosevelt Institute-New Republic Felicia Wong-Michael Tomasky a€oeHow to Save a 
Countrya€D Podcast:


Excerpts:

Brad: I still cannot believe that the New Deal order collapsed as rapidly as it did in the 
1970sa€!. Enormous productivity growth and real wage increases.... [Yes,] inflationary and... 
productivity slowdown speed bump[s]a€! peoplea€! angry at bureaucracya€! at unions that they saw as 
having... monop [sony]... powera€! [But that] shouldna€™ t have led to the... collapse within less 
than a decade of the most successful political
economic system and order that the world had ever seen...

Brad: The bad neoliberalism... is: the market giveth, the market taketh away, blessed be the name 
of the market.... The belief that if property rights are cut at the joints, the marketa€! 
crowdsources the problem of increasing productiona€! mobilizes human brain power to making a richer 
world in a way no other system can. But... at a horrible price. A market system cannot provide any 
form of social justice, and if you demand that it
be tweaked and managed to do so, that would wreck the marketa€™ s ability to do what it could.... 
This is Margaret Thatchera€™ s TINA... a€oethere is no alternative a€D...

Brad: There was a left neoliberalism as well... the posta€“World War II system had become 
overbureaucratized... encrusted with rent-seekinga€! politically strong clients... [with] ]weak 
claimsa€!p Aroperly constructed market economy crowdsourcesa€! solution[s]... [better than] 
bureaucrats]... or some central planner.... [as] people on the spot with the information are 
empowered to act and to act for the common good.  Left

neoliberalism, of which I was once a card-carrying member... [saw itself as] a huge improvement 
over... the posta€ “World War II generation [system]...

Brad: Left and... right neoliberals alternated, but... whenever we left neoliberals did something 
like balance the budget in the interest of faster economic growth, the righta€! promptlya€! fund[s] 
many more bigger tax cuts for the rich...

Brad: The neoliberal order persisted.... Its three promises... restore productivity growth... right 
the distribution of income by getting rid of various intermediaries with]... market and regulatory 
power. restore the moral center of life by making people realize that they could not [always] rely 
on the governmental [if] they didna€™ t make good decisionsa€l. It did absolutely none of those 
things. All it did was greatly widen income

and wealth inequalitya€l. And yet, it wenta€! putting alonga€! surviveda€! the 1980sa€! the 
1990sa€! comes roaring back in the 2000s, and no matter what you want to say about the end of the 
neoliberal order in the ashes of the fires caused by the Great Recession, I look around and ita€™ s 
still there...
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:



Give a gift subscription

MUST-READ: The American Prospecta€™s a€oeBlockchain Eighta€D

David Dayen: Congressmembers Tried to Stop the SECa€™ s Inquiry Into FTX: a€~The a€~Blockchain 
Eighta€™ wrote a bipartisan letter in March attempting to chill the SECa€™ s information requests 
to crypto firms. FTX was one of those firms: Tom Emmer (R-MN), whom the Republican caucus just 
elected as majority whip, the number three position in the House GOP leadership, led the letter.  
a€oeMy office has

received numerous tips from crypto and blockchain firms that SEC Chair Gary Gensler's nformation 
reporting a€~requestsa€™ to the crypto community are overburdensome, dona€™t feel particularly a€! 
voluntary a€! and are stifling innovation.a€D... Byron Donalds (R-FL) said through a spokesperson 
that the congressman was not attempting to influence ongoing investigations at the SEC.  Jake 
Auchincloss (D-MA), another

of the signatories, told the Prospect, a€oeThe congressman has been clear from day one that crypto 
needs strong and clear laws from Congress. The SEC will need to explain to Congress why, despite 
claiming that it didna€™ t need new laws for exchanges, it failed to foresee this meltdown.a€D. 
[]Also] Warren Davidson (R-OH), Ted Budd (R-NC), Darren Soto (D-FL), Josh Gottheimer (D-NJ), and 
Ritchie Torres (D-NY). Budd

was elected this year to the U.S. Senate...
Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Nouriel Roubini: MegaThreats: Ten Dangerous Trends That Imperil Our Future, And How to Survive 
Them: The Say More interview. Read nowa€!.

•  Josh Zumbrun: Inflation and Unemployment Both Make You Miserable, but Maybe Not Equally: a€~For 
nearly 50 years, the so-called Misery Index has added the unemployment rate to the inflation rate 
as a gauge of AmericansaC™ mooda€!

•  Steve M.: Republicans Sound Like Stochastic Terrorists Even When They're (Apparently) Not Trying 
to: a€~How much is Pompeo adding to this atmosphere or rage? Okay, probably not much, because the 
only people who seem to care about his campaign are journalists naive enough to believe that 
someone other than Donald Trump or Ron DeSantis will be the 2024 Republican presidential nomineea€!

•  Joan Williams: How you treat the a€~non-elitea€™ is key to beating populism: a€~In Pennsylvania, 
John Fetterman bridged the a€~representation gapa€™ between the concerns of elite and middle-class 
votersa€!

•  Robert Armstrong: Sam Bankman-Fried and the power of dressing badly: a€~Looking attractive 
matters a lot less, for political or professional purposes, than telling your storya€!

•  Gary Marcus: How come smart assistants have virtually no ability to converse, despite all the 
spectacular progress with large language models?: a€~5 reasons why Large Language Models like GPT-3 
couldna€™t save Alexaa€!

•  Mark Bowden: The Tiny and Nightmarishly Efficient Future of Drone Warfare: a€~Russiaa€™ s war on 
Ukraine has given us just a peek of the world to comea€!

•  Derek Thompson: The housing market has gone from bad to worsea€!
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Suresh Naidu: Is There Any Future for a US Labor Movement?: a€~US union density remains low, even 
as unions remain popular. This is because employer opposition and US labor law together imply that 
workers need to overcome substantial collective action problems at work in order to win union 
recognition and collective bargaining agreements. These barriers make dense social networks and 
high levels of social capital at
work a prerequisite for unionization. Labor organizinga€! faces an uphill battle without policy 
changes that extend collective bargaining across employers and up the value-chain...

Annie Lowrey: The U.S. Needs More Housing Than Almost Anyone Can Imagine: a€~No one can say just 
what it would take to make Brooklyn affordable for workers who dona€™ t have a college degree, 
render San Francisco accessible to families with kids and elderly couples on fixed incomes, or 
allow extended-family members in Boston to buy apartments within a few blocks of one another. That 
means we have no policy
vision of how to make our biggest, most productive places affordable for all, and no plan to get 
therea€!

Steve Clemons: A Trump spoiler alert: a€~As an opening act of his possible 2024 bid, Mike Pompeo 
called out AFT President Randi Weingarten as the most dangerous person in the worlda€”more than 
Chinese premier Xi Jinping! He laid it out for David Weigel and Shelby Talcott after attending the 
Republican Jewish Coalition conference in Las Vegas this weekend. I asked Weingaraten for her 
response, and she said Pompeo
was a€oedesperate to be labeled as the extremist in the Republican presidential primarya€Da€!

Adam Serwer: Rebelling Against Trump Is Not the Same as Rebelling Against Trumpism: a€~Fox News, 
typically a geyser of Trump worship, spent the aftermath of the midterms promoting Florida Governor 
Ron DeSantis, who possesses Trumpa€™ s authoritarian instincts but fewer personality defects. 
National Review published an editorial saying that Trump should not run for president againa€!. 
Wea€™ ve seen Republicans
try to distance themselves from Trump beforea€!. And they always come crawling back. As long as 
Trump is seen as helping Republicans politically, he can shoot as many people on Fifth Avenue as he 
likesa€!



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

