Subscribe now



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

I want to thank Gabe. I want to thank the Stones. I want to thank the Stone Foundation. I want to 
thank the production team for this very nice opportunity to deliver my thoughts on how inequality 
is a Gordian knot of a socio-economic problem that has us as a species pretty completely 
flummoxeda€”even though human progress across the 20th century is, in many
I will divide my thoughts tonight into four parts:

1. Rebalancing the University, the Strike, & What We Deserve

The first part of this talka€”the current strikea€!
[a€i]

a€!4. What to Do?

Finally, I arrive at the fourth part of my talk: Given all this, what should I do? What should we 
do? What should you do?

Remember, first, that economicsa€™ s utilitarian roots place an extremely high value on equality. 
We have every reason to think that the marginal utility of consumption declines steeply with 
wealth, even after we have gotten out of the range where a 50% increase in family wealth, cuts 
infant mortality by 50% and raises adult height by 2 inches. Any aversion to
interpersonal comparisons of utility turns out, in practice, to be a claim that maybe it does not 
matter if they are poor because they would not appreciate the finer things. It is obvious how to 
judge any such claims.

Remember, second, that economicsa€™ s libertarian roots also place an extremely high value on 
equality. Absolute wealth is power over nature. Relative wealth is social power: power to seek the 
attention and assistance of others, to have a voice in what we are collectively going to doa€”and 
it is collectively, because on our own each of us would have a life nasty,
brutish, and likely to be short. As John Stuart Mill wrote, the lives of the poor are lives of 
degradation and imprisonment. If one is locked in a cage, it does not matter much whether there is 
no key or whether one is just not rich enough to buy a key

Remember, third, ethical philosophy also places an extremely high value on equality. We have none 
of us made anything by our hand and brain alone, but only through what has been freely gifted to us 
in the form of this planet and of the accumulated stock of human wisdom, to which we are all heirs.

We understand why, before 1870, human societies were greatly unequal: humanity had no chance of 
baking a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have enough. Those who did have enough did 
so by virtue of their participation in the A©litea€™ s domination-and-exploitation scheme. Since 
1870 humanity has accomplished a great deal: we now have the
technological powers to bake a sufficiently large economic pie that everyone living before 1870 
would have seen as certainly more than enough. Yet, although we have solved the problem of baking a 
sufficiently large economic pie, The problems of slicing and tasting ita€”of equitably distributing 
our collective wealth, and of utilizing it wisely and well so that people
live   lives in which they feel safe and secure, and are healthy and happy a€”those continue to 
flummox us, more or less completely.

That the social democratic order collapsed so rapidly around 1980 makes me think we should look 
back and try to figure out why it had not collapsed earliera€”what had changed then? I am tempted 
to put forward the hypothesis that what had changed was the aging of those with visceral memories 
of the Great Depression and of World War II, who had in the front of
their minds an unusually strong degree of empathy with others, remembering how the world, chance, 
and fate had demonstrated that we were all in this together.

So perhaps the first step is to recognize that this loss of solidarity is odd, for we are all in 
this together.

In his Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argues against those who claim that a more unequal society is 
a better society, for in a more unequal society the rich and the government can get more work out 
of the poor for the same amount of coin. Adam Smith pulls an intellectual-judo move, drawing on 
expectations about gift-exchange:

No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are 
poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body 
of the people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves 
tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodgeda€!

There are people in Pakistan whom I do not know who wove the carpets that are on the floor of my 
house. Whenever one of dogs looks like it might vomit, we frantically hustle them outside because 
the rugs are things of great beauty, which enrich our lives. In fact we should spend more time than 
we do looking down at them and admiring them. The thing about a
well-functioning gift-exchange relationship is that each party benefits greatly on net, and each 
party believes that the current favor balance is against it, so it needs to do more and thus to 
strengthen the relationship.

Every time I walk on any of my carpets, I should think: I am really one-down with respect to the 
balance of favors vis-A -vis the people in Pakistan who wove this, and I should strive harder to 
appreciate the artistic gift they have given me, and find more ways to better their lives. I should 
take care that theya€™re somewhere close to the front of my mind.
I wish I had more to offer you. But I do, at least, have this. Thank you very much.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

