Subscribe now

SUBJECT: A Brief Note on Friedrich Engels (1884) on the Relative Autonomy of the State


First, glossing the Communist ManifestoaC™ s a€oethe executive of the modern state is but a 
committee for managing the common affairs of the whole bourgeoisiea€da€”a€ceDie moderne 
Staatsgewalt ist nur ein AusschuAY, der die gemeinschaftlichen GeschApfte der ganzen 
Bourgeoisklasse verwalteta€na€”a€oethe modern state is nothing but  an association for managingthe 
affairsof the business classa€D:

Friedrich Engels (1884): The Relative Autonomy of the State 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2020/03/friedrich-engels-1884-the-origin-of-the-familv-private-prop
ertv-and-the-state-the-state-is-normallv-the-stat.html>: a€~The state... is normally the state of 
the most powerful, economically ruling class, which by its means becomes  also the politically 
ruling class, and soacquires new meansof
holding down and exploiting the oppressed. The ancient state was, above all, the state of the 
slave-owners for holding down the slaves, just as the feudal state was the organ of the nobility 
for holding down the peasant serfs and bondsmen, and the modern representative state is the 
instrument for exploiting wage-labor by capital.

But Engels finds that the Communist ManifestoaC™ s 1848 formulation is not adequate for any 
productive discussion of what was to him modern politics and of political strategy. And so in 1884 
Engels issues a very important qualification indeed:

Exceptional periods, however, occur when the warring classes are so nearly equal in forces that the 
state power, as apparent mediator, acquires for the moment a certain independence in relation to 
both. This applies to the absolute monarchy of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, which 
balances the nobility and the bourgeoisie against one another, and to the Bonapartism of the First 
and
particularly of the Second French Empire, which played off the proletariat against the bourgeoisie 
and the bourgeoisie against the proletariat. The latest achievement in this line, in which ruler 
and ruled look equally comic, is the new German Empire of the Bismarckian nation; here the 
capitalists and the workers are balanced against one another and both of them fleeced for the 
benefit of the decayed
Prussian cabbage-aquires.

In short, a€oethe modern state is nothing other than an association for managing the common affairs 
of the business classa€D needs to be substantially qualified in every case the later (1884) Engels 
runs up against in his day:

Moreover, there is another qualification that Engels finds necessary: In the a€oelow stagea€D of 
state development, property in its form of the extraction of resources is closely tied to the power 
to say what the law is and will bea€”to jurisdiction directly, to legislation, or to the choice of 
magistrates. But just as the modern market economy makes everyone formally equal in their economic 
rights, so the a€oehighest
stagea€D statea€”the democratic republica€” makes everyone formally equal in their political 
rights:

Further, in most historical states the rights conceded to citizens are graded on a property basis, 
whereby it is directly admitted that the state is an organization for the protection of the 
possessing class.... This political recognition of property differences. marks a low stage in the 
development of the state. The highest form of the state, the democratic republic, which in our 
modern social conditions

becomes more and more an unavoidable necessity and is the form of state in which alone the last 
decisive battle between proletariat and bourgeoisie. no longer officially recognizes differences of 
property.

But in Engelsa€™ s eyes formal equality is in fact the opposite of substantive equality, because of 
simple corruption and, indirectly, a€oeby an alliance between the government and the stock 
exchangea€D:

Wealth here employs its power indirectly, but all the more surely. It does this... by plain 
corruption of officials. and by an alliance between the government and the stock exchange, which is 
effected all the more easily the higher the state debt mounts and the more the joint-stock 
companies concentrate in their hands not only transport but also production itselfa€!. In addition 
to America, the latest

French republic illustrates this strikingly, and honest little Switzerland has also given a 
creditable performance in this field.

And the control of the government by the stock exchange is not limited to democratic republics:

But that a democratic republic is not essential to this brotherly bond between government and stock 
exchange is proved not only by England, but also by the new German Empire, where it is difficult to 
say who scored most by the introduction of universal suffrage, Bismarck or the BleichrA^der bank.

It is, however, not completely clear to me what Engels is pointing to as this a€oealliance between 
the government and the stock exchangea€D. Today it is very clear: in the public sphere the 
governments™ s performance is scored by the media and by the well-thinking by whether stocks go up 
or not. But this was not true, or not true to the same degree, back in 1884.
Finally, Engels needs to reassure the faithful, and to say that, in spite of what he sees around 
him, eventually the New Jerusalem will descend from the Heavens, adorned like a bride:

The oppressed class... the proletariat... in the measure in which it matures towards its 
self-emancipation... constitutes itself as its own party and votes for its own representatives, not 
those of the capitalists.  On the day when the thermometer of universal suffrage shows 
boiling-point among the workers, they as well as the capitalists will know where they standa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2020/03/friedrich-engels-1884-_the-origin-of-the-familv-private-pro
pertv-and-the-state-the-state-is-normallv-the-stat.html>
Share

AJs:

I am finding it increasingly hard to believe that Elon Musk is a Turing-class entity, rather than 
some pattern-matching algorithm that, as Matthew Yglesias likes to say, is most helpfully analyzed 
by a€oeadopting a non-intentional stance and attributing behavior to hormonal fluctuations, 
caffeine consumption, serotonin levels or what have youa€D:

Annabelle Timsit: Elon Musk Calls Tesla Electric Car Factories a€~Gigantic Money Furnacesa€™: 
a€~Factories in Austin and Berlin are a€~losing billions of dollarsa€™ amid supply-chain 
disruptions and challenges in battery manufacturings!. SoeThere should be like a giant roaring 
sound, which is the sound of money on fire,SD he added. Both factories opened earlier this year to 
much
fanfareS!. Musk said these issues would Sceget fixed real fast, but it requires a lot of attention 
SUS! Musk told Tesla employees in June, after the interview was taped, that 10 percent of the 
companyS™ s salaried workforce would be laid off as he expressed concerns about a possible future 
recession in the United StatesS!

LINK: 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/technology/2022/06/23/elon-musk-tesla-factories-gigantic-money-furna
ces/>

Share

How incredibly far we are from being able to perform first-principles analyses of biological 
systems. Finding hierarchy-based ways of conceptualizing and classifying is our only hope for 
generations to come. And yet even with our own microelectronic systems, there is enough bug=based 
leakages across hierarchy levels that we have explicitly designed in to keep us jumping. What will 
we do with biological systems where
the only bug-catcher is Darwin?:

Bharath Ramsundar (2016): The Ferocious Complexity Of The Cell’. S~Fifty years ago, the first 
molecular dynamics papers allowed scientists to exhaustively simulate systems with a few dozen 
atoms for picoseconds. Today, due to tremendous gains in computational capability from MooreS™ s 
law, and due to significant gains in algorithmic sophisticiation from fifty years of research, 
modern
scientists can simulate systems with hundreds of thousands of atoms for milliseconds at a timeS!. 
The scope of this achievement should not be underestimated; the advent of these techniques along 
with the maturation of deep-learning has permitted a host of start-ups (1,2,3, etc) to investigate 
diseases using tools that were hitherto unimaginable. The dramatic progress of computational methods
suggests that one day scientists should be able to exhaustively understand complete human cellsa€!. 
Following the historical example a€! and assuming that Moorea€™ s law continues in some form, we 
are at least 50 years of hard research from achieving thorough understanding of the simplest of 
human cellsa€!. How far is human science from understanding a human brain?a€! Assuming
Moorea€™  s law continues, we are at least 100 years of hard research from achieving thorough 
understanding of the human braina€!. Both estimates above are likely low. An important, but often 
ignored fact about biological systems is that all nontrivial biomolecules exhibit significant 
quantum entanglement. The wavefunctions of biological macromolecules are quite complex, and until 
recently
have remained beyond the reach of even the most approximate solvers of Schrodingera€™ s equation. 
As a result, most simulations of biomolecular systems use crude approximation to handle fundamental 
biological phenomenon such as phosphorylation or ATP processing. More accurate simulations of cells 
will require extremely large quantum simulations on a scale far beyond todaya€™ s
capabilities. We have to assume that a Moorea€™ s law for quantum computing will emergea€!

LINK: <https://rbharath.github .io/the-ferocious-complexity-of-the-cell/>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

I have not read this. But is seems important to me, important enough that I should move the book to 
the very top of the pile:

Timothy Burke: The Read: Daniel Laurison, Producing Politics’. a€~Therea€™ s a good analysisa€! of 
why parties are in many ways so very far away from the communities that make up their political 
basea€”and why many idealistic young people who want to forge a relationship to the party they 
prefer end up alienated by being used as canvassing foot soldiers, a grueling and unpleasant task 
that

ic       mnstlv hv nrcrcini'ZQtinnc that QTA         fnr nanvQC nr»prcitir»nc tn innrAacA thf»ir 
nn.ntinAr mAmhprchin mile fTTiA clnnrt timp T xx/nrlmrl fnr Q PTRd WMIA in pnllncm WZQQ nucilxz 
thf* uznrst nznrV pvnpripnpp T VIQVA hurl ^3^! ETHAI cnpial crliiA that xxzAlpnmAC npnnlp intn an 
AlitA iHAntitxz fnftAn thrnnoh CAlAntivA hicrliAr ArliinatinnA3^‘”thfit CAncA that vnn arA in 
nharcrA nf manacrincr thACA


predictable, controllable bundles of people and things, of discerning how atomistic individuals 
scale up into communities, electorates, populations, groups, nations, economies. And the one thing 
that cana€™t be abided in that work-defined identity is the empirical and philosophical fact of 
unpredictability and uncontrollability that is rooted ina€! humanitya€!
LINK:

Eight by Seven

The Read: Daniel Laurison, Producing Politics

Why did I get this book? Laurison is my colleague, but I also think hea€™ s one of the more 
sophisticated intellectuals I know when it comes to thinking about the specific, measurable 
consequences of social capital and educational attainment and one of the few observers of politics 
(both formal party politics and the wider social field of a€~being politicala€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 3 likes A- Timothy Burke
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

