Subscribe now

Me trying to explain why Ia€”and also so many others of my karass have a strong tendency to write 
of Leon Trotsky with more affection than he deserves, a tendency we need to struggle against:
Share

Why do people like Leon Trotsky? It is not as though he stands at the head of a great political 
movement. And he was not terribly likable:

READING: Leszek Kolakowski: On Trotsky in Exile


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: Leszek Kolakowski: On Trotsky in Exile

Leszek Kolakowski: Main Currents of Marxism: Vol. 3: a€™ Trotsky: The years of exile: IN January 
1929, after the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union had been almost entirely wiped out by 
repressive measa€!
Read more

7 months ago A- Brad DeLong

Leszek Kolakowskia€™ s judgment does seem to me to be tough but fair, even if the preceding rant is 
a littlea€”but just a littlea€’’one-sided:

The fact that [Trotskya€™ s] theor[ies were]a€! rejected bya€! almost everyonea€! [has weight 
because they were] theories that ha[d] an inbuilt self-interpretation to the effect that they are 
an a€~expressiona€™ of great historical tendencies (or of the will of Providence)a€! embody the 
true consciousness of the classa€! destined soon to triumph, ora€!
constitute a revelation of truth, anda€! must inevitably prevaila€!. If a theory of this kind fails 
to secure recognition, its failure is an argument against it on its own premisses. (On the other 
hand, success in practice is nota€! [just] an argumenta€! that the faith inspireda€! corresponded 
to essential social needsa€! Stalina€™ s successes did not prove that
he  was a€~righta€™ as a theorist .)a€!. The failure of Trotskyism in practicea€! isa€! proof 
thata€! theory as Trotsky conceived it was wronga€!.

But he was an outstanding personality, endowed with immense courage, will-power, and endurance. 
Covered with obloquy by Stalin and his henchmena€l persecuted by the most powerful police and 
propagandaa€! he never faltereda€!. His children were murdered, he wasa€! hunted down like an 
animala€! finally done to death. His amazing resistance to
every trial was the result of his faitha€!. Unfortunately, the intensity of a faith and the 
willingness of its adherents to undergo persecution for it are no proof that it is intellectually 
or morally righta€!.

Trotsky was not unique in criticizing Soviet despotism, nor was he the first to do so. On the 
contrary, he criticized it much more mildly than the democratic socialists, and he did not object 
to it qua despotisma€!. Trotsky did not offer any alternative form of Communisma€!. Trotsky 
advocated ceaseless revolutionary aggression and endeavoured to
convince himself and others that if he had been running the Soviet state and the Comintern, the 
whole world would have been set ablaze without delay; his reason for so believing was that Marxist 
historiosophy taught him that such were the laws of historya€!..

Stalinism was the natural and obvious continuation of the system of government established by Lenin 
and Trotsky. Trotsky refused to recognize this fact and persuaded himself that Stalina€™ s 
despotism bore no relation to Lenina€™ s; that coercion, police repression, and the devastation of 
cultural life were due to a a€~bureaucratica€™ coup da€™ etat
and that he himself bore no vestige of responsibility for them. This desperate self-delusion is 
psychologically explicable. What we have here isa€! the tragedy ofa€! a revolutionary despot 
entangled in a snare of his own making. There wasa€! only a deposed leader whoa€! could not realize 
that his efforts were vain, and who would not accept
responsibility                                                                                      
                                                                          for a state of affairs 
whicha€! was in fact the direct consequence of the principles that he, together with Lenin and the 
whole Bolshevik party, had established as the foundations of socialism.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

So why is Trotsky likeable to, well, to someone like me?

First, the guy could writea€”and had good translators: a€ceEvery man has a natural right to be 
stupid; but Dwight Macdonald abuses the privilegea€D. That means that the sub-Turing instantiation 
of Trotskya€™ s mind we spin up from the black squiggles on the page, run on our own wetware in a 
separate sandbox, and then talk to is a wonderful and entertaining simulacrum of
a guy.

Second, it is the sheer rightness of the narrative thrust of his story that, I think, makes it 
attractive to someone like me:

1. A smart young whippersnapper finds an intellectual doctrine that he thinks is a lever with which 
he can change the world.

2. He thus falls victim to what can only be described as an irrational cult.

3. Wonderful initial successes.

4. But things go horribly wrong.

5. And he spends the last fifteen years life as a sorcerera€™ s apprentice, trying to dispel the 
demons that his own spells had raiseda€”and yet at the end has very painfully repaired some of the 
damage earned a certain kind of wisdom: the story, in a way, of A’dipus at Colonos.

(Unfortunately, it is not really the story of A’dipus at Colonos, for Trotsky never gains wisdom, 
and never repairs any of the damage: he is still objectively pro-Hitler and calling for 
international support of Stalina€™ s rA©gime against bourgeois imperialism to the end of his days, 
which is ultimately why his Shachtmanite and Burnhamite American followers broke with him;
Kolakowski: a€oeln 1939a€“40 he explained indignantly to Shachtman and Burnham that the Soviet 
[1939] invasion of Poland coincided with the revolutionary movementa€! and that in Finland too the 
[1939a€“40] war with the Soviet Union had awakened revolutionary feelings. True, this was a 
revolution of a a€~special kinda€™ , since it was introduced at the point of the
bayonet and did not spring from the depths of popular feeling, but it was a genuine revolution all 
the same.a€D)


me Dest-written lines on all tnis come trom Bamuna Wilsonafe1" s 10 the Finland Station: Study in 
tne Writing and Acting oj History.

Book Wilson Finland Station

32.1MB a"™ PDF File
Download

Download

We who of recent years have seen the State that Trotsky helped to build in a phase combining the 
butcheries of the Robespierre Terror with the corruption and reaction of the Directory, and Trotsky 
himself figuring dramatically in the role of Gracchus Babeuf, may be tempted to endow him with 
qualities which actually he does not possess and with
principles which he has expressly repudiated. We have seen the successor of Lenin undertake a 
fabulous rewriting of the whole historya€! to cancel-out Trotskya€™ s part, pursue Trotsky from 
country to country, persecuting even his children and hounding them to their deaths; and at last, 
in faked trials and confessions more degrading to the human spirit
than  the frank fendishness of IvAjn the Terrible, try to pin upon Trotsky the blame of all the 
mutinies, mistakes and disasters that have harassed his administrationA±till he has made the world 
conscious of Trotsky as the Accuser of Stalina€™ s own bad conscience, as if the Soviet careerists 
of the thirties were unable to deny the socialist ideal without
trying to annihilate the moral authority of this one homeless and hunted man.

It is not Trotsky alone who has created his role: his enemies have given it a reality that no mere 
self-dramatization could have compassed. And as the fires of the Revolution have died down in the 
Soviet Union at a time when the systems of thought of the West were already in an advanced state of 
decadence, he has shone forth like a veritable Pharos,

rotating a long shaft of light on the seas and the reefs all around.

But we must try to see the man inside the role and to examine his real tendencies and doctrinesa€!.

There has beena€! no othera€! for whom the Marxist conception of Historya€! plays so frankly 
teleological a rolea€!. Historya€! with its dialectical Trinity, had chosen Prince 
Svyatopolk-Mirsky to disillusion the middle class, had propounded revolutionary conclusions which 
it had compelled Father CapA3n to bless, and will cruelly discredit and destroy
certain Pharisees and Sadducees of Marxism before it summons the boiling lava of the Judgment, 
These statements make no sense whatever unless one substitutes for the words history and the 
dialectic of history the words Providence and God. And this Providential power of history is 
present in all the writing of Trotskya€!. Of late, in his solitude and
exile, this History, an austere spirit, has seemed actually to stand behind his chair as he writes, 
encouraging, admonishing, approving, giving him the courage to confound his accusers, who have 
never seen Historya€™ s facea€!.

What it may mean in moments of action to feel History towering at onea€™ s elbow with her avenging 
sword in her hand is shown in the remarkable scene at the first congress of the Soviet dictatorship 
after the success of the October insurrection of 1917, when Trotsky, with the contempt and 
indignation of a prophet, read MAjrtov and his followers out
of meeting: a€oeYou are pitiful isolated individualsa€D, he cried at this height of the Bolshevik 
triumph: a€oeYou are bankrupt; your role is played out. Go where you belong from now ona€”into the 
rubbish-can of history !a€D

These words are worth pondering for the light they throw on the course of Marxist politics and 
thought.

Observe that the merging of yourself with the onrush of the current of history is to save you from 
the ignoble fate of being a a€oepitiful isolated individuals□, and that the failure so to merge 
yourself will relegate you to the rubbish-can of history, where you can presumably be of no more 
use.
Today, though we may agree with the Bolsheviks that MAjitov was no man of action, his croakings 
over the course they had adopted seem to us full of far-sighted intelligence.

He pointed out that proclaim ing a socialist regime in conditions different from those contemplated 
by Marx would not realize the results that Marx expected; that Mars and Engels had usually 
described the dictatorship of the proletariat as having the form, for the new dominant class, of a 
democratic republic, with universal suffrage and the popular recall
of officials; that the slogan a€oeAll power to the Sovietsa€D had never really meant what it said 
and that it had soon been exchanged by Lenin for a€oeAll power to the Bolshevik Party.a€D

There sometimes turn out to be valuable objects cast away in the rubbish-can of history a€’’things 
that have to be retrieved later on.

From the point of view of the Stalinist Soviet Union, that is where Trotsky himself is today; and 
he might well discard his earlier assumption that an isolated individual must needs be pitifula€oe 
for the conviction of Dr. Stockman in Ibsena€™ s Enemy of the People that a€Dthe strongest man is 
he who stands most alone."
But Trotsky-the-person never could and never did reach the destination of intellectual and moral 
enlightenment that the narrative current of his story forces us to believe that he was destined to 
attain.

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

