•  Kaushik Basu: All the Kinga€™ s Games: a€~Do Russians want to oust Putin and restore democracy? 
If you ask people familiar with Russia, they will most likely say
that most of the population still supports him. I have my doubts. Tyrants always appear to have 
more support than they do until they are gone, because feigning support
is a survival strategy...

•  Dave Lee: The ever-expanding job of preserving the interneta€™ s backpages: a€~A quarter of a 
century after it began collecting web pages, the Internet Archive is
adapting to new challengesa€!

• David Smith: a€~Testing an Apple Watch Ultra in the Scottish Highlandsa€™

• Michael Hiltzik: Column: How did America get addicted to a policy that fails everyone but the 
rich?

•  Frederik Gieschen: Thinking About the Next Warren Buffetta€D: a€~Munger: a€oe Young lawyers 
frequently come to me and say, a€~How can I quit practicing law
and become a billionaire instead?a€™ a€! The next Warren Buffett, whoever they are, will not be 
afraid to ask the question that is on everyonea€™ s mind. But they
will also not be sitting in the audience waiting to be handed enlightenmenta€!

•  Dan Davies: A non-random walk down Lombard Street: a€~Not all market interventions are bailouts 
and not all bailouts are bada€!. The idea that financial crises can
be managed by mitigating the consequences ex post rather than preventing the problem ex ante has a 
bad reputation, mainly as a result of Alan Greenspana€™ s use of
it as an excuse for not doing more during the 2000s. But ita€™ s not intrinsically unorthodox 
central banking. The optimal frequency of crises, as Professor Richard
Portes once told me, is not zero. A central bank cana€™ t anticipate everything and the perfect 
regulatory system doesna€™ t exist. Since central banks have the power
to expand their balance sheets without limit, and so the ability to unstick frozen markets, why 
shouldna€™t they use it sometimes? As long as people dona€™t get
into the habit of expecting to be rescued simply from falling markets, this is a valid part of the 
toolkita€!

• Joe Nye: What Caused the Ukraine War?: a€~Distinguish between deep, intermediate, and immediate 
causesa€!. Putin lit the matcha€! on February 24a€!. The
intermediate cause was a refusal to see Ukraine as a legitimate statea€!. Putin wants to restore 
what he calls the a€oeRussian worlda€Da€!. [But] while NATOa€™ s
decision in 2008 may have been misguided, Putina€™ s change of attitude predated ita€!. Behind all 
this were the remote or deep causes that followed the end of the
ColdWara€!

• Emily Holland: Permanent Rupture: The European-Russian Energy Relationship Has Ended with Nord 
Streama€!

•  John Ganz: The Matteotti Crisis: a€~Mussolinia€™ s success was not guaranteeda€!. The King might 
have withdrawn his mandate, his parliamentary allies could
have fled, the opposition might have adopted a more muscular strategy, or the Fascist ultras may 
have launched a coup that justified governmental suppression of the
Fascists in response. Mussolini took advantage of the disorganization of his opponents and the 
craven opportunism of his allies. It was the sort of tactical victory he had
become expert in, riding out the storms while just managing to keep his coalition together. The 
killing of Giacomo Matteotti may have been reckless in that it created an
unstable situation and threatened his rule, but ultimately it proved to be a€oethe right move:a€D 
Mussolini removed an opponent of extraordinary courage and moral
authority and created the conditions for consolidating controla€!

• Hermione McKenzie: Review of Social Origins of Dictatorship and Democracya€\

•  Noah Smith: We still haven't solved the Nuclear Age: a€~Maybe Feynman was right after all. Maybe 
now that humans have nukes, wea€™ 11 inevitably use them
(again). Wea€™ ve used every other weapon wea€™ ve ever created, multiple times. Maybe war obeys 
the principle that everything possible is mandatory. I hope this
is  not true, obviously. But if wea€™re going to make sure it isna€™ t true, we need to be more 
purposeful about finding a solution to the Nuclear Agea€!

• Kos: Ukraine Update: Russians in disarray, as Ukraine presses their advantage: a€~Russia is 
desperate for trucks and other military gear. Youa€™ ve seen the WWII
era buggies on their way to the front? This is almost guaranteed a wartime requisition, with the 
side benefit of panicking observers into thinking Russia might go
nucleara€!

•  Matt Yglesias: To save downtowns, we need to embrace windowless bedrooms: a€~Ia€™ m not telling 
city officials anything they dona€™ t already know about the
merits of office-to-residential conversions as a means to help urban cores address economic 
pressuresa€!. But for a major downtown redevelopment project, I dona€™ t
think that kind of wink-wink strategy would worka€!

• Chris Anstey: A Decisive Turn: a€~Ita€™ s not just corporate anecdotesa€! suggesting a decisive 
turn in the worlda€™ s manufacturing cycle. Macroeconomic data
are starting to align that way as wella€!

• The Onion: No. 22-293 
<https://www.supremecourt.gOv/DocketPDF/22/22-293/242292/20221003125252896_35295545_l-22.10.03 - 
Novak-Parma - Onion Amicus
Brief.pdf> In The Supreme Court of the United States :: BRIEF OF THE ONION AS AMICUS CURIAE IN 
SUPPORT OF PETITIONERS!

• Lincoln Michel: Understanding the Reader Without Pandering to the Reader: a€~As writers we should 
try as much as we can to experience the text as another reader
would. As just a text. Only the words on the page in the order they appear on the pagea€!

• Massimo Livi-Bacci: A concise history of world populations! Halpin: The Healthy Parks Theory of 
Governances □: a€~Politicians often forget that what really
matters to most people is a proper sense of placea€!

• Zach Carter: A Dose of Rational Optimism: a€~And though he does at times take excessive detours 
into dorky cul-de-sacsa€”the book does not need quite so many
pages on the development of alternating current or the transistora€’’these indulgences can be 
skimmed easily enougha€!

• Jacob Soil: How Christianity Influenced the Development of Capitalism in Medieval Europea€!

• Steve Donoghue: a€~Historical asides are so winningly conversational that they very much help to 
make the booka€™ s 600 pages surprisingly easy readinga€!
[DeLong] has written the most entertaining End Times narrative since The Late Great Planet Earth^\

• David Chance: a€~At 600-plus pagesa€! not for the faint-hearted, but therea€™ s little in the way 
of jargona€! the booked is laced with interesting anecdotes,
although DeLong does get a bit wordya€!

•  Michael Nielsen: Notes on Effective Altruism: a€~I personally often find many new EAs a little 
self-righteous and overconfident, and sometimes overly evangelical...
("why are you wasting your time doing that, you should be working on AI safety", said by someone 
who thinks they know about AI, but does not, and has no ideas of
any value about AI safety). This varies from amusing to mildly annoying to infuriating...

•  Alex: Keynes' General Theory Ch. 19: a€~It takes institutions to displace institutions, and it 
takes alternative sources of legitimacy to displace existing sources of
legitimacy.

• Noah Smith: A concrete vision of the liberal democratic futurea€!

• The Economist: A study of fights at night suggests dictators lie about economic growth: 
a€~a€oeHow much should we trust the dictatora€™ s GDP growth estimates?
a€D, by L.R. Martinez, 2022; Freedom House; World Bank...

• Doug Jones: The world at 1000 BCEa€!

• Nicole Barbaro: The Cognitive Gap Between Humans and Everything Elsea€!

• Felix Martin: Free Market: The History of an Idea by Jacob Soil: Reviewa€!

• Martin Farrer: A Ponzi scheme by any other name: the bursting of China property bubble: a€~Nearly 
a third of all property loans are now classed as bad debtsa€!.
S&P said at least 800bn yuan would be needed a€“ or even 10 times that much in the worst-case 
scenario a€“ to rescue a property market...

• Jeff Herf: Reactionary modernism: technology, culture, and politics in Weimar and the Third Reich


•  Stefan J. Link: Forging Global Fordism: Nazi Germany, Soviet Russia, and the Contest over the 
Industrial Order

• Ilya Somin: a€~Ukraine seems likely to bag thousands of prisoners in Lyman, and another pocket 
could collapse in Kherson, in the next few weeks, yielding many
more. In both cases, Putin refused permission to withdraw a€!

•  Matthew C. Klein: The Covid Recovery Looks Different Now: a€~The latest revisionsa€! have closed 
most of the gap between thea€! valuea€! produceda€! and the
incomea€! generateda€L GDP as of 2022Q2 has been revised up by 1.1 %a€! GDI has been revised down 
by 1.5%a€!

•  Dani Rodrik: An Industrial Policy for Good Jobs: a€~A modern approach to industrial policy must 
respond to new circumstances. It must target a€oegood-jobs
externalities,a€D in addition to the traditional learning, technological, and national security 
considerationsa€!. Focus on manufacturing and globally competitive
industries    has to be broadened to service sectors and smaller and medium-sized firms. And the 
practice of industrial policy will need to relya€! more on collaborative,
iterative interaction whereby public agencies supply a portfolio of customized public services in 
exchange for firms undertaking soft commitments on the quantity and
quality of employments!

• Sara Trimble & Hannah Eliiot: Stunt Driver Sera Trimble on How She Got Her Start (and Her Porsche 
911): a€~In the latest a€oeHowa€™ d You Get That Car?a€D
column, Trimble talks with Hannah Elliott about getting into car collectings’’and showbizS!

• John Anthers: The UK Cannot Afford to Look This Ridiculous: S~The Bank of England may have saved 
gilts, but scorn and political danger for Truss and Kwarteng
still have a long way to runS”and could cut their careers short. Ridicule is something politicians 
need to be very, very scared of...

• Radley Balko: Welcome to The Watch: a€.~a€ceA masterpiece of reporting ... If the goal of great 
journalism is to speak truth to power, Balkoa€™ s contribution does
just that.a€^.€.”Judgesa€™ statement, 2022 Deadline Club AwardsS!

•  The Economist: What to read to understand central banking: S~Lombard Street: A Description of 
the Money Market. By Walter Bagehot. White Crane
Publishing; 232 pages; $8.99. John Wiley & Sons; A£15.99a€\. A book that analyses in simple 
language the Bank of Englands™ s role in the British monetary
systemS!. Bernanke refers to Bagehot in at least eight chapters of his memoir and kept the book in 
his office at the Fed...

•  The Economist: What to read to understand Donald Trump: a€~Identity Crisis: The 2016 
Presidential Campaign and the Battle for the Meaning of America.

John Sides, Michael Tesler and Lynn Vay reck.Prince ton University Press; 352 pages; 529.95S!. 
TrumpS!. Were non-college-educated whitesS”key to his victory in
the battleground statesS”swayed by economic anxieties or by his racism, Islamophobia and 
anti-immigrant scapegoating? This book, by three political scientists,
argues it was the latterS!. Racial attitudes shaped their perception of who deserved what from the 
economya€!. Grievance politics prevaileda€!

• Annie Lowrey: Teachers, Nurses, and Child-Care Workers Have Had Enougha€!

• Chris Matthews & Brad DeLong: A History of the 20th Century and the Search for Economic Utopiaa€!

• James Altucher & Brad DeLong: a€ZThe James Altucher Show: a€~What changes occurred in 1870 that 
changed the course of human history more than the
previous three thousand years ?a€!. "This is one of the best economic history books I've ever 
reada€\Ja€\

• Brad DeLong: Has capitalism's economic miracle run out of steam?a€!

• Chris Matthews: Sept. 28: MarketWatch - A History of the 20th Century and the Continuing Search 
for Economic Utopia: a€~MarketWatch reporter Chris Matthews
speaks with economist Brad DeLong about his new book Slouching Towards Utopia, a history of the 
economically miraculous 20th century and what investors,
technologists and policymakers can do to ensure the next hundred years of growing prosperity a€!

• Mitchell Clark: Google will help you find better results without tagging a€ceReddita€D onto every 
searcha€!

•  Ian Millhiser: The Supreme Court hands the religious right a big victory by lying about the 
facts of a case: a€~Gorsuch misrepresents the facts of the casea€!

• Jeffrey Sonnenfeld & Steven Tian: Commentary: The Fed is oversteering on inflationa€“every signal 
suggests it's already coolinga€!

•  The Economist: How not to run a country: a€~It was meant to usher in an era of economic growth. 
Instead the 25-minute statement that Kwasi Kwarteng,
Britaina€™ s new chancellor of the exchequer, gave on September 23rd kickstarted a crisisa€!. As 
investors took fright, gilt yields surged, prompting the Bank of
England to say on September 28th that it was ready to buy unlimited quantities of long-dated 
bondsaCI

•  Bret Swanson: The $101,000,000 iPhone: a€~One terabyte of digital storagea€!which alone would 
have cost around $45 million in 1991. Add in the A16 processor,
the 5G modemaCI an amazing graphics processor, and four cameras totaling 84 megapixels, and youa€™ 
ve got a device that would have cost at least $101 million to
build in 1991 a€!

• Shakezulu: You know who else assumes people of color are waiters

• Empty Wheel: Under Seal, Trump Accuses Hand-Picked Special Master of Not Following Orders

• Ken White: a€~Okay. College students, like any other group, can be censorial assholesa€!

• Kevin T. Dugan: Elon Musk Caught Deleting Messages About the Twitter Deal

• Dambisa Moyo: Why US Inflation Is Headed Down

• Ezra Klein & Andrea Kendall-Taylor: Why Russia Is Losing Steam and Ukraine Is Gaining Ground 
<https://o vercast.fm/+oiPVJRHrI>

• Dan Wang: a€~Brad @DeLong makes FDR sound like Deng Xiaoping, whose spirit was: a€oe Whatever 
grows the economy we shall declare to be socialism, and
what does not we shall declare to be capitalisma€Da€!

• Max Chafkin: The Sneaky Genius of Applea€™ s AirPods Empire: a€~AR/VR headsets are a small market 
by Apple standards, but Tim Cooka€™ s massive
headphones division shows just how big the company can make a niche producta€!

• Duncan Black: Our Donald Problem, and Yours: a€~I get the impediments to publicly betraying The 
Donald, but that elite conservatives generallya€’’including
judgesa€’’don't obviously want to quietly push him off stage is a bit of a mystery. Sure they love 
Trumpism too, but not the guy!a€!

• John Burn-Murdoch: Economics May Take Us to Net Zero: a€~The plummeting cost of low-carbon energy 
has already allowed many countries to decouple economic
growth from emissionsa€!

• Sam Seder: a€~We have been speculating why Sean Hannity has repeatedly pressed guests to concede 
that ita€™ s criminal to transport asylum seekers around the
country under knowingly false pretensesa€! now its cleara€! the team trump/desantis war is becoming 
more public..

•  Erik Loomis: The Long Arms of Trumpism: a€~a€oeThis week, Mr. Malpassa€™ s refusal to 
acknowledge that the burning of fossil fuels is rapidly warming the
planet exposed a debate inside and outside of the [World Bank] institution^Da€I Who could have 
guessed that putting a climate denier at the head of the World Bank
would be less than optimalWonder why people are so upset by ita€!

• Scott Lemieux: Our Complacent Insiders: 'Balls & Strikes: a€oeAs Scalia himself says in another 
anecdote, 'Ia€™ m a Supreme Court justice. I can do what I want'.
Thanks to reporters like Totenberg, whose ideas for rigorous questions for the justices include 
a€~red wine or white?a€™ , hea€™ s right...

•  Bill McBride: a€~Merrill: "We now look for a hard(er) landing.... Our baseline outlook for the 
US economy continues to include a recession in 1H 2023. We project

real GDP to fall 1.0% in the four quarters ending 4Q 2023 and for the unemployment rate to rise to 
5.6% in December 2023a€!


• Dan Pfeiffer: All (Elected) Republicans are MAGA Republicans: a€~Every elected Republican is 
advancing the MAGA agendaaCI posing an existential threat to our
country a€™ s democracy and peoplea€™ s freedoma€!

• Dr. Frizzle: a€~The first singular use The first use of a€cetheya€D is so old, it predates the 
letter combination a€cetha€D in favor of the thorn, a€ceAza€O When
William and the Werewolf, in 1375 CE, used the singular a€cetheya€D as a pronoun, it was spelled 
a€oeAzeia€Da€!

•  Jonathan Korman: a€~Having long had an unwholesome interest in understanding fascism, I had a 
hard time understanding its radical indifference to policy. I find
myself understanding the texture of it nowa€!. Fascism is not a policy ideology deeply concerned 
with economics like communism or neoliberalism. Fascism is a social
& governance ideology like liberal democracy or Dominionism. It is an oversimplification to say 
that authoritarianism is gangster logic applied to politics, but it is a

useful oversimplification^!

• Duncan Black: Wait And See: a€~I think the first time I really tried to follow legal arguments 
was in thea€! 2000 electiona€!. It was quite clear the Supremos would
not rule as they eventually did because of clear precedents. Ah, well, nevertheless. I don't follow 
legal arguments closely anymore...

• Jemima Kelly: Crypto: a€~There is another slightly more sophisticated flavoura€! finding its way 
into my inboxa€! agreement that crypto is immoral, a scam, or some
version of a Ponzi schemea€! [that] quickly changes course, to explain that none of this applies to 
bitcoina€!

•  John Ganz: Reading , Watching 09.22: Memoirs of a Revolutionarya€”Victor Sergea€”In preparation 
for an essay on Last Times, Victor SergeaC™ s novel about the
fall of France, Ia€™ ve been reading his memoirs. [containing] character sketches of Lenin, 
Trotsky, Gramsci as well as scores of now-forgotten comrades, swallowed

up by wars, terrors, and purgesa€!

•  James Marson: The Ragtag Army That Won the Battle of Kyiv and Saved Ukraine: a€~Citizen 
volunteers teamed up with soldiers to turn the tide in the most
consequential European battle since World War IIa€!

•  Books Inc.: J. BRADFORD DELONG at the West's Oldest Independent Bookseller: a€~Tuesday, 
September 27,2022 - 7:00pm :: 1491 Shattuck Ave Berkeley,
CA94710a€!

•  Tom Watson: A Big Win for the 'Inside Game': 'I kept coming back to the same thougha€! a€DThis 
is the opposite of extremism"...

• John Gruber: Review of Apple Watch Ultra

• Mark Cliffe: The Sting of Climate Risk Is in the Tails: a€~Heatwaves, wildfires, storms, 
droughts, and floods make it increasingly clear that global warming is causing
more extreme weathera€!. Conventional climate models have chronically overlookedaCI these risks...

• Rafael Guthmann: Ancient scientists and the economic performance of antiquity:
RafaelaC™ s Commentary

Ancient scientists and the economic performance of antiquity

In this piece, I said that the Ancient Greek world was wealthier than the Roman Empire. This can 
give the reader impression that these two were distinctly separate
worlds that existed in different periods. However, the reality is that the a€oeAncient Worlda€D was 
basically a network of city-states around the Mediterranean sea that
flourished from the 1st mila€!

Read more

5 months ago A- Rafael R. Guthmann

'Ancient economic history can be summarized by: Fast growth from 800 BC to 300 BC, slow growth from 
300 BC to around 1 AD, negative growth from 1 AD to the
7-8th centuries AD...

•  WONDERFUL!! TLS Review of Slouching!: Paul Seabright: Trouble in paradise: Why is economic 
progress so little cause for celebration? <https://www.the-
tls.co.uk/articles/slouching-towards-utopia-i-bradford-delong-book-review-paul-seabright/>

• My First Twitter Mob: objecting to the Hayekian need for inflation right nowa€! 
<https://twitter.com/FortuneMagazine/status/1572250790827528192>

<https://fortune.com/2022/09/17/whv-inflation-good-economv-stagflation-recession-brad-delong-larry-s
ummers/>

