Subscribe now

Over at The Valve, they are talking about the book Theory's Empire—and thus about the damage done 
by "Critical Theory" and its spawn on the American humanities over the past
generation. But most of it is all too... theoretical J1/

What work can you do with statements like:

•  "Derrida is... the greatest and most exciting thinker of the 20th century.... Derrida is in many 
respects... very conservative... one must start from that conservatism in
order to measure the ways in which he is radical... can seem highly radical to thinkers who are 
attempting to graft Derrida into a tradition... in which many of
Derridaa€™ s key reference points have historically been marginal. How much does that affect the 
way you read a sentence where someone asks to have a button

undone? Probably not much. "

• "This polarizing, personalizing rhetoric indicates that social constructionism has an 
institutional basis, not a philosophical, moral, or political one. It tramples on
philosophical distinctions and practices an immoral mode of debate. Though it declares a political 
goal for criticism, it is not a political stance. Herein lies the secret

of constructionisma€™ s success. it is the school of thought most congenial to current professional 
workplace conditions of scholars in the humanities."

•  "I liked theory, even when I felt I didn't have the faintest idea what was going on, because if 
nothing else you could sense the energy behind it.."

• "The older philosophical critics, Jameson suggests, lacked Hegelian seriousness: in place of an 
aggressive commitment to the consequences of their premises, they were
'content' to 'simply' muse about literature 'in an occasional way'. His sinecured dilettanti 
mass-produced 'curiosities of an existential or phenomenological criticism, or

a Hegelian or a gestalt or indeed a Freudian criticism.' Burke, Empson et al. avoided indenture in 
the Curiosity Trade, Jameson argues, by processing literature in
accordance with a personal interpretive ethos, one resonant with a nonsystemized theory nonetheless 
compulsively applied in a rage for symmetry. Jamesona€™ s
notion                                                                          of a virtuoso 
critic (of the good camp) can be summed up thus: a thinker of original temperament but suitable 
Hegelian seriousness whose passion for patterns
generates interesting reading of literary works. His notion of a virtouso critic (of the bad): 
calicified mind, learned but unoriginal and philosophically fickle, whose
passions for other peoplea€™ s patterns generates predictable readings of literary works. "

•  "I apologize for Heideggera€™ s highly convoluted and neologistic prose. (I imagine that some 
readers are already thinking, 'come back, Derrida, all is forgiven'). In

Heideggera€™ s reading, we could say that the discovery of Neptune in 1846 could plausibly be 
described, from a strictly human vantage point, as the 'invention' of
Neptune.... [B]efore we began to look for it, the planet 'Neptune' simply did not exist in any 
human consciousness.... And yet once humans had invented. Neptune,

they understood [it]... as [a thing]... not susceptible to mere human invention. "

•  "[It] takes the already deeply problematic arguments and style of the dominant superstars like 
Spivak, Prakash and Bhabha and operationalizes it as yeoman-level
banality"

?

There is a certain bloodlessness here: the dry bones hop about and clatter, but there is no flesh 
on them: much too little is said about how High Critical Theory changeda€”for good
and for illa€”how "we" "read" "our" "texts"./2/

So let me get down and dirty: in the boiler room, at the contact point, before the mast. Let me 
recount the two monthsa€’’November and December 1981a€”that I spent enthralled
by the High Critical Theory of Michel Foucault.

By day I would rise late, eat a strange late breakfast of scrambled eggs mixed with cottage cheese 
(a kind of breakfast which I ate only from November 1981 through January 1982,
never before, and never since), and then walk across the Charles River footbridge to the Kress 
Collection of the History of Economic Thought in Baker Library. I would read. I
would hasten out into the lobby where I was allowed pens and take notes. I would go back in and 
read some more. I would hasten out into the lobby. After dinner I would sit in my
room, either staring at the wall wondering what my thesis was going to be about or reading 
secondary works on the history of economic thought, hoping to spot a hole that I could
fill with something sorta original.

It was Associate Professor of Social Studies Michael Donnelly's fault. He knew I was trying to 
write an undergradute thesis about the British Classical Economists and how they
understood the economy of their time. He gave me a book by Keith Tribe, Land, Labour, and Economic 
Discourse. And Tribe had read and been hypnotized by Foucaulta€”
specifically The Order of Things and The Archaeology of Knowledge. I began to read Keith Tribe.

He said very strange things.

He said that the Wealth of Nations that economists read was not the Wealth of Nations that Adam 
Smith wrote. The Wealth of Nations that economists read was made up of two
books: Book I on markets and Book II on capital.

The Wealth of Nations that Adam Smith wrote was made up of five books: Book I on the "system of 
natural libertya€D; Book II on accumulation and the profits of stock; Book III
on the economic history of Europe, and why the empirical history of its economic development had 
diverged from its natural history; Book IV on the mercantile and physiocratic
systems of political economy; and Book V on the proper management of the affairs of the public 
household by the statesman.

The Wealth of Nations, Tribe said, could not be a book of economics because a book of economics had 
to be about the economy. And there was no such thing as the economy in
1776                                                                                for a book of 
economics to be about. What was there? There was the undifferentiated stuff of the mixed 
social-cultural-political-trading system that governed production and
distribution: material life. There was the study of the management of public finances. This was 
conceived in a manner analogous to the domestic-economic management of
household finances. Just asa€”to Robert Filmer and othersa€”the King was the father of the people, 
so the King's households’’which became the state-a€”had to be properly and
prudently managed.

In the words of James Steuart, who wrote his Principles of Political Oeconomy nine years before the 
Wealth of Nations, in 1767: "Oeconomy, in general, is the art of providing for
all the wants of a family, with prudence and frugality. What oeconomy is in a family, political 
oeconomy is in a state." It is managing affairs to make the people prosperous and the
tax collections ample by governing "in such a manner as naturally to create the reciprocal 
relations and dependencies between [inhabitants], so as to make their several interests lead
them to supply one another with their reciprocal wants."

There wasn't, Tribe argued, an economy that an economist could write a book of economics about 
until the 1820s or so.

Strip Tribe's (and Foucault's) arguments of their rhetoric of apparent contradiction and you can 
understand that within the mystical shell there is a rational kernel. It isa€”or, at least,
I read them asa€”an injunction to analyze a school of thought in more-or-less the following way:

1. Read not just one or two important books, but a whole bunch of books that talk to our past each 
other and use the same or similar vocabulary in order to identify the
school you will look at.

2. Strip your mind of what they must be talking about, and look with fresh eyes on what they are 
talking about.

3. Examine what rhetorical, conceptual, and intellectual moves are common within the examples you 
have of this "discursive formation."

4. Think hard about what rhetorical, conceptual, and intellectual moves you would think you would 
find in these books—but don't.

5. Think hard about what rhetorical, conceptual, and intellectual moves you do not expect to find 
prominently in these books—but that you nevertheless do find.

6. Present to the world, in as clear and straightforward a way as you can, what this particular 
form of discourse was—what it thought the world was like, what it saw as
important, what its particular blindnesses were, what its particular sharp points of insight were.

7. Do not, ever, grade a discursive formation of the past by how much it falls away from the ideas 
of the bien-pensant of today. The past is another country.

And I became convinced that Tribe and Foucault were right. It was, indeed, only with Ricardo that 
the operation of what we now say is the economya€”the production, exchange,

and distribution of goods and services all mediated through market exchangea€”was seen as something 
that was important enough, or separate enough, or coherent enough to be
somethin? that it made sense to write books about, and. indeed, somethin? that it made sense to be 
an exnert in. David Ricardo was a nolitical economist. Adam Smith was a moral


philosopher. To trya€”as somebody like Joseph Schumpeter wasa€”to grade Adam Smith as if he were 
engaged in the same intellectual project as Schumpeter was somewhat
absurd.

Tribe applied this methodology to Adam Smith, his predecessors, contemporaries, and successors. 
What they were doing, before Ricardo, was Political Oeconomy a€’’writing
manuals of tactics and policy as advice to statesmen, although manuals restricted to what Adam 
Smith would have called (did call) a subclass of police: how to keep public order
and create public prosperity. Hence for Adam Smith:

• Book V of Wealth of Nations is the payoff: it tells British statesmen what they ought to do in 
order to make the nation prosperous, their tax coffers full, and thus the
state well-funded.

• Book IV is a necessary prequel to Book V: it tells the statesmen in the audience why the advice 
that they are being given by others in other books of Political
Oeconomya€”by Mercantilists and Physiocratsa€”is counterproductive.

• Book III is another necessary prequel: it teaches statesmen about the economic history of Europe 
and how political oeconomy of various kinds has been practiced in the
past.

But Tribe's (and Foucault's) methodology collapses when we work back to Books II and I of the 
Wealth of Nations. For Adam Smith is not the prisoner of the discursive formation
of Political Oeconomy. He is not the simple bearer of currents of thought and ideas that he 
recombines as other authors do in more-or-less standard and repeated ways.

Adam Smith is a genius.

He is the prophet and the master of a new discipline.
He is the founder of economics.

Adam Smith is the founder of economics because he has a great and extraordinary insight: that the 
competitive market system is a remarkably powerful social calculating and
organizing mechanism, and that the sophisticated division of labor to which a competitive market 
system backed up by secure and honest enforcement of property rights give rise is
the  key to the wealth of nations.

Some others before had had this insight in part:

•  Richard Cantillon writing of how once you have specified demands the market does by itself all 
the heavy lifting that a central planner would need to do;

• Bernard de Mandeville that dextrous management by a statesman can use the power of private greed 
to produce the benefit of public utility.

But it is Smith who sees what the power of the "system of natural liberty" that is the market could 
bea€”and who follows the argument through to the conclusion that it forever
upsets and overturns the previous intellectual moves made in and conclusions reached by the 
discursive formation of Political Oeconomy.

And once I had worked my way through to this conclusion, I could start to write my own thesis. I 
had broken the thralldom. Foucault's ideas of "discourse" and "archaeology" were
not my masters, but my tools. And as I wrote it became very clear to me that between David Ricardo 
and even the later John Stuart Mill the discursive formation that was Classical
Economics did not produce anybody like Adam Smith. There was nobody who made the intellectual 
leapa€’’produced the epistemological breaka€”that Smith had done that
shattered Political Oeconomy and enabled the birth of Classical Economics.

Thus I could write my thesis about how the British Classical Economists never understood the 
Industrial Revolution that they were living through.
a€”J. Bradford DeLong, B.A. in Social Studies summa cum laude, June 1982.

Share

Leave a comment

/1/Let me interject that the best contribution I have found so far is from Tim Burke—I think I like 
it the most because it is the meatiest and the bloodiest. But, as always, YMMV:

Tim Burke: Book Notes: Theory's Empire: In 1989,1 was well into graduate school... had a lot of 
exposure to "critical theory" as an undergraduate... a class
with Judith Butler on Foucault while she was at Wesleyan. I liked theory, even when I felt I didn't 
have the faintest idea what was going on, because if
nothing else you could sense the energy behind it.... Theory made you feel almost like you were in 
the dream of the Enlightenment... disciplines and
specializations set aside....

I warm to the talk that [Theory] was an empire, but I'm equally aware that my sense of it as such 
is a direct personal consequence of my individual
experience of academic careerism.... I get both the insider and outsider version[s]. I tend to 
bristle on one hand at know-nothing denunciations of theory,

like E.O. Wilson's in Consilience, but also at circle-the-wagons defenses of it. The main point, 
and it is one made again and again throughout the

anthology, is that theory was above all a... way of feeling and being academic... native to a past 
time and place. You can't just separate out some of the

chief manifestations of the era of theory, like the star system, as unrelated epiphenomena, or 
insist that we just talk about the actual texts. (Though at the
same time, the volume could really use an ethnographic retelling of a conference or conversation 
from the late 1980s or early 1990s. Anthony Appiah
comes closest in his short essay, and maybe there's nothing that really fits the bill besides a 
David Lodge novel.)....

[W]hatever "theory" began as, it quickly metastasized into. a way of being and acting that was 
often a new and virulent practice of academic warfare

which left a lot of casualties and fortifications in its wake....

Saussure, Foucault, Derrida, Lacan, and even many of the various American academic superstars who 
dominated the era of theory like Fish, Jameson, or
Spivak had important, substantive arguments to make that can't just be waved away or ignored. 
Still, I agree with many of Theory's Empire's authors: the

geist and historical moment of theory is an equally important part of the subject....

This is not to underrate the particular forms of self-interest that theory serviced in very 
particular ways. [T]heory was the ultimate careerist maneuver,

because its normal operations conferred upon the theorist a position of epistemologically 
unimpeachable, self-confirming authority (in part by claiming to
abjure authority) while also freeing the theorist from having to know anything but theory in order 
to exert such authority. [S]uch gestures of intellectual

hypocrisy, some of them more subtle, some less so, are a particular target of mockery and anger 
from the authors in Theory's Empire. [O]ther points that

emerge along the way... strike me as important. One is the amnesia of theory. So when John Ellis 
observes of Stanley Fish's work that it ignored the past,

that in Fish's work, "philosophy of science begins with Thomas Kuhn, serious questions about the 
idea of truth and the positivist theory of language begin
with Derrida, jurisprudence begins with the radical Critical Legal Studies movement", I think he's 
exactly right, and not just about Fish. The same

affliction affected us all across a wide swath of disciplines: we reinvented wheels, fire, 
alphabets and chortled in satisfaction at our own cleverness. Theory
dropped into our midst like commodities drop into a cargo cult, and our reaction was roughly the 
same, right up to eagerly scanning the skies for the next
French thinker to drop down....

[T]he ordinary work of postcolonial scholarship takes the already deeply problematic arguments and 
style of the dominant superstars like Spivak, Prakash
and Bhabha and operationalizes it as yeoman-level banality. [A] missing generation of monographs 
[is] a result, an absence of substantive, minutely

authoritative, carefully researched and highly specialized knowledge....

It is a straightforwardly good thing that historians now write about a whole range of topics that 
were relatively unstudied in 1965; a straightforwardly good
thing that literary critics read and think about a much wider range of texts than they once did. I 
suppose if I had one hope from this volume, it's that

people who read it and take it seriously won't be the kind of lazy Sokollites that Michael Berube 
justifiably complains about, because nowhere in the
volume does anyone claim that doing literary analysis or humanistic scholarship is easy or 
straightforward. If this is a roadmap to the future, it does not go
from point A to point B, much to its credit...

/2/A second interjection: Sean McCann does attempt to put some sinews on what he is talking about: 
he lists six (he thinks four, but they are six) intellectual power-moves of High


Critical Theory <http://www.thevalve.org/go/valve/article/theorys empire wrestling the tog 
bank/#2277>:

1. Language is a complex and imperfect instrument of profound importance to our sense of what it 
means to be a self-conscious human being.
Because communication makes use of conventional codes, ita€™ s always possible for a listener to 
misinterpret the intentions of a speaker or
for   a sentence to be given more or different meanings than a speaker intends (a matter which 
explicitly or not may become a reflexive resource
and thematic concern of literary texts).

2. The various possibilities for imperfect communication are comparable to, or perhaps consistent 
with or related to, the other senses in which
individuals are less than fully autonomous, rational, self-directed beings.

3. Many commonplace beliefs, practices, and institutions owe far more to persistent habit, 
superstition, and ideology (in a word, culture) than to
reason or evidence. These include once prevalent beliefs about the properties and boundaries of 
literature.

4. They also include more fundamental mattersa€”-e.g., the social reproduction of race, gender, 
sexuality, and, to a degree, of classa€”-whose
role in shaping our individual and social lives may be of greater importance than explicit legal or 
governmental structures. Literature plays a
role in establishing and legitimizing, as well as in revealing and challenging those tacit beliefs, 
practices, and institutions and in this way is
connected to more extensive social problems.

5. The existence of those social conventions, and our understanding of them, is shaped by 
systematic social inequities. We have good reason,
therefore, to be highly attuned to the way interest as well as culture affects belief.

6. Taking full cognizance of these matters could have emancipatory consequences.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

ORIGINAL: <https://delong.typepad.eom/sdi/2005/07/two months befo.html>

