
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Six Paragraphs:

Terry Nguyen: What Is Clubhouse, the Invite-Only App that Celebrities & Entrepreneurs Are Talking 
About?: a€~Speaking events on the app are set in rooms... a sort of virtual stage. The host and 
moderators... control the
flow of conversation, who gets to speak, and when. As a listener, you can use the a€oeraise your 
handa€D function, but the moderator is in charge of handing over the digital microphone. Whereas 
these chatrooms are

temporary one-offs, users can also join public and private clubs. Vulturea€™ s Craig Jenkins 
likened the app to a€oea never-ending trade conventional where the best time is had when you sneak 
off elsewhere with

friends.a€D... Clubhouse is what you make of it and, ultimately, who you know.... There is a veneer 
of professionalism from the get-go, even for general users.  The burden of discovery typically 
falls on the user. Unlike a

platform like TikTok, which heavily relies on algorithmic prodding. The app also encourages the use 
of full names, rather than usernames, thereby relying on existing threads of recognition to draw in 
listenersa€! LINK:

<https://www.vox.com/the-goods/22276715/clubhouse-invite-onlv-audio-app-explained>

Neil Fligstein & Steven Vogel: Network for a New Political Economy. a€~The Network for a New 
Political Economy (N2PE) aims to rethink political economy and develop an alternative intellectual 
paradigm to
neoliberalism. N2PE was launched by an interdisciplinary group of faculty and students at the 
University of California, Berkeley with support from the Hewlett Foundation. The roots of the new 
paradigm reside in ongoing
research   in social science departments such as Economics, Political Science, Sociology, and 
History, as well as professional schools such as Business, Law, and Public Policy. The Network 
fosters an intellectual conversation
among faculty and students across these units and encourages them to frame their insights for 
public engagement and policy relevance. It facilitates collective deliberation on how political 
economy should be studied and
taught  as well as how new perspectives on political economy can be applied to broad public debates 
and pressing policy problems. Please see the statement by our co-chairs in Boston Review on 
a€oePolitical Economy after
Neoliberalisma€Da€! LINK: https://newpoliticaleconomv.berkeley.edu/

Edward Conard: Economics of Inequality in High-Wage Economies: a€~The advent of information 
technology opened a window of investment opportunities that has exceeded the supply of properly 
trained talent while
trade with low-wage economies, low-skilled immigration, trade deficits, and aging demographics have 
relieved constraints to low-skilled labor and risk-averse savings. As the economy devotes more 
resources to raising the
productivity of talent, low-skilled productivity and wage growth have slowed. With a constrained 
supply of risk-reducing talent allocated to more productive endeavors, an unconstrained supply of 
risk-averse savings has
lowered  interest rates. With improbable innovation needed to capitalize on the value of 
information, high returns to success have fortunately motivated increased risk-taking, despite the 
declining productivity of innovators.
Proponents of income redistribution have concluded that high returns to success and slowing 
productivity growth, despite low interest rates, are evidence of rising cronyism, notwithstanding 
extensive evidence to the contrary.
This chapter provides an alternative explanation^ I LINK: 
https://oxford.universitvpressscholarship.eom/view/10.1093/oso/9780197518199.001.0001/oso-9780197518
199-chapter-ll

Dan Hon: a€™People whoa€™ve grown up with games their entire lifea€A are entirely happy navigating 
information-rich 3D environmentsa€!. The raw video, images and text posts of the Capitol 
seditionists include
location data. Pretty fine-grained location data. Home computers have enough processing power, 
never mind on-demand cloud computing power to, I dona€™ t know run offline photogrammetry, 
stabilization and 3D scene
reconstruction of all of those image and videos, placing them in a collective space navigable not 
just in three dimensions but time, too. Part of me wanting this is not just because there was a lot 
going on, but therea€™ s a lot
of    data, too! And I dona€™ t think at this point you even need to call this sort of thing data 
journalism at least not on the outside because ita€™ s just making sense of what happened, and yes 
I get it, that actually includes
doing a lot of data engineering and analysis and so ona€! LINK: 
https://danhon.substack.eom/p/s09e01-no-such-thing-as-a-blank-slate

Will Wilkinson: On the Defensive Prickliness ofAnti-Woke Patriotism: a€~the truly baffling 
Calvinball of conservative national assessment. America is the greatest country in the history of 
the world! It is also a€oenot
great,a€D a€oecrippled,a€n and the victim of a€cecarnagea€Ua€!. A meaty majority of the American 
population dwells in large metro areasa€! run by Democratsa€! unmitigated disasters. You might 
thinka€! mixed
judgment                                                                                            
            of Americaa€™ s merits would be logically inescapable once youa€™ ve committed yourself 
to the idea that half the country lives in one or another crumbling, corrupt, crowded, 
crime-infested hellholea€!. But this
isna€™ t logic; this is a coping mechanism. Thata€™ s why the problems that beset Americaa€™ s 
cities, whether real or imagined, dona€™ ta€! counta€! because they counta€! against Democrats and 
Democrats

arena€™t really American. Or maybe ita€™ s that multicultural Democratic-majority cities dona€™t 
count as part of a€oereala€D America, so the horrendous problems they are imagined to have cana€™t 
drag down
Americaa€™ s greatness score. Either waya€!. Anti-wokeness is so defensively patriotic because 
a€cewokenessa€Da€! is the source of the internal treason that leads people to steal the historical 
spotlight from Betsy Ross
and   turn it on the sickening experience of enslaved people and hunted natives. Nobody who truly 
loves America would do thata€!. So that must be what the woke want in their relentless push to make 
us look. They hate
America, hate our pride in it, and want us to hate it, tooa€! LINK: 
https://modelcitizen.substack.eom/p/on-the-defensive-prickliness-of-anti

I am sorry: This is just bonkers. The question Wall Street was consideringa€”Ryan Cohen vs. Gabriel 
Plotkina€”was this: GameStop now is a sustainable enterprise: it pays its bills. Suppose GameStop 
wants to raise an extra

$300 million on the equity markets to spend on reorienting itself as it tries to find a path 
forward. Should those willing to invest that $300 million get, in return, a half-ownership of the 
firm? Or should they get a 20%
ownership of the firm? Gabriel Plotkin believes and bets on the first, and Ryan Cohen believes and 
bets on the second. The investor community, ultimately, decides. Its judgments tell everyone hwo 
high a priority for society
the expansion of the entity called GameStop should be. Then along comes WallStreetBets, saying: IT 
SHOULDN'T BE 50%! IT SHOULD BE 2%!! AND YOU GAMESTOP SHAREHOLDERS^’’YOU OWN A GOLD
MINE!!! OOODLES AND OOODLES OF FREE CASH FLOW WILL PROBABLY COME OUT OF GAMESTOPa€”$20 BILLION 
WORTH!!!! And yet David Atkins, in some way, and for some reason, approves:

David Atkins: Hedge Funds Shouldna€™ t Get To Decide Who Has Fundamental Value: a€~[Financial 
firms,] most of them, would have been bankrupt multiple times over without assistance from
the Federal Reserve.... They have become... guaranteed against failure. Within a modern capitalist 
system that is probably good macroeconomic policy. But crucially, that leeway has not been given

to brick-and-mortar firms. Your local chain storea€“to say nothing of your local mom-and-pop corner 
storea€“has not been provided the same assurances against failure or the same easy moneya€!.
Keynesian liquidity... gives predatory hedge funds enormous leeway to stake out short positions on 
struggling firms, devaluing them and then selling off the remains for pieces. obliterating

companies that might have survived for a long time otherwise, such as Toys R Us. LINK: 
<https://washingtonmonthlv.com/2021/01/3Q/hedge-funds-shouldnt-get-to-decide-who-has-fundamental-

value/>

Hoisted from the Archives

2013: More Jobs and Higher Middle Class Incomes as Economic Policy Job #1: Housing Policy Edition: 
The Obama Administration and its Treasury's failure to move on the FHFA and on housing finance over 
2009-2012 is
up there as one of the leading contenders for the largest Obama Administration unforced errors....

Someday I want Tim Geithner to explain to me why it was that in 2009 he was so certain that there 
were going to be "green shoots" and "recovery summers" that he did not select, nominate, and get 
confirmed an FHFA chair
willing to use the GSEs as tools of macroeconomic stabilization by triggering a housing-sector 
recovery. I do know that as early as the summer of 2008 Democratic economists and 
policymakersa€”and Republican onesa€”
were having conversations about what the housing bust would do to the housing-sector credit channel 
and whether such use of the GSEs would be called fora€!

LINK: 
<https://delong.typepad.com/sdj/2013/07/more-jobs-and-higher-middle-class-incomes-as-economic-policy
-job-l-housing-policy-edition.html>
Leave a comment


willing to use the GSEs as tools of macroeconomic stabilization by triggering a housing-sector 
recovery. I do know that as early as the summer of 2008 Democratic economists and 
policymakersa€”and Republican onesa€”
were having conversations about what the housing bust would do to the housing-sector credit channel 
and whether such use of the GSEs would be called fora€!

LINK: chttps://delong.typepad.com/sdi/2013/07/more- 
jobs-and-higher-middle-class-incomes-as-economic-policy-job-1 -housing-policy-edition,html>
Leave a comment

