Subscribe now

CONDITION: And Now the Bond Market Thinks the Fed Has Got This Againa€!

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

Monday, May 2, 2022: 2.41


2019                2020

2021

2022

The 5-year 5-year-forward inflation breakeven back below 2.5% per yeara€!

FIRST: The New York Times, Mendaciously Talking Its Book Againa€!

An article from Tiffany Hsu in the New York Timesa€”one that I strongly suspect fits the old adage: 
what is true in it is not news; and what is news in it is not true. But Noah Smith reads it:

Noah Smith: Is Substack Good for the World? Is Substack Worth it for Writers?


Is Substack good for the world? Is Substack worth it for writers?

Tiffany Hsu of the New York Times recently wrote an article about Substack. People love to argue 
about everything the New York Times says, so naturally it generated a fair share of controversy. 
The cynical take, of course, would be that the NYT is choosing to highlight criticisms of a 
competitor because it doesna€™ t want the competition (and especially doesna€™ t want its best 
writers leaving to strike out on their own). Ita€™ s certainly plausible, I suppose
a€” the online media space has certainly become a more cutthroat space as new entrants have flooded 
the market, and the proliferation of independent newsletters just adds to the pressure. It was 
certainly a bit shady that the NYT article talked of an a€ceexodusa€D from Substack, while quietly 
noting lower down in the article that the platform isa€!

Read more

10 months ago A- 25 likes A- 34 comments A- Noah Smith

And Noaha€™ s first reaction is: a€~It was certainly a bit shady that the NYT article talked of an 
a€ceexodusa€D from Substack, while quietly noting lower down in the article that the platform is 
actually growing by leaps and boundsa€!a€™
Noah has other reactions:

•  a€oeContent moderationa€! always a tricky businessa€! fewa€! free-speech absolutists. What if 
Vladimir Putin used Substack as his main platform for denying the atrocities that his armies are 
committing in Ukraine? At some point, nearly every platforma€™ s administrators are going to 
encounter some moral red linea€!. If I were running Substack, I would probably be more restrictive 
about anti-vaccine content, given the fact that the
vaccinesa€™ safety and efficacy is so proven and that so many people have died from refusing to get 
vaccinateda€!.

•  a€oeSubstack, unlike many platforms, is not a public square. Platforms like Twitter are public 
squares, because they have strong network effectsa€!. The fact that there can be only one Twitter 
gives the platform a degree of social responsibility that it would not otherwise havea€!. Substack 
isna€™ t like thata€!.

•  a€oeMost of the people reading this post are folks who love to have world events filtered 
through the analytical lens of Noah Smith (and I am grateful!). But if a reader is looking for 
smaller samples of 50 different voices, theya€™ 11 probably want to subscribe to a newspaper 
instead of 4 Substacks. And if you think youa€™ re the kind of writer who appeals more to that kind 
of reader, then dona€™ t quit your day joba€!. The more distinctive your
voice and your perspective is, the more you should take a look at Substacka€!.

• a€oeWriting for a living is not a good careera€”if you want a good salary, follow the clichA© and 
learn to code. Or go work for private equitya€!a€D
What do I think about this?

First, I think Noah is wrong at at least one point: SubStack is a (potentially) important part of 
our Public Sphere(s). It is (potentially) important because it is (possibly) less afflicted by the 
dopamine-loop and clickbait biases that afflict short-form and audiovisual and especially 
advertising-supported media. As such, it is very much worth supporting and betting ona€”unless you 
can see a more favorable wager to place in our collective task of trying to keep our
collective decision-making processes from becoming even worse than they are.

Will substack avoid the market-economy money-making corporate pressures that, given human 
psychology and given that SubStack is a corporation aimed at some horizon at making money, dissolve 
reason into madness? Probably not. Google serves as a cautionary tale. Those of us who want a 
better Public Sphere need to always be prepared to migrate to the next green pasture win this piece 
of the digital commons becomes a poisonous wasteland.

But if we can get influencers following links from Twitter to SubStack and then actually reading 
arguments, we will have a much better system. So I would urge everyone who wants to make a positive 
contribution to write things on SubStack, and then drop a link on Twittera€’’along with other links 
on Twitter to other peoplea€™ s things on SubStack that you see as useful and informative. You 
wona€™t get rich, but you will be contributing more than if you
simply retweet your doomscrolling.

I think I am going to be on SubStack for a while. The first reason is that I do not see a better 
bet to place a with respect to our collective task of improving our Public Sphere. The second is 
that my weblog has long served as my external brain back, and has served me very well. As a age, 
the desirability of my having a very good external brain pack becomes greater. And I do not see a 
better workflow for creating one than the path currently offered by SubStack.


Also see:

Tomas Pueyo: The Future of Substack: a€~The Substack mobile appa€!. Search and discover new 
authorsa€!. Recommendations, a€oea new way for writers on Substack to recommend each other and 
discover more great worka€Ua€!. Authors have a lot of power: they can disintermediate Medium 
because readers care who their favorite authors are, and are willing to follow thema€!. Substack 
created a SaaS tool for long-form articles
giving all the power to the authorsa€!. Substack needs some network effects to keep authors tied to 
the platform, even if they can leave at any moment. The best way to achieve that is through 
cross-promotion tools that allow authors to constantly gain new readers that they wouldna€™ t gain 
otherwisea€!. So Substack will keep building tools to cross-promote readers from one author to 
anothera€!. The best way to optimize so many
authors and readers? Bundlesa€!

LINK:



C-SPAN: Winston Churchill a€oelron Curtaina€C2Speech 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/7191439-101/winston-churchill-iron-curtain-speech>

One Image:



Very Briefly Noted:

•  Kurt Vonnegut: On a€ceHaving      <https://mo-issa.com/kurt-vonnegut-on-having-enough/>

• Ilya Ilf & Yevgeny Petrov: The Twelve Chairs <http://lib.ru/ILFPETROV/ilf petrov 
_12_chairs_engl.txt>

•  Tom Mitchell, Sun Yu, & Eleanor Olcott: Zero-Covid Pride of Chinaa€™ s a€~Big Leadera€™ 
Threatens Economic Fall: a€~Doctor Bian Quea€! warned a local ruler he had contracted a disease 
requiring immediate treatment. But the ruler insisted his health was fine even as the disease 
seeped into his bone marrow, sealing his fatea€!. Xi Jinpinga€! may be similarly ignorant abouta€! 
his a€cezero-Covida€D policya€!

<https://www.ft.com/content/33b7fcb2-bc88-4a76-9b81-d561deaabc5c>

• D .C .B. Lieven: Russia against Napoleon 
<https://archive.org/details/russiaagainstnap001iev_0/mode/2up>

• Kevin Kelly: The Technium: 103 Bits of Advice I Wish I Had Known 
<https://kk.org/thetechnium/103-bits-of-advice-i-wish-i-had-known/>

•  Jeffrey Edmonds: Start with the Political: Explaining RussiaaC™ s Bungled Invasion of Ukraine: 
a€~A portion of the failure is a result of incorrect political assumptionsa€! [but also] the clear 
lack of effective command and control, an overly timid air force, and poor tactical performance on 
basic unit-level skillsa€! 
<https://warontherocks.com/2Q22/Q4/start-with-the-political-explaining-russias-bungled-invasion-of-u
kraine/?

   S=vyym9al708ox0czut6oj>

•  Bloomberg: Bloomberg Green: a€~Nobody knows how much methane is leakinga€!. India this year 
experienced its hottest March in 12 decades of records, and one of its driesta€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/green>

• Dean Baker: The Surge in Imports and the Drop in GDP: Offloading the Ships Lined Up Offshore 
<https://cepr.net/the-surge-in-imports-and-the-drop-in-gdp-offloading-the-ships-lined-up-offshore/>

• Joseph Politano: Americaa€™ s Homebuilding Boom (That Isna€™ t) 
<https://apricitas.substack.eom/p/americas-homebuilding-boom-that-isnt>

• Matt Levine: Twittera€™ s Board Gave Up 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-05-02/twitter-s-board-gave-up>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Elvis Level: a€™ After careful analysis of the state of the world J.D. Vance concluded that the 
way forward was in fact sleazy grifting. So why give the poor guy a hard time?

The GOP delenda est @elvislevel

@SykesCharlie @RadioFreeTom After careful analysis of the state of the world Vance concluded that 
the way forward was in fact sleazy grifting. So why give the poor guy a hard time?
7:37 PM r™ Apr 29,2022

9Likesl Re tweet

•  Galina Esther Shubina: a€™So leta€™s make sure this doesna€™ t get lost in the noise. The new 
omicron variants BA.4 and BA.5 are here. They spread better than BA.2 (so can be expected to take 
over). They evade prior immunity (so can be expected to take over). Am I missing anything?a€!

Galina Esther Shubina, my coffee is my own @galinash

So let's make sure this doesn't get lost in the noise. The new omicron variants BAA and BA.5 are 
here. They spread better than BA.2 (so can be expected to take over). They evade prior immunity (so 
can be expected to take over). Am I missing anything?
11:40 AM r™ May 3,2022

• Connor Oa€™Brien: Finding Opportunity in Urban Flight: a€~People migrate to cities fora€! 
reasonsa€! a€oeamenitiesa€na€! [and] the strength and depth of labor marketsa€!
Regions

Finding opportunity in urban flight

This is perhaps the most interesting moment in decades to be studying or otherwise thinking about 
the future of American cities. The social and economic shocks of the last two years have either 
fundamentally upended the economic trajectory of dense urban centers across the developed world or 
been a mere blip on an inevia€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 3 likes A- 1 comment A- Connor Oa€™ Brien

•  Republicans United of Arizona: a€™ a€ceThe Bright Ages: A New History of Medieval Europe.a€UA 
book written by David Perry and Mathew Gabrielle a couple of homosexuals who defame Whites, men, 
Christians, priests, and extol genocidal enslaving Moslems, Magyars, and Vikings who they believe 
were snazzy dressersa€! <

Republicans United of Arizona @RUArizona

"The Bright Ages: A New History of Medieval Europe." A book written by David Perry and Mathew 
Gabrielle a couple of homosexuals who defame Whites, men, Christians, priests, and extol genocidal 
enslaving Moslems, Magyars, n Vikings who they believe were snazzy dressers. The end.
5:15 AM r™ Apr 9,2022


Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions
Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

I look back, and I think that twenty-nine years ago Al Gore got within one senate vote of a carbon 
tax that would have crowdsourced dealing with global warming in a very effective way. My generation 
has had much better Democratic political leaders than we deservea€”and infinitely worse Republican 
ones, and Republican fellow travelers:

Bloomberg: Bloomberg Green: a€~Nobody knows how much methane is leakinga€!. Miami declares a€~heat 
seasona€™ as temperatures risea€!. India this year experienced its hottest March in 12 decades of 
records, and one of its driest. Next came the third-hottest April, after 2010 and 2016. Then it got 
even hotter. New Delhi saw an average maximum April temperature of 40.2A0 Celsius (104.4A° 
Fahrenheit), according to the
Times of India. The heat is jeopardizing the countrya€™ s wheat supply, just as Russiaa€™ s war in 
Ukraine disrupted trade from Eastern Europe. Temperatures in neighboring Pakistana€™ s Jacobabad 
rose to 47A°C (116.6A°F)a€!. Global temperatures have climbed 1.2A° Celsius since the mida€“19th 
century. So when someone asks the question, a€oeDid climate change make this or that heat wave 
hotter? a€D the answer is almost
invariably yesa€!

LINK: chttps://www.bloomberg .com/green>

Back in 1993, Alan Blinder taught me: look at the growth rate of final demand, no oh total product. 
It is very important to look through the inventory cycle to understand the principal drivers of the 
business cycle:

Dean Baker: The Surge in Imports and the Drop in GDP: Offloading the Ships Lined Up Offshore: a€~It 
probably makes the most sense to focus on the measure of final demand to domestic purchasers, which 
rose at a very healthy 2.6 percent annual ratea€! [with] the main components of final demand, 
consumption, investment, and government expendituresa€! growing at a healthy pacea€!. Inventories 
have been largely rebuilt,
meaning that supply chain problems are being alleviateda€!. This rise in inventories is exactly 
what we want to see if inflation is to be sloweda€!

LINK: 
<https://cepr.net/the-surge-in-imports-and-the-drop-in-gdp-offloading-the-ships-lined-up-offshore/>

I am not so sure that this is correct. Yes, cities will increasingly grow because they are nice 
places to live rather than productive places to work. But a great many of those who vote, of the 
current residents, will define "nice place to bea€D as "place that does not change". It is true 
that NIMBYist policies are, right now, additionally incentivized by the fact that "place that does 
not change" also makes homeowners fabulously richa€”if they are willing to move
outa€”in productive-work cities. That will melt away, and diminish NIMBYist energy. But a lot will 
remain:

Connor Oa€™Brien: Finding Opportunity in Urban Flight: a€~People migrate to cities fora€! 
reasonsa€! [that] boil down to two bucketsa€! a€oeamenitiesa€na€! [and] the strength and depth of 
labor markets. People move to cities to work, but not necessarily for a particular joba€!. At its 
best, this labor market agglomeration looks something like AnnaLee Saxeniana€™ s fascinating 1996 
portrayal of Silicon Valleya€™ s business
environment, Regional Advantage. Workers are constantly bouncing between employers, starting their 
own highly specialized firms, and interacting with university and industry researchers on the 
cutting edge at industry forums, more structured R&D environments, or local bars. This force is why 
a€cesuperstara€D firms have tended to concentrate in superstar cities, where they become more 
productive despite higher labor and real
estate  costsa€!. In a world of widespread remote work, cities are forced to lure people, not 
firms. Livability and affordability will matter morea€!. The competition between cities will 
increasingly take place on turf friendly to urbanists and YIMBYs. Cities will have an incentive to 
align themselves with pro-growth advocates for permitting more market-rate affordable housing so 
that workers arena€™t forking over 30 or 40 percent of
their income each month in rent. If cities want to attract a new class of remote workers, theya€™ll 
also need to provide larger living spacesa€!. While remote work is on one level a tool that enables 
people to leave pricey cities for lower-cost places, it may also force cities to finally confront 
long-simmering quality of life problemsa€!

LINK:

Regions

Finding opportunity in urban flight

This is perhaps the most interesting moment in decades to be studying or otherwise thinking about 
the future of American cities. The social and economic shocks of the last two years have either 
fundamentally upended the economic trajectory of dense urban centers across the developed world or 
been a mere blip on an inevia€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 3 likes A- 1 comment A- Connor Oa€™ Brien

No. Even our current housing boom will not catch up to the likely future state of housing demand, 
and so remove the anemic recovery-created shortfall in the housing stock. And the Federal 
Reservea€™ s resort to higher interest rates to cool off the economy is not going to help. Any 
further questions?:

Joseph Politano: Americaa€™ s Homebuilding Boom (That Isna€™ t): a€~America is Building More Than 
it has in a Decade. Ita€™ s Nowhere Near Enougha€!. Today, new housing starts are higher than at 
any point since early 2006a€”but ita€™ s nowhere near enough to keep up with population growth, let 
alone make up for the decade of lost construction. The pandemic has driven increased demand for 
housing as living patterns
shift and incomes improve, but construction is falling behind. Supply chain issues are increasing 
building costs, keeping housing completions low, and preventing many projects from even breaking 
ground. Underconstruction has pushed vacancy rates to the lowest levels in nearly 40 years, 
indicating just how severe the housing shortage has gotten. There may be a construction boom, but 
ita€™ s a false booma€”one dwarfed by the size
of the demand it is trying to satiate. Across America (but especially in major cities), it still 
remains incredibly difficult or outright illegal to build new housing of any type. More and more 
Americans are moving into lower-cost cities in the South and Southeast, but even these places are 
failing to keep up. The US will still need millions more homes before demand is even close to 
satiateda€”and todaya€™ s construction boom needs to be
placed in the proper context of an acute housing shortagea€!

LINK: <https://apricitas.substack.eom/p/americas-homebuilding-boom-that-isnt>

One further sign that Jack Dorsey was a really bad CEO COHEN he created what appears to have been a 
very bad Board of Directors for Twitter:

Matt Levine: Twittera€™ s Board Gave Up: a€~Ten years ago if you had said that the job of a board 
of directors was to maximize the stock price, a lot of people would say a€oewell sure yes of 
course,a€D but now we have stakeholder capitalisma€i. The Business Roundtable CEOs want to weigh 
the interests of all stakeholders and sometimes prefer other stakeholders over shareholders; at 
least some ESG investors are surely willing to
sacrifice financial performance for environmental performance. And then Twittera€™ s CEO shrugs and 
says, in effect, a€oemeh look this deal might be bad for our users and employees and product and 
mission, but we cana€™t think about that; the price is right and my only duty is to 
shareholders.a€D Ita€™ s strange! One thing to say about this story is that, as a description of 
the boarda€™ s legal duties, it is debatable.[2] The
foundational Delaware hostile-takeover cases from the 1980s explicitly say that a board can 
consider aCcethe impact on a€~constituenciesa€™ other than shareholdersa€!. What is strange here is 
that the richest person on earth came in out of the blue with a not-particularly-preemptive offer 
to buy a service that he is obsessed with and that seems crucial to his success. Hearing that, you 
might think things like a€oehuh this product must
be pretty valuable.a€D You might sit down and try to think of ways to extract value from it, other 
than selling it to Musk at the first price he proposed. Twittera€™ s board had no ideasa€!. I want 
to be clear here that I am not saying that it was a bad decision, for Twittera€™ s product or 
users, to sell to Elon Musk. I have no ideaa€!. The basic problem with Twittera€™ s management and 
board of directors seems to be that they do not
care about Twitter, as a company or as a product, so they are left to care about shareholders. This 
seems bad for everyone, including shareholders.a€!

LINK: <https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-05-02/twitter-s-board-gave-up>

Subject: A (Small) Course That I Might Teach in Spring 2023:

History of Economic Growth Seminar:

I think roughly half of all economics should be growth economics because it is the most absolutely 
vital topic in economics. One of the truest things Robert Lucas said was that once one starts to 
think about [the questions of economic growth and development, a€oeit is hard to think about 
anything elsea€!a€D <https://web.Stanford,edu/~klenow/Lucas_Mechanics,pdf>. (Never mind for the 
moment that the price-taking external increasing-returns framework he
insists is the only admissible one in which to build econoomic models keeps Lucas from saying 
anything very interesting about economic growth:



READINGS: Paul Romer: Mathiness: II: The Fork in Growth Theory

Subscribe to get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. &/or become a paid subscriber to support my 
hiring an RA for this, & to get the Directora€™ s Cut version of this a€~Stacka€! Paul Romer: 
Mathiness in the Theory of Economic Growth: a€™ II. The Fork in Growth Theorya€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong

•)

The next question is: what kind of economics should growth economics courses be? I find that as I 
age I have less tolerance for economic theory moored only to (a) introspection about human 
psychology and (b) von Hayekian ideas about the functioning and power of market economies and their 
a€oeequilibriuma€n points. (Yes, I know von Hayek did not like static equilibrium, but he would 
have been more tolerant of dynamic equilibrium concepts.) This
means, I think, that I am either becoming wiser or becoming stupider. I am not sure which.

Yes, economic theories can be truly admirable and powerful intellectual filing systems. Yes, there 
are people among usa€”the Solows, Krugmans, Dixits, and so fortha€”who can use economic theories as 
very powerful intuition pumps. But they are both geniuses and trained professionals. For the rest 
of us, I think history, and trying to see how the present might be rhyming with it, is a much 
better approach to understanding than is theory.
But which historical episodes? And what should we read about them? I present a draft syllabus for a 
seminar, a syllabus that needs much emendation and correction:

Economic Growth Seminar Syllabus
173KB a'™ PDF File

Download
Download


iBrad DeLong s urasping Reality

READINGS: Paul Romer: Mathiness: II: The Fork in Growth Theory

Subscribe to get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. &/or become a paid subscriber to support my 
hiring an RA for this, & to get the Directora€™ s Cut version of this a€~Stacka€! Paul Romer: 
Mathiness in the Theory of Economic Growth: a€™ II. The Fork in Growth Theorya€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong

■)

The next question is: what kind of economics should growth economics courses be? I find that as I 
age I have less tolerance for economic theory moored only to (a) introspection about human 
psychology and (b) von Hayekian ideas about the functioning and power of market economies and their 
a€oeequilibriuma€n points. (Yes, I know von Hayek did not like static equilibrium, but he would 
have been more tolerant of dynamic equilibrium concepts.) This
means, I think, that I am either becoming wiser or becoming stupider. I am not sure which.

Yes, economic theories can be truly admirable and powerful intellectual filing systems. Yes, there 
are people among usa€”the Solows, Krugmans, Dixits, and so fortha€”who can use economic theories as 
very powerful intuition pumps. But they are both geniuses and trained professionals. For the rest 
of us, I think history, and trying to see how the present might be rhyming with it, is a much 
better approach to understanding than is theory.
But which historical episodes? And what should we read about them? I present a draft syllabus for a 
seminar, a syllabus that needs much emendation and correction:

Economic Growth Seminar Syllabus
173KB r™ PDF File

Download
Download

