
Share

Must-Read: Twitter Toast!

This is not quite right: Twitter equity still has option value if Musk cannot immediately cut 
Twittera€™ s costs and boost its income enough to cover the interest:

William Cohan: The Elon Financial Mindfuck: a€~If the Twitter debt is worth only 50 cents on the 
dollar at the moment because of a combination ofa€! cash flow, thea€! interest-rate landscape for 
leveraged loans, anda€! 13x EBITDA, then the Twitter equity underneath that debta€”the $31 
billiona€”is technically worthless alreadya€!. Right now, the market is telling Elona€™ s Wall 
Street banks that Twitter is actually worth around

$7 billion, or 7x EBITDA, not the 44x EBITDA that he agreed to pay, since ita€™ s at that price 
that the banks can sell the Twitter bank debt and ita€™ s at that price that the buyers of the bank 
debt will buy ita€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Audio: And a€oeSlouchinga€C on The Gist

Mike Pesca & Brad DeLong: The Gist: Everything About The Economy Ever, Pithily Explained
chttps ://o vercast .fm/+BmH778A7o>

Leave a comment

One Image: The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level Arrives in the United Kingdom

UK 10 year Gilt

UK10YG

YIELD TODAY'S CHANGE           1 YEAR CHANGE

4.26 * 0.023 / 0.54% t +293.72%

Summary     Charts


4.00

3.00

2.00

1.00


January July             January July             January

2018                   2019                   2020

i

July        January July

2021

January July
2022


oive a gin suoscripuun

Other Things That Went Whizzing by:

Very Briefly Noted:

• Martin Sandbu: The post-pandemic recovery has been officially cancelled: a€~Taking on some lazy 
arguments for monetary tighteninga€!

•  Justin Wolfers: a€~The CPIa€! xcluding food and energy a€ I rose +0.6% in the month, so core 
inflation is 6.6%. Inflation is proving to be more resilienta€”and more troublinga€”than many had 
hoped or forecast. Both the headline and core inflation readings are about 0.2 percentage points 
higher than expecteda€!

•  Dan Pfeiffer: How Dems Can Court Republicans without Becoming Republican-lite: a€~The term 
a€oepermission structure ,a€Da€ I We needed to create a permission structure for voters to do what 
they wanted to do...

•  Paul Krugman: a€oePersonal background may matter here. My macro roots are in international, 
where we've always known that there are long lags in the effect of exchange rates on trade flows, 
leading to phenomena like the J-curvea€!. Does u need to go well above u*, Volcker style? Some 
people still saying that, still talking about "sacrifice ratios", but I don't get it. The Volcker 
slump was an effort to squeeze out high inflation expectations. But
expected inflation isn't high nowa€!. I see a strong case that the Fed has already done enougha€!. 
You want to shoot ahead of a moving target, not behind ita€!

•  The Economist: How thinking hard makes the brain tired: a€~Cognitive fatigue is associated with 
increased glutamate in the prefrontal cortex. Dr Wiehler speculates that this is the result of a 
mechanism in the brain that is computing a sort of cost-benefit analysis, with fatigue and 
increased glutamate adding to the cost of mental efforta€i. Meanwhile, the best solution is the 
natural one: sleepa€!

•  China: Back to Authoritarianism: a€~Xi has decimated his opposition, leaving him with two 
choices at the upcoming party congress: risk a gerontocracy by keeping on older officials, such as 
the seventy-year-old economics czar, Liu He, or turn to younger mena€!. In the twilight of Xia€™ s 
reign he is more likely to be isolated, surrounded by fewer and fewer people who dare to tell him 
the truth.
a€0 a€”September 20, 2022

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

