Subscribe now

20k

Daily Deaths

Deaths per Day
Data as of 0:00 CMT+0

-•- 7-day moving average

The last four months have made it very clear that the globe now faces two additional disasters, 
together making the current plague two orders of magnitude worse than it had to be. First, the 
plaguea€™ s uncontrolled spread has triggered the evolution of the Delta variant, 2-3 times as 
virulent and 1.5-2 times as deadly as the original. Second, while global-north governments have did 
commit the resources to
vaccinate themselves in 2021, they have not committed the resources to ramp-up high-quality vaccine 
production to a level that would vaccinate the globe in 2021. Moreover, they have not yet grappled 
with the consequences of likely erosion after nine months of both infection-acquired and vaccine 
immunity.


The last four months have made it very clear that the globe now faces two additional disasters, 
together making the current plague two orders of magnitude worse than it had to be. First, the 
plaguea€™ s uncontrolled spread has triggered the evolution of the Delta variant, 2-3 times as 
virulent and 1.5-2 times as deadly as the original. Second, while global-north governments have did 
commit the resources to
vaccinate themselves in 2021, they have not committed the resources to ramp-up high-quality vaccine 
production to a level that would vaccinate the globe in 2021. Moreover, they have not yet grappled 
with the consequences of likely erosion after nine months of both infection-acquired and vaccine 
immunity.

Thus it is too early to focus attention on the post-plague world economy.
Public health should be in command.

Keeping the economic engine running and avoiding a mass increase in poverty as the Delta variant 
sweeps its way througha€’’those should be our economic focus right now. Restoring economies to some 
a€oenormalcya€n of full employment after we have achieved some combination of vaccine- and 
acquired-herd immunity? That is a task best delayed. We cannot know now what state the world economy
will be in six months, which will determine what policies are appropriate. And it is certainly 
inappropriate right now to call for policies to a€oecool downa€D the world economy in order to 
avoid some shadowy future inflationary spiral, or some return of bond-market vigilantes. The coming 
of the Delta variant should be met by not cooling but warming.

Our ignorancea€“or at least my ignorance, and the general ignorance, for those with truly informed 
opinions are not broadcasting them loudly enough to get through the noisea€”is immense with respect 
to what the likely ranges are of the key numbers needed to understand the shape of the plague on a 
global scale. All I find I can do is look at petri dishes:

The United Kingdom serves as a first petri dish. Bad luck, incompetence, and 
carelessnessa€’’widespread, for Alexander Boris de Pfeffel Johnson did not do this all on his own, 
even given his modus operand! of b.s.ing and lying to somehow fail upwarda€”has gotten the U.K. to 
a situation in which more than 90% of residents now have detectable antibodies. Only **% have been 
vaccinated. This was a very
expensive way to get to herd immunity: 130,000 dead, 0.2% of the population. But at least in the 
last wave only 3000 have died.

The well-performing countries of East Asia are a second petri dish. Their plague-spread control 
mechanisms are cracking under the pressure of the Delta variant. Their measures were best-in-world. 
It thus seems likely that these measuresa€™ use is limited to buying time for universal vaccination 
programs.

Perhaps the United States is a third petri dish. The lesson here is not the British lesson that an 
inept government can, with the power of global-north pharma biotech behind it, can stumble into 
herd immunity at hideous human cost. The lesson here is not that virtually any 
infection-suppression rA©gime is outmatched by this evolving plague virus. The lesson from the 
U.S.a€™ s 600,000 deathsa€”with it
looks like another 100,000 to comea€”is different.

We all confront the message we all have heard from Fox News and others: a€oeSuperman-President 
Donald Trump quarterbacked the incredibly successful warp-speed project that performed medical 
biotech miracles and created a highly effective vaccine against a disease that is just the flu and 
we should never have worn masks that, moreover, is a Chinese bioweapon funded by Dr. Fauci who 
constantly gave
Trump bad advice about this gigantic hoax for which the medical establishment is suppressing 
information about the truly useful medications that fight this dangerous plague: ivermectin, 
hydroxychloroquine, and hydrogen peroxide.a€D

The terrifying thinga€”for now and for the futurea€”is that a quarter of the American population 
hears this thought-salad and finds in it somewhere, somehow, sufficient reason to shy away from the 
extremely effective and extremely safe vaccine and run a 1% risk of death. A country In which a 
malevolent and cynical media can trigger such psychological fractures for a quarter of the 
population to wreak
such damage Is likely to be vulnerable to and fall victim to even more vicious and destructive 
psychological hacking attacks in the future, even if they are motivated at bottom I nothing more 
than a desire to sell more ads.

The bottom line? It is the same as it has been last August, when the ongoing stage three trials 
first suggested that the messenger RNA vaccines were huge successes. The bottom line is: cut the 
bureaucracy and open the money spigots to mobilize as many resources as are needed to get 
high-quality vaccines into every arm in the world as fast as possible. Sort out the financing 
later. Sort out the final regulatory
approval later. It has been a year since we got the news the biochemist-wizards of Pfizer, 
BioNTech, Moderna, and company really had given us the tools to beat this thing.

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

