Subscribe now

Culture I Progress and its discontents

Bradford DeLong reconsiders the 20th centurya€™s economic history

a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D is a tale of stunning material progressa€”and of its limits


Slouching Towards Utopia. By J. Bradford DeLong. Basic Books; 624 pages; $35 and A£30

<https://www.economist.com/culture/2022/09/08/bradford-delong-reconsiders-the-20th-centurys-economic
-history>

Between the hot war in Europe and a brewing cold one between America and China, todaya€™ s world 
has a very 20th-century feel. Amid these echoes, historians and international-relations buffs have 
been reappraising the failure of liberal democracy to consolidate its victories over rival 
political systems. In his new book, Bradford DeLong of the University of California, Berkeley, 
places the successes and failures of the 20th century in their
economic context. In doing so, he provides insights into how things have gone wrong in more recent 
yearsa€”and what must go right if catastrophe is to be avoided in the current century.

a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D is an impressive achievement, written with wit and style and a 
formidable command of detail. Ambitiously, Mr DeLong seeks to redraw the temporal map. Many 
historiansa€’’among them the late British scholar Eric Hobsbawma€”have preferred to chop modern 
history into a long 19th century, stretching from the French revolution to the crisis of 1914, and 
a short 20th, ending with the fall of communism. Mr
DeLong, by contrast, argues that the period from 1870 to 2010 is best seen as a coherent whole: the 
first era, he argues, in which historical developments were overwhelmingly driven by economic ones.

At its outset, despite the Industrial Revolution, even the most prosperous parts of Europe and 
North America still had one foot firmly planted in a Malthusian worlda€”in which, for millennia, 
technological improvements never yielded enough new production to outrun population growth. Incomes 
had stuck close to subsistence levels. Yet from around 1870, growth found a new gear, and incomes 
in leading economies rose to unprecedented levels, then
kept climbing.

The step-change in growth stemmed from technological advances, specifically three meta-innovations 
that drove rapid and sustained progress: the modern corporation, the research laboratory and 
globalisation. Thanks to these, a widening part of humankind hurtled towards a€oeeconomic El 
Doradoa€D, a land of plenty that prior generations could scarcely have imagined.

Mr DeLonga€”an economist after alla€’’helpfully quantifies the dramatic change in economic 
fortunes. For roughly 10,000 years before 1500, humankinda€™ s productive potential (meaning the 
stock of useful knowledge, roughly corresponding to real output) doubled about once every three 
millennia. Over the following 370 years, that productive power doubled again. Thereafter, it rose 
at a pace of just over 2% per year, which equates to a roughly
20-fold rise in productive power over 140 years. It was economic magic, which allowed living 
standards to rocket even as the global population swelled to 7bn.

Had the denizens of the 19th century known how fantastically wealthy their descendants would 
become, many would have supposed those heirs lived amid peace and contentment. Yet building 
harmonious societies out of material abundance has proved maddeningly difficult.

Mr DeLong frames this history as a duel between the insights of Friedrich von Hayek, an Austrian 
economist who extolled the power of the free market, and Karl Polanyi, a Hungarian thinker who 
warned that the market was there to serve man, not man the market. In the years before the first 
world war, markets generated rapid growtha€”but also soaring inequality and jarring disruption. 
People pushed back, demanding greater political rights, which
they used to pursue regulation of the economy and social insurance. After the war, both the 
Polanyian and Hayekian impulses contributed to disasters: in the totalitarian socialism of the 
Soviet Union on the one hand, and, on the other, in the Depression, which persisted and deepened 
until politicians eventually abandoned laissez-faire orthodoxy.

In the aftermath of the second world war, though, the mix of a market economy and a generous 
safety-net made for a happy marriage of Hayek and Polanyia€”a€oeblessed by Keynesa€D (as Mr DeLong 
puts it), who provided the insight that governments should act to prevent recessions. The union 
bore fruit, in the form of a three-decade post-war run of torrid growth never matched before or 
since. And yet the last third of Mr DeLonga€™ s long 20th
century was coloured by disappointments.

When growth sagged and inflation rose in the 1970s, voters supported politicians promising 
market-friendly, or a€oeneoliberala€D, reforms, such as lower taxes and reduced regulation. (During 
a stint in Bill Clintona€™ s Treasury department, Mr DeLong was himself a steward of such 
policies.) Those reforms failed to keep growth high and led to worse inequalitya€”yet rich 
countries pressed on with them, the author writes, up to the global financial
crisis and the end of the long 20th century.

The values gap

Could things have gone better? In Mr DeLonga€™ s version of history, key events are often the 
product of chance rather than structural forces. He reckons, for instance, that had victory in the 
Falklands war and the collapse of communism not seemed to validate the records of Margaret Thatcher 
and Ronald Reagan, voters might have been quicker to see the limitations of their economic outlook. 
But that analysis underestimates how deeply neoliberal
ideas took root across both the left and the right, at least in the Anglosphere. Barack Obama was 
no Reagan nostalgist; his unwillingness to respond to the financial crisis in a more 
interventionist way seems to have been grounded in a genuine belief that doing so would have made 
things worse.

Indeed, if this book has a weakness, it is its occasional reluctance to give credit to peoplea€™ s 
beliefs, rather than narrow economic concerns, as a driving force of history. Mr DeLong cites Max 
Webera€™ s dictum that though a€oematerial interests may drive the trains down the tracksa€!ideas 
are the switchmen.a€D The start of the 21st century suggests that faiths and myths and values are 
even more consequential than that.
a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D shows how economic growth can transform the world. It also 
demonstrates that material prosperity alone cannot transport people to the promised land. The 
future may well be shaped by fights about what can. a-

This article appeared in the Culture section of the print edition under the headline "Cana€™ t buy 
me love"

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/culture/2022/09/08/bradford-delong-reconsiders-the-20th-centurys-economic
-history>
Subscribe now

