a€\Sherwood Forest & Nottinghamshire must become legible to Atte true king, Richard I 
a€oeLionhearta€U\Plantagenet, who must A3Aen provide good lordship & establish justice:

Hoisted from the Archives: Perhaps. And Sometimes 
<https://www.cato-unbound.org/2010/09/16/j-bradford-delong/perhaps-sometimes>: In 542 AD the late 
Roman (early Byzantine?) Emperor Justinian I wrote to his Praetorian Prefect concerning the army 
a€” trained and equipped and paid for by the Roman
State to control the barbarians and to a€oeincrease the state.a€D Justinian was, Peter Sarris 
reports in his Economy and Society in the Age of Justinian, upset that:

certain individuals had been daring to draw away soldiers andfoederati from their duties, occupying 
such troops entirely with their own private businessa€!. The emperora€! prohibit[ed] such 
individuals from drawing to themselves or diverting troopsa€! having them in their householda€!
on their property or estatesa€!. [A]ny individual who, after thirty days, continues to employ 
soldiers to meet his private needs and does not return them to their units will face coni-'nscation 
of property a€! a€oeand those soldiers and foederati who remain in paramonar attendance upon
thema€! will not only be deprived of their rank, but also undergo punishments up to and including 
capital punishment.

Justinian is worried because what is going on in the country he rules is not legible to him. 
Soldiers a€” soldiers whom he has trained, equipped, and paid for a€” have been hired away from 
their frontier duties by the great landlords of the Empire and employed on their estates and in the 
areas they dominate as
bully-boys. One such great landlord was Justiniana€™ s own sometime Praefectus Praetorio per 
Orientem Flavius Apion, to whom one of Flaviusa€™ s tenants and debtors, one Anoup, wrote:

No injustice or wickedness has ever attached to the glorious household of my kind lord, but it is 
ever full of mercy and overflowing to supply the needs of others. On account of this I, the 
wretched slave of my good lord, wish to bring it to your lordshipa€™ s knowledge by this present
entreaty for mercy that I serve my kind lord as my fathers and forefathers did before me and pay 
the taxes every year. And by the will of Goda€! my cattle died, and I borrowed the not 
inconsiderable amount of 15 solidia€!. Yet when I approached my kind lord and asked for pity in my
straits, those belonging to my lord refused to do my lorda€™ s bidding. For unless your pity 
extends to me, my lord, I cannot stay on my ktema and fulfill my services with regard to the 
properties of the estate. But I beseech and urge your lordship to command that mercy be shown to me
because of the disaster that has overtaken mea€!

The late Roman Empire as Justinian wished it to be would consist of (a) slaves, (b) free Roman 
citizens (some of whom owned a lot of land), (c) soldiers, (d) bureaucrats, and (e) an emperor. The 
slaves would work for their masters. Slaves along with their citizen masters and non-slaveholding 
citizens would farm
the empire (some of the citizens owning their land, some renting it). All would be prosperous and 
pay their taxes. And the emperor would use the taxes to pay the soldiers who dealt with the 
Persians, the Huns, the Goths, and the Vandals; to fund the building of Hagia Sophia and other 
works of architecture in
Constantinople; and to promote the true faith and extirpate heresy. If the countryside were legible 
to him, that is how things would bea€“slaves and citizens in their places, landlords and tenants in 
their mutually beneficial contractual relationships, all prosperous and all paying their taxes to 
support the empire.

But Justinian knows very well that the countryside is not legible to him. The contracts that 
Flavius Apion makes with his tenants are made under the shadow of the threat that if Flavius Apion 
does not like the way things are going he will send a bucellarius to beat you up. Anoup is not 
pointing out to Flavius Apion
that their landlord-tenant relationship is a good thing and that keeping him as a tenant rather 
than throwing him off the land for failure to pay the rent is in both their interests. Instead, 
Anoup is calling himself a slave (which he is not). Anoup is calling Flavius Apion a lord (which he 
is not supposed to be). Anoup is
appealing to a long family history of dependence of himself and his ancestors on the various Flavii 
Apionoi and Flavii Strategioi of past generations. Justinian thinks that things would be better 
served if the countryside were properly legible to him and he could force reality to correspond to 
the legal order of slaves
and citizens, tenants and landlords interacting through contract, and taxpayers. Flavius Apion 
would prefer that the order be one of proto-feudalism: that all the Anoups know and understand that 
they are at his mercy, and that the emperor is far, far away. And we dona€™ t know what Anoup 
thinks. We do know
that it does not sound as though he experiences the lack of legibility of the countryside to the 
emperor and his state as a full and complete liberation. And we do know that the Emperor Justinian 
was gravely concerned about the transformation of his soldiers into bucellarii, into the dependent 
bully-boys of the
landlordsa€“both because it meant that they were not on the borders where they belonged and because 
it disturbed what he saw as the proper balance of power in the countryside and what he saw as the 
emperora€™ s justice.

Justiniana€™ s big (and to him insoluble) problem was that the Flavius Apion whose bully-boys beat 
up his tenants when they displeased was the same Flavius Apion who headed Justiniana€™ s own 
bureaucracy.

Thus when James C. Scott speaks of how local knowledge and local arrangements having the ability to 
protect the people of civil society from an overmighty, blundering state, I say a€oeperhapsa€D and 
I say a€oesometimes.a€n

It is certainly the case that the fact that Sherwood Forest is illegible to the Sheriff of 
Nottingham allows Robin of Locksley and Maid Marian to survive. But that is just a stopgap. In the 
final reel of Ivanhoe the fair Rebecca must be rescued from the unworthy rogue Templar Sir Brian de 
Bois-Guilbert (and packed
offstage to marry some young banker or rabbi), the Sheriff of Nottingham and Sir Guy of Gisborne 
must receive their comeuppance, the proper property order of Nottinghamshire must be restored, and 
Wilfred must marry the fair Rowenaa€“and all this is accomplished by making Sherwood Forest and
Nottinghamshire legible to the true king, Richard I a€oeLionhearta€n Plantagenet, and then through 
his justice and good lordship.

A state that makes civil society legible to itself cannot protect us from its own fits of 
ideological terror, or even clumsy thumb-fingeredness. A state to which civil society is illegible 
cannot help curb roving bandits or local notables. And neither type of state has proved terribly 
effective at constraining its
own functionaries.

In some ways, the a€oenight watchmana€D statea€”the state that enables civil society to develop and 
function without distortions imposed by roving bandits, local notables, and its own functionaries, 
but that also is content to simply sit back and watch civil societya€”is the most powerful and 
unlikely state
of all...


