Subscribe now
Nice to see:

David Chance: a€~At 600-plus pagesa€! not for the faint-hearted, but therea€™ s little in the way 
of jargona€! the booked is laced with interesting anecdotes, although DeLong
does get a bit wordya€!a€™

a€oeA bit wordy.a€D Hah! At over 600 pages, it is not a book for a flight from Dublin to Frankfurt 
or a ferry ride to Liverpool. Think a€cetransoceanica€D instead.

Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

David Chance: Slouching Towards Utopia'. Clinton gurua€™ s sweeping story of an economic dream that 
died: a€~Economist Brad DeLong has described
himself as a a€~card-carrying neoliberala€™ and a firm believer in the power of globalisation and 
free markets to deliver prosperity.

His narrative <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> of capitalism and the unprecedented wealth it created during a 
a€~long centurya€™ that lasted from 1870 until 2010 tells a
tale in which near-universal poverty finally ended for those fortunate enough to be born white and 
male and to live in northern industrial countries.

DeLong is professor of economics at the University of California and was a top US Treasury official 
during Bill Clintona€™ s presidency, where he helped
to make policy on issues such as the North American Free Trade Agreement, which critics say killed 
US manufacturing.

This book, more than two decades in the making, tells the story of what DeLong says is an era in 
which economic transformation was the dominant force in
society for the first time.

The story is presented through the prism of two individuals. The first is Friedrich Hayek, the 
intellectual father of free markets and the force behind
Thatcherism; the second is Austro-Hungarian philosopher Karl Polanyi, who believed self-regulating 
markets were incompatible with human needs and
desires.

At 600-plus pages, it is not for the faint-hearted, but therea€™ s little in the way of jargon and 
the booked is laced with interesting anecdotes, although
DeLong does get a bit wordy.

With a century and a half to cover including two world wars, the rise and fall of fascism and 
communism (or, as DeLong irritatingly insists on calling it,
a€~really-existing socialisma€™), the Great Depression and the post-war economic miracle, the tale 
rips along at a decent pace.

The starting point is one in which the life of ordinary people has barely changed in centuries a€” 
it is defined by the precarity of too little food, poor health,
high population growth and high infant mortality.

Life, for most people, was just grim. All of that started to change in 1870, DeLong argues, when 
the industrial revolution was married to the organisational
skills of modern firms by free-market capitalism.

It is not just the invention of the flush toilet or electric power that had a transformative 
effective on the lives of ordinary people, he argues, but the ability of
companies to deliver those products.

a€oeWhat is most important is never so much the arrival of any particular technology as it is the 
burgeoning understanding that there is a broad and deep
range of new technologies to be discovered, developed and deployed,a€D he writes.

For this to work, you needed the market order of property rights, contracts and exchange to 
incentivise production of goods, said Hayek, whose life
spanned most of that a€~long centurya€™.

Yes, life was still hard, dirty and very unequal in the US but it was a life that people from 
Ireland, Hungary and Russia would travel thousands of miles to
live. Hayek believed that not only did justice and fairness not matter, they were antithetical to 
the workings of the market and to freedom.

The marriage of technology and business saw the average wage of unskilled workers rise by a half by 
1914 as commerce became globalised like never
before.

Then the music stopped with the a€~ismsa€™ that would derail progress a€” the nationalism of the 
World War I and then the emergence of communism
and fascism followed by a second global war.

This is where Polanyi comes in. In reaction to the displacement of social relationships by the 
market, he argued society would strike back against what it
sees as unfair outcomes.

a€oeAs a consequence, a market society will face a backlash a€” it can be a left-wing backlash, it 
can be a right-wing backlash, but there will be a
backlash a€” and it will be powerful,a€D DeLong writes.

A backlash also killed off the equitable wealth creation of the social democratic post-war era amid 
the great inflation of the 1970s which then ushered in
Thatcherism and Reaganism.

Despite what DeLong sees as the failure of the new neoliberal project, it remains the dominant 
economic and political force, animating Bill Clinton and
Tony Blair as well as Fine Gael here in Ireland.

DeLong had announced in a 1998 lecture with the same title as this book that he aimed to complete 
the work by the end of that century. Had he done so, it
would have been a very different narrative. Communism had been defeated only a decade earlier and 
China had not yet started cutting a swathe through the
American heartland.

As recently 2006, DeLong saw a€oerising working- and middle-class incomes in America during the 
next generationa€D. Economists, he stated, could
transform the business cycle a€oefrom a life-threatening economic yellow fever of the society into 
the occasional night sweats and feversa€D.

That dream died in the financial crisis, which the author says was mishandled by Barack Obama. Now 
we have real fascists winning the Italian election and
a€~nativistsa€™ running Hungary, Britain and America under Donald Trump. Europe is at war again, 
thanks to Vladimir Putin. While income growth for
those at the top is better than ever, white men lower down the scale now resent having to share 
their slice of the economic pie with ethnic minorities and
women. a€oeA new story, which needs a new grand narrative that we do not yet know, has begun,a€D 
DeLong concludes.

Non-fiction: Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> by J Bradford DeLong

Basic Books, 624 pages, hardcover a, ->22.99; e-book A£T7.99

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


