Subscribe now

Edward Said (1995): Contra Mundum'. a€~Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century, 1914a€“1991 by 
Eric Hobsbawm. Joseph, 627 pp., A£20, October 1994,0-7181-3307-
2: A powerful and unsettling book, Eric Hobsbawma€™ s Age of Extremes brings to a close the series 
of historical studies he began in 1962 with The Age of Revolution: Europe
1789a€“1848, and followed in 1975 and 1987 respectively with The Age of Capital, 1848a€“1875 and 
The Age of Empire, 1875a€“1914.

Share

It is difficult to imagine that anyone other than Hobsbawm could have approacheda€”much less 
achieveda€”the consistently high level of these volumes: taken together, they
represent one of the summits of historical writing in the postwar period. Hobsbawm is cool where 
others are hot and noisy; he is ironic and dispassionate where others would have
been either angry or heedless; he is discriminatingly observant and subtle where on the same ground 
other historians would have resorted to clichA©s or to totalistic system.

Perhaps the most compelling thing about Hobsbawma€™ s achievement in these four books is the poise 
he maintains throughout. Neither too innocent nor too knowing and cynical,
he restores onea€™ s faith in the idea of rational investigation; and in a prose that is as supple 
and sure as the gait of a brilliant middle-distance runner, he traces the emergence,
consolidation, triumph and eclipse of modernity itselfa€”in particular, the amazing persistence of 
capitalism (its apologists, practitioners, theoreticians and opponents) within it.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

The four books also record the growth of a world consciousness, both in Hobsbawm himself and in the 
history he writes. In the 1780s, for example, the inhabited world was known
to Europeans only patchily; by the time he gets to the rise of empire a century later, Hobsbawma€™ 
s subject is EuropeaC™ s discovery of the rest of the world. Yet the growth of
the historiana€™ s mind, so to speak, never reduces itself to tiresome self-contemplation. On the 
contrary, Hobsbawma€™ s solutions to the problems of his own epistemology
become part of his quest for knowledge. This emergent global consciousness is at its most memorable 
in the opening of The Age of Empire, where he records the peregrinations of
his mother and fathera€”one from Vienna, the other from Britain, both originally from Eastern 
Europea€”and their arrival in Alexandria, which while prosperous, cosmopolitan
and recently occupied by Britain, a€~also, of course, contained the ArabsaC™ .

His parents met and married there; Alexandria became Erica€™ s birthplace. This accident of his 
birth suggests to Hobsbawm that Europe alone can no longer be his subject, any
more than his audience can only be academic colleagues. He writes a€~for all who wish to understand 
the world and who believe history is important for this purposea€™, but he
does not minimise the fact that as he approaches the present he must deal with that a€~fuzzya€™ 
period he calls a€~the twilight zone between history and memory; between the
past as a generalised record open to relatively dispassionate inspection and the past as a 
remembered part of, or background to, onea€™ s own lifea€™ .

There is considerable overlap between history and memory in Age of Extremes. The period at hand is 
now Hobsbawma€™ s own lifetime. Although he says that this composite of
the public and the private can be understood as the a€~Short 20th CenturyaC™ in world-historical 
terms, the result is necessarily an account that rests on a€~curiously uneven
foundationsaC™. The historian is now less a guide than a a€~participant observera€™ , one who does 
not, indeed cannot, fully command the historiography of our century. Yet
Hobsbawma€™   s disarming admissions of fallibilitya€”he speaks candidly of his ignorance, avowedly 
controversial views, a€~casual and patchya€™ knowledgea€”do not at all
disable   Age of Extremes, which, as many reviewers have already noted, is a redoubtable work, full 
of its authoraC™ s characteristic combination of grandeur and irony, as well as of
his wide-ranging scope and insight.

What gives it special appeal is that Hobsbawm himself appears intermittently, a bit player in his 
own epic. We see him as a 15-year-old with his sister on a winter afternoon in
Berlin on the day that Hitler becomes Chancellor of Germany. Next he is a partisan in the Spanish 
Civil War. He is present in Moscow in 1957, a€~shockeda€™ to see that the
embalmed Stalin was a€~so tiny and yet so all-powerfula€™ . He is part of a€~the attentive and 
unquestioning multitudesa€™ who listen to Fidel Castro for hours on end. He is a
deathbed witness to Oskar Langea€™ s final days, as the celebrated socialist economist confesses 
that he cannot find an answer to the question: a€~Was there an alternative to the
indiscriminate, brutal, basically unplanned rush forward of the first Five-Year-Plan?a€™ At exactly 
the time that Crick and Watson were doing their breakthrough work on
DNAa€™      s structure, Hobsbawm was a Cambridge fellow, a€~simply unawarea€™ of the importance of 
what the two men were up toa€”and in any case a€~they saw no point in
telling usa€™ about it.

These very occasional glimpses of Hobsbawm the participant lend a special credibility to his 
account of changes that took place between 1914 and the Nineties. One, of course, is
that by about 1950 ours had become the most murderous century of all time; this prompts the 
conclusion that as the century advanced there was a€~a marked regression in
standardsa€™ once considered a€~normala€™ . Torture, murder, genocide have been officially 
condoned. To complicate matters, our world is now no longer Eurocentric (even
though  wealth and power remain essentially Western): the globe is a single unit, a fact already 
the subject of numerous studies by so-called world system theorists, economists and
historians. But the most drastic transformation of all, Hobsbawm writes, has been a€~the 
disintegration of the old patterns of social relationships and with it, incidentally, the
snapping                                                                                 of the 
links between generations, that is to say, between past and presentaC™ . This gives historians a 
peculiar relevance since what they do impedes, if it does not
altogether prevent, the destruction of the past. Their a€~business is to remember what others 
forgetaC™ . Hence, Hobsbawm says, a€~my object is to understand and explain why
things turned out the way they did, and how they hang together.a€™

Three massive blocks constitute his design for this job. Part One, a€~The Age of Catastrophesa€™ , 
covers the period from World War One through the Second World War to
a€~the end of empiresa€™ a€”i.e. the immediate post-war period. Part Two is slightly longer, and is 
(perhaps ironically) entitled a€~The Golden Agea€™ . It starts with the Cold
War, moves through the social, cultural and economic revolutions of the Sixties through to the 
Eighties, glances at the emergence of the Third World, and culminates in a brisk
discussion of a€~real socialisma€™ . Part Three, a€~The Landslidea€™ , traces the collapse of most 
things a€“ the world economy, socialism, the artistic avant gardea€.”as the
story limps to a not particularly cheering conclusion, waiting for the millennium surrounded by 
poverty and a€~consumer egoisma€™ , all-powerful media, a decline of state
power,  a rise in ethnic hatred, and an almost total lack of vision. An exhausting and somewhat 
joyless segment of the trip, this, with Hobsbawm still admirably adroit and rational
despite all the catastrophes and declines.

He is at his best identifying and then drawing conclusions from major political and economic trends 
in the metropolitan West: the rise of socialism and Fascism, life under
bureaucratic socialism and advanced capitalism, the fall of the Soviet Union and the end of the 
Cold War. No one has more chillingly recited the costs of total war and repression
than Hobsbawm, and few chroniclers of great power politics have seen them in their folly and waste 
with a steelier gaze than he. For him the central story of the century is the battle
for the hearts and minds of Europeans and (principally North) Americans. He sees the double paradox 
of capitalism given life by socialism, and of Fascism as belonging not a€~to
an oriental feudalism with an imperial national missiona€™ but a€~to the era of democracy and the 
common mana€™ . A moment later, as if cautioning against the too rigorous
application of his own observation, he remarks that, whereas European Fascism destroyed labour 
movements, the Latin American fascist A©lites a€~they inspired created
thema€™     ; and as anti-Fascism in Europe led to the left, so, too, did anti-colonial movements 
in Africa and Asia incline to the Western Left, a€~nursery of anti-imperialist
theorya€™.

He is magnificent in charting the progress and indeed the lived texture of socialism, not as theory 
according to Hegel, Marx, LukAjcs or Gramsci, but as a practice dedicated to
a€~universal emancipation, the construction of a better alternative to capitalist societya€™ . And 
it needs pointing out, as he does a moment later, that the devotion and self­
sacrifice                                                                                   of 
individual militants is what kept the thing going, not just the lies and repression of brutally 
stodgy bureaucracies. a€~A Russia even more firmly anchored in the
pasta€™ is how Hobsbawm (unflinchingly) judges a€~real socialisma€™ as practised by the Bolsheviks, 
with a€~an undergrowth of smaller and larger bureaucrats, on average
even less educated and qualified than beforea€™ . (There isna€™ t enough said, however, about the 
disappointment later generated in the same committed people, many of whom
were mystified by the sudden cancellation of the whole enterprise and the abject and ugly 
concession to a€~free marketa€™ doctrines that followed.) Hobsbawma€™ s sharp-eyed
and demystifying account of the Cold War is similarly trenchant; he writes very effectively of its 
irrational and gloating lurches, its mindless squandering of resources, its
impoverishing rhetoric and ideological corruption, in the US especially.

His account of the Golden Age in general, to someone a good part of whose life coincides with it, 
is satisfying and at times very insightful. The descriptions he gives of the rise and
progress of the international student movement and of feminism are sober, if only moderately 
enthusiastic in tone, particularly when he has to keep reminding us that traditional
laboura€”from steel workers to telephone operatorsa€’’declined in importance, as did the peasantry, 
which had all but died by the latter third of the century. And there were strange
inversions                                                                                of 
history as a result: a€~On city street-corners of Europe small groups of peripatetic Indians from 
the South American Andes played their melancholy flutes and on the
pavements of New York, Paris and Rome black peddlers from West Africa sold trinkets to the natives 
as the nativesa€™ ancestors had done on their trading voyages to the Dark
Continent.a€™ Or when upper and middle-class youth start to take on the clothes, music and language 
of the urban poor. Strangely absent from this account, however, is the
enormous change in popular attitudes to, as well as modes of partaking in, sexuality that begins in 
the Sixties; there is a continuity between this period and the next, in which the
new sensibility produced by gays and lesbians, and of course the scourge of Aids, are central 
motifs.

Each of Hobsbawma€™ s major claims about periods in world history is provocative and, in the best 
sense, tendentious. Certainly there is something almost poetically inevitable
about the last of his three divisions, a€~The Landslidea€™: a€~the history of the twenty years 
after 1973,a€™ he says, a€~is that of a world which lost its bearings and slid into
instability and crisis.a€™ What does the slide include? The fall of the Soviet Union and the 
Eastern European Communist states; the re-division of the world into rich and poor
states;   the rise of ethnic hatred and xenophobic nationalism; guerrilla movements both in the 
ascendancy and in almost bathetic decline; politics as the art of evasion, and politicians
as assuagers rather than leaders; the unprecedented importance of the media as a worldwide force; 
the rule of transnational corporations; the surprising renaissance of the novel,
which in places like Russia, Latin America, and parts of Asia and Africa is an exception to the 
general eclipse of the major traditional aesthetic genres. Interspersed is a particularly


gripping (for the layman at least) chapter on the triumphs and changes in modern science. Hobsbawm 
gives the best short account of how scientific theory and practice traverse the

distance between the laboratory and the marketplace, in the process raising fundamental issues 
about the future of the human race, now clearly undergoing a€~a renaissance of
barbarisma€™.

His conclusion, laced with understandable fatigue and uncertainty, is scarcely less pessimistic. 
Most of what he has to say about the yin de siA'cle in his final pages is already
perceptible in earlier sections of the book. The general loss of Marxism and of the models for 
political action developed in the 1890s is balanced by the bankruptcy of counter­
alternatives, principal among them a a€~theological faith in an economy in which resources were 
allocated entirely by the totally unrestricted market, under conditions of unlimited
competition^™ . The worldwide assault on the environment, the population explosion, the collapse of 
state power and the appearance of fundamentalist mass movements with
a€~nothing                                                                                  of 
relevance to saya€™ about the modern world, all these show how a€~the fate of humanity in the new 
millennium would depend on the restoration of public
authoritiesa€™ . It is clear that Hobsbawm sees link hope in a solution that prolongs either the 
past or the present. Both have proved themselves unworthy models.

A very disquieting book this, not only because its conclusions seem so dispiriting but also 
because, despite onea€™ s deep admiration for it as a performance, a muffled quality
surfaces here and there in its authora€™ s tone, and even at times a sense of self-imposed 
solemnity that makes it more difficult to read than one would have expected. In part the
grandeur of Hobsbawma€™ s project precludes the kind of buoyancy one finds in the brilliantly 
eccentric earlier books, like Primitive Rebels or Bandits. For most of the time here
he   is so measured, responsible, serious that the few disputable judgments and questionable facts 
that turn up in the book seem disproportionately unsettling. Most of them occur in
discussions either of the arts or of non-European politics: that is, in areas which he seems to 
think are mainly derivative and hence inherently less interesting than in the altogether
(to   him) more important realms of Western politics and economics.

At one point he says with quite unmodulated certainty that a€~the dynamics of the great part of the 
worlda€™ s history in the Short 20th Century are derived, not original.a€™ He
clarifies this by saying something pretty vague about a€~the A©lites of non-bourgeois societiesa€™ 
imitating a€~the model pioneered in the Westa€™ . The trouble with this, as
non-Western historians like the Subaltern Studies group (an influential collective of Indian 
historians headed by Rangjit Guha, which has been dedicated to the idea that Indian
history   must be written from the perspective of the real history-makers: the urban masses and the 
rural poor, not the nationalist A©lite) have tried to show, is that it leaves out huge
gobs of non-A©lite historical experience which have their own, non-derivative integrity. What about 
conflicts between nationalist A©lites and resistant non-A©litesa€”in India,
China, parts of Africa, the Arab world, Latin America and the Caribbean? Besides, how can one so 
easily detach the original from the derivative? As Fanon said, a€~the entire
Third World went into the making of Europe .a€™

It is not just Hobsbawma€™ s occasionally dismissive tone that troubles one but the sense one has 
of a long-held, quite unexamined decision that in matters non-Western the
approved Western authority is to be preferred over less conventional non-Westerners. Hobsbawm 
registers little awareness that a debate has been raging in Islamic, Chinese,
Japanese, African, Indian and Latin American studies about authority and representation in the 
writing of history. This debate has often relegated not only traditional authorities but
even the questions raised by them to (in my opinion) a well-deserved retirement. In his recent 
Nations and Nationalism since 1780 (1990) Hobsbawm expresses an impatience with
non-European nationalism which is often quite justified, except that that very impatience also 
seems to contain a wish not to deal with the political and psychological challenges of
that nationalism. I recall with some amusement his characterisation there of a€~Arabiana€™ 
anti-imperialist nationalism as a€~the natural high spirits of martial tribesa€™ .

Hobsbawm is therefore peculiarly ill-equipped to deal with the rise and ascendancy of 
a€~politicised religiona€™, which is surely not, as he implies, an exclusively Muslim
phenomenon. The US and Israel, whose Christians and Jews respectively are in many ways a€~moderna€™ 
people, are nonetheless now commandeda€”or at least deeply
affecteda€”by   a theologically fervent mentality. The last thing to be said about them, or the 
Muslims (in the understanding of whose world Hobsbawm is surprisingly banal) is that
they a€~have nothing of relevance to saya€™ about their societies. Barring a few cranks (like the 
Saudi Arabian cleric who persists in preaching that the world is, and always will
be, flat), the contemporary Muslim movements in places like Egypt and Gaza have generally done a 
better job of providing welfare, health and pedagogical services to an
impoverished populace than the government. Christian and Jewish fundamentalists also answer to real 
needs, real anxieties, real problems, which it will not do to brush aside as
irrelevant.  This blindspot of Hobsbawma€™ s is very surprising. With Terence Ranger, he is a 
pioneer in the study of a€~invented traditiona€™ , those modern formations that are
part fantasy, part political exigency, part power-play. Yet even about this subject, clearly 
related to the new appearance of religious mass enthusiasm, he observes a mysterious
silence in Age of Extremes.

The more positive aspect of Hobsbawma€™ s reticence is that it enables his reader to reflect on the 
problem of historical experience itself. Age of Extremes is a magisterial
overview of 20th-century history. I accentuate the word a€~overviewa€™ because only rarely does 
Hobsbawm convey what it was (or is) like to belong, say, to an endangered or
truly oppressed class, race or minority, to a community of artists, to other embattled participants 
in and makers (as opposed to observers) of a historical moment. Missing from the
panorama Hobsbawm presents is the underlying drive or thrust of a particular era. I assume that 
this is because he thinks impersonal or large-scale forces are more important, but I
wonder whether witnesses, militants, activists, partisans and ordinary people are somehow of less 
value in the construction of a full-scale history of the 20th century. I dona€™ t
know the answer to this, but I tend to trust my own hunch that the view from within, so to speak, 
needs some reconciling with the overview, some orchestrating and shading.

The absence of these things in turn produces a remarkably jaundiced view of the arts in the 20th 
century. First, Hobsbawm seems to believe that economics and politics are
determining factors for literature, painting and music: certainly he has no truck with the idea 
(which I myself believe in) that the aesthetic is relatively autonomous, that it is not a
superstructure! phenomenon. Second, he has an almost caricatural view of Western Modernism, which, 
as far as he is concerned, has not, since 1914, produced an adequate
intellectual self-justification, or anything of note, other than Dadaism and Surrealism. Proust 
apparently counts for nothing after 1914 and neither do Joyce, Mann, Eliot or Pound.
But  even if we leave imaginative writers asidea€”and Hobsbawma€™ s constricting dating system does 
not help his casea€”there is good reason to argue that in the arts and
disciplines of interpretation, Modernism plays a considerable role. What is LukAjcsa€™ s History 
and Class Consciousness or even Auerbacha€™ s Mimesis if not Modernist? Or
Adorno and Benjamin? And when it comes to trying to understand the often bewildering efflorescence 
of Post-Modernism, Hobsbawm is stubbornly unhelpful.

The irony here is that both Modernism and Post-Modernism represent crises of historical 
consciousness: the former a desperate attempt to reconstruct wholeness out of fragments,
the latter a deep-seated wish to be rid of history and all its neuroses. In any case the Short 20th 
Century is, more strikingly and jarringly than any before it, an age of warring
interpretations, of competing ideologies, methods, crises. The disciples of Nietzsche, Marx, Freud, 
the apologists for culture and counter-culture, for tradition, modernity and
consciousness,  have filled the air, and indeed space itself, with contestation, diatribe, 
competing viewpoints; our century has been the age of Newspeak, propaganda, media hype
and  advertising. One reason for thisa€”as Gramsci, unmentioned by Hobsbawm, was perhaps the first 
to appreciated”is the enormous growth in the number and importance of
intellectuals, or a€~mental workersa€™ as they are sometimes called. Well over 60 per cent of the 
GNP in advanced Western societies is now derived from their labour; this has led
to   what Hobsbawm calls in passing a€~the age of Benettona€™ , as much the result of advertising 
and marketing, as of the changed modes of production.

In other words, the 20th century saw, along with the appearance of genocide and total war, a 
massive transformation of intellectual and cultural terrain. Discussions of narrative
moved from the status of story to the hotly debated and fought-over question of the nation and 
identity. Language, too, was an issue, as was its relationship to reality: its power to
make or break facts, to invent whole regions of the world, to essentialise races, continents, 
cultures. There is therefore something unsatisfyingly unproblematic about
Hobsbawma€™ s decision to try to give us facts, figures and trends shorn not so much of their 
perspective as of their disputed provenance and making.

Viewed as deliberately standing aside from the interpretative quarrels of the 20th century, Age of 
Extremes belongs to an earlier, manifestly positivist moment in historiographic
practice; its calm, generally unexcited manner takes on an almost elegiac tone as Hobsbawm 
approaches his melancholy conclusion that history a€~is no help to prophecya€™ . But
as   a somewhat younger and far less cautious student of Hobsbawma€™ s other great work, I would 
still want to ask whether there arena€™ t greater resources of hope in history
than the appalling record of our century seems to allow, and whether even the large number of lost 
causes strewn about does not in fact provide some occasion for a stiffening of
will and a sharpening of the cold steel of energetic advocacy. The 20th century after all is a 
great age of resistance, and that has not completely been silenced.

LINK: chttps://www.lrb .co .uk/the-paper/v 17/n05/edward-said/contra-mundum>
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

As I said up at the top, I find this review odd and puzzling. I run across a passage like:

Only rarely does Hobsbawm convey what it was (or is) like to belong, say, to an endangered or truly 
oppressed class, race or minority, to a community of
artists, to other embattled participants in and makers (as opposed to observers) of a historical 
moment. Missing from the panorama Hobsbawm presents is
the underlying drive or thrust of a particular era. I assume that this is because he thinks 
impersonal or large-scale forces are more important, but I wonder
whether witnesses, militants, activists, partisans and ordinary people are somehow of less value in 
the construction of a full-scale history of the 20th
century.                                                                    I dona€™ t know the 
answer to this, but I tend to trust my own hunch that the view from within, so to speak, needs some 
reconciling with the
overview, some orchestrating and shadinga€!

And I think: What are a€oeimpersonal or large-scale forcesa€D but the aggregate of the dreams, 
perceptions, and actions of the massesa€”as a€oemilitants, activists, partisans and
ordinary peoplea€D?


And I run across a Said passage like:

The 20th century saw, along with the appearance of genocide and total war, a massive transformation 
of intellectual and cultural terrain. Discussions of
narrative moved from the status of story to the hotly debated and fought-over question of the 
nation and identity. Languagea€! was an issuea€! its
relationship to reality: its power to make or break factsa€! invent whole regionsa€! essentialise 
races, continents, cultures. There is therefore something
unsatisfyingly unproblematic about Hobsbawma€™ s decision to try to give us facts, figures and 
trends shorn not so much of their perspective as of their
disputed provenance and makinga€!

And I think: what among Hobsbawma€™ s a€oefacts, figures and trendsa€D does Said object to? What is 
disputeda€’’other than Hobsbawma€™ s rootless cosmopolite fear and
suspicion of twentieth-century nationalism, and Saida€™ s embrace of at least the right kinds of 
it?

Some of what is going on is what Ken White calls a€oethe problem of the preferred first speakera€D:

Ken White: d€™ d€oeThe problem of the preferred first speakera€D is the tendency to impose norms of 
civility, openness, productiveness, and dialogue­
encouraging on a RESPONSE to expression that we do not impose on the expression itselfa€!

JeSuisJortsHat @ Popehat

a€oeThe problem of the preferred first speakera€D is the tendency to impose norms of civility, 
openness, productiveness, and dialogue-encouraging on a RESPONSE to expression
that we do not impose on the expression itself.

3:27 PM r™ Jul 7, 2020

1,273Likes241 Retweets

Said felt offendeda€’’rightlya€’’that Hobsbawm, Cambridge University member of the Society of 
Apostles, was a preferred first speaker who gets to say what he wants when he
wants in polite bourgeois society (even though Hobsbawm is outcaste as an Egyptian-born 
half-British radical leftist), while Said had to walk carefully.

But there is more: Said seems to feel that there is too much a€oepessimism of the intellecta€O and 
not enough a€oeoptimism of the willa€D in Hobsbawm. Said has a great deal of
optimism of the willa€’’perhaps especially the religious will:

Barring a few cranksa€! the contemporary Muslim movements in places like Egypt and Gaza have 
generally done a better job of providing welfare, health
and pedagogical services to an impoverished populace than the government


For:

Hobsbawm expresses an impatience with non-European nationalism which is often quite justified, 
except that that very impatience also seems to contain a
wish not to deal with the political and psychological challengesa€!. Hobsbawm is therefore 
peculiarly ill-equipped to deal with the rise and ascendancy of
a€~politicised religiona€™ a€! surely not, as he implies, an exclusively Muslim phenomenon^!. 
[that] answer[s] to real needs, real anxieties, real
problemsa€!

And Said concludes:

This blindspot of Hobsbawma€™ s is very surprisinga€! a pioneer in the study of a€~invented 
traditiona€™, those modern formations that are part fantasy, part political exigency,
part power-play. Yet even about this subject, clearly related to the new appearance of religious 
mass enthusiasm, he observes a mysterious silence in Age of Extreme sa€.\

I read this as a demand by Said that those who see humanity as primarily divided by ethnicity and 
culture be the preferred first speakers, and that those who see humanity as
primarily divided by class or as primarily united be forced to walk carefully.

