Subscribe now

CONDITION: I Am Significantly Dismayed by A34e Harvard Administrationa€™s Denial of a Fellowship to 
Kenneth Roth of HRW:

Using Ken Whitea€™ s terminology, Kenneth Rotha€™ s speech is not illegal or unrightful. It does 
not tend to erode the free speech community. And while some might call him indecent in using 
hyperbole in calling Israel today an apartheid state, I certainly would nota€’’although I would say 
that that hyperbole is not likely to be a constructive contribution. So I see absolutely zero case 
for fellowship denial. (And I thought the administrative denial of a
fellowship to Chelses Manning was extremely dismaying as well.

That said, I cannot sign on to the Open letter to Harvard Kennedy School Dean Douglas Elmendorf, 
Harvard President Lawrence Bacow, and Incoming Harvard President Claudine Gay. To claim that 
a€oewelcoming Ehud Barak and Tzipi Livnia€D is part of a€oea long history of anti-Palestinian bias, 
discrimination, and racism at the Harvard Kennedy Schoola€D is not a statement that anyone who 
wants to contribute to a free-speech or an academic culture
can make.

But do not take the absence of my signature from the letter as evidence that I am not significantly 
dismayed.

The Popehat Report

Hamline University And Cancel Culture

Last March I wrote a self-indulgently long post airing my grievances about the term a€oecancel 
culturea€D and how ita€™ s used in an unprincipled, unproductive way that discourages good 
discussions rather than encouraging them. My thesis was this: (1) any productive discussion of 
cancel culture needs a workable definition of it, (2) any principled discussion a€!

Read more

a month ago A- 276 likes A- 118 comments A- Ken White
Share

FOCUS: Chat-GPT: What Is It Good For?:


The internal workings of Chat-GPT visualized as a Tron-style animation with lots of bright lights, 
colors, grids, and lens flares, by Stable Diffusion via NightCafe
I was playing with Chat-GPT this morning, instead of doing real work:


rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Playing wiA34 Chat-GPT

I think: this is an occasionally haa€!

Read more

a month ago A- Brad DeLong

I think I am converging towards an assessment. I think my assessment is going to be something like 
this: an occasionally hallucinatory conventional-wisdom generator.

After all, what else could it possibly be? Chat-GPT looks back at up to 4000 tokens (maybe 3000 
words?) in the prompt(s), and then, probabilistically, it selects the next token to output. It was 
trained on half a trillion words, and it has 175 billion connection weights between nodes. And yet 
how it is wired together is not obvious to me, and it is not obvious why its wiring is the right 
wiring for us to be trying to build. It seems to me to be too word-cloudy to be
likely to be successful. But, then, I also think that most oral and written communication is too 
word-cloudy to be well-designed for its purposes.

The worrisome thing is that what has made it viral is that it speaks with much too much authority, 
it is too convincing at conveying the false illusion that there is actually a human mind back 
there. And that is likely to mislead us.
For example, I fed it the quick brown fox jumped over the lazy. Its response was not a€oedoga€D, 
period, followed by something else. Its response was:

The phrase "the quick brown fox jumped over the lazy" is a well-known sentence that is used to test 
the quality of typefaces. The sentence uses every letter of the English alphabet, making it a good 
sentence to test the completeness of a typeface. The sentence is also commonly used as a typing 
test and as a sentence that can be used to test the autocomplete function of a word processing 
program.

1. This is wrong.

2. a€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the lazya€d is not a sentence.

3. a€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the lazya€d is not well-known.

4. a€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the lazya€d is not used to test the quality of typefaces.

5. All of those are true not of the prompt, but rather of a€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the 
lazy dog.a€D

6. What is right is that a€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the lazya€D can be used to test the 
autocomplete function of a world processing program.
Do note that, as autocomplete, Chat-GPT has just flunked.

It is pretty clear to me what Chat-GPT did here: It thought:

•  a€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the lazya€d is almost the same as a€oeThe quick brown fox 
jumped over the lazy doga€D.


• So I will say the things that usually follow a€oea€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the lazy 
doga€D.

•  There are some occurrences of a€oeThe quick brown fox jumped over the lazya€D which are then 
soon followed by a€oetest the autocomplete functiona€D and a€oeword processing programa€D.

• So I will output that as well.

No, the issue is complicated by the fact that a lot of the timea€”95%?a€”hen we speak or write, we 
are stochastic parrots giving the conventional or conventional wisdom tokens in response to a 
prompt. But there is that very meaningful extra 5%. That is what GPT-Chat lacks.

Perhaps what we are learning is (a) how much of language is social, reinforcement, blue rather than 
information, transmission, and (b) how much of language it is information transmission is, indeed, 
the transmission of useful and relatively straightforward conventional wisdom that Chat-GPT can 
grok by essentially averaging the corpus of human language instances? Perhaps not. Perhaps I am off 
base herea€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: Sell A%e Bonds!

Selling bonds for more than par is less stupid and less goofy than a€oedisinvestinga€n the Social 
Security trust fund and then claiming that the trust fund balance is not part of the debt subject 
to limit. And that has been semi-routinely done for 28 years now:

Matt Yglesias: A new plan to get around the debt ceiling hostage: a€~If the platinum coin is too 
weird, meet high-yield bondsa€L Ita€™ s debt ceiling time againa€!. Instead of selling a $100 bond 
that has a low interest rate for $100 dollars, they can offer a $100 bond that has a high interest 
rate and see how much money people will give them for ita€!. The Treasury could raise more than 
$100 while only issuing $100 worth of debta€!
stupid, buta€! less goofy than a platinum coin. Anda€l stupid in a manner that is perfectly 
suitable to the underlying stupidity of the statutory debt ceiling, which purports to limit the 
face value of debt that the Treasury can issue separate from all the legislation that specifies how 
much money the Treasury has to spenda€!

Leave a comment

ONE IMAGE: A little inflation is a much better problem to have A%an an economy depressed for a 
decade:


FRED

21,000

— Real Gross Domestic Product

20,000

19,000

18,000

17,000

16,000


Give a gift subscription

BRIEFLY NOTED:

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Ethan Mollick: How to... use Chat-GPT to boost your writing: a€~The key to using generative AI 
successfully is prompt-craftinga€! very elaborated! abstracta€! almost poetica€!. More elaborate 
and specific prompts work bettera€! appears to me that the conversational interface is leading 
people to use the tool badly.

• David Dayen: Regulators Prevented a Crypto-Fueled Economic Downturn: a€~The most important 
regulation has already been done. Keeping crypto out of the broader financial system was the most 
important regulatory action of the past decadea€!. If we manage to get out of this cycle without a 
recession, we will have the banking regulators, primarily Gary Gensler at the Securities and 
Exchange Commission, to thanka€! A100% correct analysis
from David Dayan!

•  Simon Wren-Lewis: Did 2010 austerity permanently reduce UK output?: a€~ There is evidence that 
austerity, in creating an unusually protracted recovery in aggregate demand from the GFC recession, 
did have a negative impact on productivity growth and therefore a persistent negative impact on 
output supplya€! There is very, very strong evidence.

•  Ian Buruma: Chinaa€™ s Autocracy in Crisis: a€~Top-down decisions, often implemented by 
competent technocrats, have enabled China to build high-quality infrastructure and achieve rapid 
economic growth. But President Xi JinpingaC™ s handling of the CO VID-19 crisis and his erratic 
decision-making have highlighted the flaws in ChinaaC™ s one-party regimea€! Was the PRC always 
imperial, with a mask of collective leadership in the
same way that the Julio-Claudians preserved the mask of the republic and of the authority of the 
Senate? Right now it looks like we had three good emperors, and now have one very erratic one.


•  Tyler Cowen: China & the Risk of Great Power War: a€~If something has not happened for a long 
time, most people simply forget about ita€!. I think a major war between great powers falls into 
that categorya€! But I have no idea what a war between great powers would look like today. "War" 
covers an extremely broad range of levels of violence.

• JA^rgen Osterhammel: The Transformation of the World: A Global History of the Nineteenth 
Centurya€ 1A great great book.

• K.P.: Turning the Page on 2022: ^“SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA: An Economic History of the Twentieth 
Century, by J. Bradford DeLong. A masterful analysis of the extended 20th century (1870-2020) U.S. 
economy, by the former Treasury official now at the University of California, Berkeleya€! 
d€oeMasterfuld^2.1 like that. Very much.

• Mark Galeotti: a€~Putin's decision to appoint Chief of the General Staff Gerasimov as new overall 
commander of Ukraine op is significanta€!. For Gerasimova€! it isa€! the most poisoned of chalices. 
It's now on him, and I suspect Putin has unrealistic expectations againa€!. There will be spring 
offensivesa€! demonstrating to the West that Russia is in this for the long haul, and hoping that 
we will lose the will and unity to continue to support
Kyiva€! "Supporting Kyiv" is not a heavy burden for the NATO alliance. And what with North American 
shale and LNG tankers, the costs for the European civilian economy will be low. The primary 
economic burden of continued war will fall upon the poor of Nigeria and Egypt. This makes no sense 
for Russia.

•  Dave Guarino: a€~One of the most dangerous feedback loops is narrative resonance. Much of the 
opportunity operating in complex systems is understanding the gap between 1. what those fed info 
via summary (synoptic lenses) understand the problems to be, and 2. ground trutha€!. Adjusting 
conclusions in response to what resonates with the former will tend towards convergence back tothe 
(partial) epistemic modelwhich is already  a source of
disconnect/problemsa€! This is why directors and such should spend a month in the trenches. Of 
course, it is important that they spend the month in a not atypical trench.

•  Chris Hayes: a€~FIRE really is one of the only consistent voices in the academic free speech 
discourse, with a genuinely principled commitment that spans different ideological controversies^! 
I confess I have probably been undervaluing FIRE.

Get 33% off a group subscription

AJs:

What to do when a person I know to be smart, careful, and well-informed talks things that seem to 
me to be, well, bonkers? I can read the Feda€™ s credibility with the bond market off of the 
numbers. The Fed has immense credibility as an inflation fighter with the bond market. And the 
consequences for being at the zero lower bound, and thus having the market rate of interest 
well-above the neutral rate are immensea€’’not just economic consequences, but
eroding democracy, and aiding rising fascism as well. So where does all this come from?

Ragu Rajan: Central banks cana€™ t win when it comes to credibility on inflation: a€~Institutions 
are scrambling to rebuild their toolkits to deal with the new regime: The kind of credibility 
needed to escape a regime of overly low inflation, which we had until recently, is different from 
the kind needed to curb high inflation, which we have now. And by its very nature, credibility does 
not turn on a dimea€!. Should the Fed work once
more to regain credibility as an inflation hawk? Credibility takes a long time to build, and 
inflation regimes could switch againa€!. [But] central banks will probably be most effective if 
they rebuild their commitment to combating high inflation. And if inflation falls too low, perhaps 
we should learn to live with ita€!

How is it that Poland and Malaysia have managed to successfully utilize FDI for growth in ways that 
other countries have not?

Noah Smith: The Poland/Malaysia model: a€~The richer you get, the harder it is to grow, so by 
reaching the ~$30,000 range, Poland and Malaysia have accomplished an impressive feata€! not quite 
as impressive as South Korea, but then again, who is?a€! They relied heavily on foreign direct 
investments I. Poland and Malaysia are both very export-intensive economiesa€”as much or more so 
than South Koreaa€!. Ha-Joon Chang
and some other industrial policy fans think that FDI is not the basis of a sound development 
strategya€!. Developing the South Korean way, by building a bunch of world-beating high-tech 
manufacturing companies from scratch, is incredibly hard. An FDI-centric strategy, on the other 
hand, is simple and straightforwarda€!

A good example of the evil mindset of the Washington press corps back in the day and, indeed, 
today. Reporters who are flattered as peers by government officials willing to cut corners, and 
tell lies are than willing to go the extra mile to excuse such a government officials. I assure you 
that Cap Weinberger did not look at Richard Cohen as a a€oebasic sort of guya€D and a sort-of peer, 
but as a mark:

Richard Cohen (1992): Without Candor: a€~Back when Caspar Weinberger was secretary of defense, he 
and I used to meet all the time. Our a€oemeetingsa€na€! took place in the Georgetown Safeway.... 
Once... he bought a turkey. I tell you this about the man President Bush just pardoned because it 
always influenced my opinion of Weinberger.  Based on my Safeway encounters, I came to think of 
Weinberger as a basic sort of guy,

candid and no nonsensea€’’which is the way much of official Washington saw him. It seemed somehow 
cruel that he should end his careera€”he's 75a€”either as a defendant in a criminal case or as a 
felon. The man deserved better than that.... He may have lost his good sense when he allegedly 
withheld evidence. That being said, I was pleased when he was pardoned...

Kevin McCarthy plays Jim Fallows. As long as McCarthy has the guys to talk about stolen elections, 
socialists, and Hunter Biden, he can appear to take the high road and thus store up street cred 
with which he can gull Jim in the future. Thata€™ s my view, at least:

James Fallows: OK, There Was Something Positive in the Speaker-Vote Debacle: a€~What Kevin McCarthy 
didn't say is worth at least noticing as wella€!. Part of McCarthya€™ s speech was origin storya€! 
and part of it was standard MAGA platforma€! swampa€! Afghanistana€! the origins of COVIDa€! the 
weaponization of the FBIa€! Select Committee on China to investigate how to bring back the hundreds 
of thousands of
jobsa€!. But if youa€™d listened to thea€! general GOP rhetoric of the era, youa€™d notice the 
things McCarthy did not saya€! a€cestolena€D electiona€! a€cesocialistsa€Da€! Hunter Bidena€! [no] 
saber-rattl[ing] about raising the debt ceilinga€! not use a€ceDemocrata€D as an adjective (rather 
than a€ceDemocratica€D), in the routinely insulting way pioneered by Newt Gingricha€! did not 
disparage the man who gave him the
gavel, Hakeem Jeffriesa€!. Will this make any difference in terms of votes or policy?a€! No. But it 
could have been worsea€!. It will get worse, but for those few minutes it wasna€™t. For now leta€™ 
s take the wina€!

The failure of the Republican a€cemoderatesa€D to hold up the passage of the rules package for even 
a day is a very bad sign:

Robert Hubbell: Backroom deals, lies, and performative grift!: a€~The public version of the House 
resolution containing the rules omitted a secret supplement that conceals the corrupt promises made 
by McCarthy to purchase votes of reluctant GOP members who did not trust hima€!. A secret agreement 
to a€cefreezea€D congressional spending! Sounds like something Americans deserve to know about, 
doesna€™t it? Or how about
a a€oedebt-ceiling strategya€D that was part of a quid-pro-quo to drag McCarthy over the line in 
his ego-driven quest to become Speaker?a€! There are no innocent answers to that question, and we 
are entitled to presume the worsta€!

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

