Forthcoming from Basic:

Slouching Towards Utopia?l:

An Economic History of the Long Twentieth Century, 1870-2016

FINAL

Contents

Introduction: My Grand Narrative

1. Globalizing the World

2. Revving-Up the Engine of Technological Growth

3. Democratizing the Global North

4. Global Empires

5. World War I

6. Roaring Twenties

7. The Great Depression

8. Really-Existing Socialism

9. Fascism and Naziism

10. World War II

11. The Cold War of Hostile Yet Coexisting Systems

12. False (& True) Starts to Economic Development

13. Inclusion

14. Thirty Glorious Years in the Global North

15. The Neoliberal Turn

16. Reglobalization, Infotech, & Hyperglobalization

17. Great Recession & Anemic Recovery
Conclusion: Are We Still Slouching Towards Utopia?
1

Yes, the reference is to what may be the most-cited twentieth-century poem in the English language: 
William Butler Yeats, a€oeThe Second Cominga€D. The Dial Vol. 69, p. 466
(1920) <https ://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Michael_Robartes_and_the_Dancer/The_ Second Coming>. (Plus, 
secondarily, to Joan Didion, Slouching Towards Bethlehem: Essays, New
York: Simon and Schuster, 1979 <http://books .google.com/?id=hsUgAQAAIAAJ>).

A few words about notes:

I have limited the endnotes in this volume to direct quotations, close paraphrases, markers for 
where my thought and knowledge has been predominantly shaped by a single source,
and places where I think a reference for a€oewhat to read next to go more deeplya€D is appropriate.

I have done so even though I am well aware that they are grossly inadequate. Nearly every single 
paragraph needs to be substantially buttressed, for each certainly could bea€”and,
I hope, will bea€”be fiercely disputed by at least one person of great intelligence and knowledge. 
Moreover, where I am swimming with (or against) a current, I have not dropped a
note to any of the people who make up that current, save where I think I can recommend a best entry 
point into the literature. And even where I think I am originala€! put it this
way: Keynes wrote of the madmen in authority who thought they were hearing voices in the air when 
actually academic scribblers had insinuated themselves into their minds.

Machiavelli wrote of how his books were his friends who he spoke to, and they answereda€”as he 
spun-up from black marks on white pages sub-Turing instantiations of the minds
of the authors which he then ran on his wetware. Even where I think that I am most original, I am 
almost surely simply repeating something that my internal model of some wiser
persona€™ s mind has said to me in my internal dialogue.

So there should for justicea€™ s sake be many more notes. But there are stringent limits to how 
effective lengthy footnotes can possibly be. And there are even more stringent
limits to how effective endnotes can be.

So this book also has a supporting- and contradicting-arguments website at 
<https://braddelong.substack.eom/s/slouching-towards-utopia-long-notes>. Come on over, and read and
comment, please.


