Subscribe now

FIRST: No. The Federal Reserve Did Not 'a€~Drink the Kool-Aida€™ in 2021:

Let me enthusiastically endorse the second half of this from Olivier Blanchard.

It seems to me to be completely right: The way to bet for the medium- and long-run is that we are 
still in a rA©gime of secular stagnation. The demand for safe assets continues to be extremely 
high, because so much wealth is being held and will continue to be held by actors that are not 
pursuing a portfolio strategy of maximizing their real risk-adjusted expected return. (And do 
remember that Steve Cohen and I noted this emerging trend and tried to grapple
with understanding what it was going to mean back ina€! it was 2010: The End of Influence: What 
Happens When Other Countries Have the Money chttps ://www.amazon 
.com/End-Influence-Happens-Other-Countries/dp/0465018769/>.) As long as the demand for assets that 
are a€cesafea€C in the sense that their nominal values track one of the global reserve currencies 
is so high relative to supply as to be constantly pushing their values up to par, things are
going to be really weird:

But that consideration seems to me to make the first half of what he says wrong. Indeed, I do not 
understand what argument could lead somebody to believe it:

Olivier Blanchard: Economists Exchange'. a€~I didna€™ t anticipate the role of the goods market, 
which is that in many sectors the strong demand led to supply disruptions and very large increases 
in prices. In the end, inflation came first not from where I would have expected it to come, which 
was wages, but rather from pricesa€!. I think that the increase in prices, the disruptions in 
supply chains, are very much the result of strong
demand hitting supply walls. So, I would claim that I should get a few points for being right in 
February or March of 2021. Anybody could have come to the same conclusion. Ia€™ m happy I dida€!. 
What should the Fed have done or said when the fiscal package was passed? I hope that Jay Powell 
picked up his phone and told the administration that this was going to be an issue. His staff drank 
the Kool-Aid, and he, not being a
professional economist, could not easily second-guess them. They thought inflation expectations 
would remain anchored and that the Phillips curve was flata€!.

The question is, indeed, how much of this is a blip. I use the word bump, which I think has a 
slightly longer length than a blip. But I believe we will then go back to low real interest rates. 
So, on this, Ia€™ m going to do the Larry Summers thing. I am going to say, with probability 0.9, 
wea€™ 11 return to something like that world. I think therea€™ s a tendency for markets to focus on 
the current, on the present and extrapolate it forever.
But if I look at the factors behind the decline in real interest rates since the mida€“1980s, none 
of them seems about to turn around, except perhaps one, which is investment^!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/e63dab63-bf41-4c43-b827-lbl736fc518d>
The point that in a rA©gime of secular stagnation the loss function is asymmetric is decisive.

The Federal Reserve can deal with an overheated economy by raising interest rates, 
sharplya€’’sharply !a€’’decreasing demand for construction investment, for exports, and for 
domestic production of import-competing goods, and so freeing-up productive capacity to satisfy the 
other components of domestic demand, thus removing inflationary pressures. The Federal Reserve 
cannota€’’cannot !a€’’deal with a frozen economy at its zero nominal lower bound on
interest rates. Forward guidance is simply not effective at the required scale: modern central 
banks have inordinate difficulty in credibly committing to be a€oeirresponsiblea€n and inflationary 
in the future. Quantitative easing is the closest thing to powerless that a monetary-management 
tool can be. Therefore monetary policy needs to focus, unless doing so has the most dire 
consequences, at avoiding situations in which nominal interest rates hit the zero
nominal lower bound. And there was a definite, palpable risk in early 2021 that the economy without 
the early 2021 fiscal package was going to stay at the zero nominal lower bound.

Indeed. Blanchard says that he expected a€oeinflation [to] c[o]me firsta€! froma€! wagesa€na€”an 
overheated labor market giving workers the power to bargain for substantial real wage increases, 
which would then force businesses to raise their prices to try to recoup some of the costs. But 
that is not what happened: instead, under the pressure of plague waves, supply chains broke and 
bottlenecks emerged. Prices of bottlenecked goods spiked, and so the world
economy turned its attention to the now-crowdsourced problem of figuring out how to get rid of 
those bottlenecks and expand productive capacity.

Price increases that focus crowdsourced attention on places in the economy where there are 
constraining bottlenecks is usually seen as a good thing for a market economy to have: it is how we 
become richer. Would it be a better world if we had not had that focus of attention on relieving 
bottlenecks, and so expanding productive capacity? I really do not think so.

After all, in any reasonable societal well-being function, short-run inflation has significant 
costs only if it destroys the long-run inflation anchor. And it has not done so. So when Blanchard 
says that Powella€™ s a€oestaff drank the Kool-Aida€! thought inflation expectations would remain 
anchoreda€!a€D and so a failure to raise interest rates substantially was a policy mistake, I say: 
a€ceHuh?!a€D

Not passing the early 2021 fiscal package, or having the Federal Reserve immediately respond by 
raising interest rates a year ago, would have slowed down the recovery: a serious loss. And it 
would have produced nothing more than an infinitesimal gaina€”as long as the long-run inflation 
anchor remains. Which it does. Long-term inflation expectations have remained anchored:. Should 
they breakout above 2.5%, I will be calling on the Federal Reserve to do
more, and do it faster. But they are still on track, still where they should be:

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

3.5

10                                                     I                                            
                                  I

0.5                                           J

0.0

2004           2006           2008           2010           2012           2014           2016      
     2018           2020           2022

Share

Vprv Rripflv Nntprl?


• Matthew Belloni & al.: Dimond€™s d€ceHurricaned€m a€~Jamie Dimona€! is normally pretty measured 
in his economic pronouncements^! <https://puck.news/dimons-hurricane-sheryls-wall-street/?_cio 
id=f6c60600ef3 3f033>

• Kristie L. Ebi: Surviving a Future of Extreme Heat 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/preparing-for-extreme-heat-climate-change-by-kristie-l
-ebi-2022-06>

• Ben Thompson: Apple WWDC, M2, Additional Notes: a€~What was striking about yesterdaya€™ s 
keynote, though, wasa€! the unveiling of cross-platform featuresa€! 
<https://stratechery.com/2022/apple-wwdc-m2-additional-notes/>

•  Christopher Johnson: Rumours Xi Jinping Is Losing His Grip Are Greatly Exaggerated: a€~Evidence 
is thin that past episodes of factional strife in Chinaa€™ s communist party are repeating 
themselvesa€! <https://www.ft.com/content/5el4bfb2-f0a9-4259-9d4c-alb0ff607560>

•  Paul Waugh: Johnson Is Now the Sick Man of No.10, Infecting Everyone Around Him: a€~A 
double-whammy defeat in Wakefield and in Tiverton and Honiton would only confirm the terminal state 
of the patienta€!. Faced with a Prime Minister who will never change his habits, or who cana€™ t be 
trusted even if he promises to change, ita€™ s no surprise that backbenchers think ita€™ s time to 
change leader insteada€!

<https://link.news.inews.co.uk/view/61feal0c5501fe7b723832e5gnfdt.7h4/6b9f7a22>

•  Chris Anstey: Whatd€™ s Happening in the World Economy: Team Transitory Still Warn on Big Hikes: 
a€~Akey reason not to get spooked about surging prices is the evidence that expectations among 
consumers and investors for inflation over the longer run remain well anchored. That means 
theya€™re not baking in high inflation forevera€’’something that should in itself help to stabilize 
pricesa€!

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-06-06/what-s-happening-in-the-world-economy-team-tr
ansitory-still-warn-on-big-hikes?cmpid=BBD060622_NEF>

•  Matthew Belloni & al.: Elond€™s Foot-in-Mouth Disease: a€™He has a a€oesuper bad feelinga€D 
about the U.S. economya€! hard to square with the news, also on Friday, that payrolls surged by 
390,000 in Maya€! <https://puck.news/dimons-hurricane-sheryls-wall-street/? cio 
id=f6c60600ef33f033>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• James Ledbetter: A Brief History of Fintechd€™ s Meltdown

JAMES LEDBETTER’S



A Brief History of Fintech's Meltdown

James Ledbetter's FIN

Number of the Week: 700,000 (explanation below) A Brief History of Fintech's Meltdown When we 
started FIN in October 2020, fintech appeared to be setting the world on fire. There were so many 
interlocking sectors: proptech, payments, crossborder payments, Buy Now Pay Later (BNPL), 
insurtech, and of course cryptocurrency. PayPal was trading at nearly $200 a share, which would 
grow to more than $300 by July 2021 before heading back to Earth
(today ita€™ s at $86). The combination of user experience, loose regulation and a lockdown-driven 
need for contactless payment seemed to be ushering in a new era in how people interact with money. 
Private capital was flooding the sector, and even unrelated developments like government stimulus 
payments propelled the machine forwarda€!

Read more

8 months ago A- James Ledbetter

• Michael Pettis: The very smart Brad DeLonga€\ thinks there is a very good chance that China will 
get caught in the middle-income trap. I am not sure what the middle-income trap is, but whatever it 
is, I agree with hima€!

in The very smart Brad DeLong (whose new book I am eager to read) thinks there is a very good 
chance that China will get caught in the middle-income trap, I am not sure what the middle-income 
trap is, but whatever it is, I agree with him. @delong

1 O I

'nTnTnnTFnnnn^^


braddelong.substack.comChinaa€™ s Likely Trajectory in Xi Jinpinga€™ s Third Term, &BRIEFLY NOTED: 
For 2022-06-03 Fr
4:21 PM a~™ Jun 6,2022

286Likes72Re tweets

• Matthew Yglesias: Russiaa€™ s War on the Worlda€™ s Food Supply: a€~While the Russian government 
would clearly like to exploit the havoc they are wreaking for gains in Ukraine, they have very 
little leveragea€!. [In] a€cecereals,a€D some European countries do take a hit, but plenty of 
others benefit from the grain shortagea€!


Slow Boring

Russia's war on the world's food supply

Russiaa€™ s war in Ukraine is taking a terrible toll on Ukrainians and promoting hardship within 
Russia and throughout the developed world. But the biggest economic casualties are almost certainly 
the poorer countries that arena€™t involved in the proxy conflict at all but are facing potential 
devastation due to the run-up in global food prices deliberately provoked by Russian policya€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 90 likes A- 157 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

• Noah Smith: The Japan that Abe Shinzo Made'. a€~The expansion of the labor force, the rise of 
immigration and diversity, and the countrya€™ s willingness to assert itself in the international 
security spherea€!

Noahpinion

The Japan that Abe Shinzo made

This is the fifth and final post in my series of posts about Japan. In the first post, I lamented 
Japana€™ s low-ish living standards and called for a cash-based welfare policy. In the second, I 
suggested some industrial policies that Japan might use to boost growth. Ina€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 97 likes A- 27 comments A- Noah Smith
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Paragraph:


Matthew Levine is always a must-read. In fact, he is always a must-read to a frightening extent. 
Here he is on the latest from Elon Musk:

Matthew Levine: Elon Has a New Bot Excuse'. a€~This again. No, come on, stop ita€!. The merger 
agreement does nota€! allow Musk to walk away because he changed his mind. He needed some 
pretexta€!. He came up with what he thought was a good one: Twitter says, in its public filings, 
that no more than 5% of its a€oemonetizable daily active usersa€D are a€oefalse or spama€Da€i. To a 
non-lawyer I suppose this looked like a
good pretext, but it was not. It was not for at least three reasons: Musk had not a shreda€! of 
evidencea€!. Musk could not get out of the merger agreement unless the error was likely to have a 
a€oematerial adverse effecta€D on Twittera€™ s business, and it absolutely would not. Musk has been 
talking about Twittera€™ s bot problem forever, and in fact he originally said that he wanted to 
buy Twitter in order to fix the bot problem, so
no one could possibly believe him when he said that he wanted to walk away from the deal because he 
just discovered that Twitter has a bot problema€!. He set his lawyersa€! to work finding a pretext 
that they could stomach. And they found one, and today they filed it with the US Securities and 
Exchange Commission, in the form of a letter to Twitter threatening to call off the deal. Their 
pretexted is that, when Musk asks for
information about the spam bots, Twitter doesna€™ t give him the information he wantsa€!. To be 
clear, it isna€™ t a good pretexta€!. It is hard to imagine him winning if this ends up in court: 
If he refuses to close because Twitter wona€™ t humor his bot-fishing expedition, it seems unlikely 
that a Delaware court will side with him. But it does raise the risk for Twitter, which gives him a 
bit more leverage to try to renegotiate the price.
It     is all going to get so much dumbera€!

LINK: <https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2022-06-06/elon-has-a-new-bot-excuse#xj4y7vzkg>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Order the book, please! <https://bit.ly/3pP3Krk>
Subscribe now

