I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your email 
inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join
the group of supporters, please press the button and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

Robert M. Solow is a prince among men, absolutely brilliant, and has been extremely nice to 
mea€”thinks I am much smarter and harder working than I ama€’’throughout my career.
But there is one thing he co-wrote, way back in 1989, that made me go a€oeWTF?!?!&€□. It was:

Michael L. Dertouzos, Richard K. Lester, Robert M. Solow, & The MIT Commission on Industrial 
Productivity: Made in America: Regaining the Productive Edge chttps://mitpress.mit 
.edu/9780262041003/>: a€~Made in America identifies what is best and worth replicating in American 
industrial practice and sets out five national
priorities for regaining the productive edge. What went wrong and how can America become second to 
none in industrial productivity? This long awaited study by a team of top notch MIT scientists and 
economistsa€”the MIT Commission on Industrial Productivity a€’’takes a hard look at the recurring 
weaknesses of American industry that
are threatening the country's standard of living and its position in the world economy a€!

It made me go a€oeWTF!?a€D because of this: when I read Made in America, my first thought was 
a€oethis is Manufacturing Mattersa€.”a book written by my frequent co-author Stephen Cohen and very 
occasional co-author John Zysmana€”come back again.a€D
And Solow had reviewed Manufacturing Matters for the New York Times Book Review twelve two short 
years earlier, back in 1987.

It was not a friendly review:

We'd Better Watch Out

MANUFACTURING MATTERS: TheMyth of the Post-Industrial Economy.

By Stephen S. Cohen and John Zysman. Tables and Charts. 297pp. New York: A Council on Foreign 
Relations Book.
Basic Books. $19.95.

by Robert M. Solow

June 12,1987

THERE is a lot of loose talk about the "deindus-trialization" of the United States economy. We are 
losing our manufacturing industry to foreigners and becoming a "service economy" (if you like the 
idea) or a "nation of hamburger stands and insurance companies" (if you don't like the idea). 
Stephen S. Cohen and John Zysman begin their book, Manufacturing
Matters: The Myth of the Post-Industrial Economy, by insisting, quite correctly, that no such thing 
can happen. The orders of magnitude are such that the United States could not hope to pay for its 
manufacturing imports by selling services abroad. We need too many goods, and there are not enough 
services. One way or another we will continue to be producers of
goods, including manufactures, and probably net exporters of goods in order to pay interest on the 
debts we have incurred during the consumption binge of the 1980's.

That doesn't make things all right. We could of course balance our tradea€”and we willa€”by 
depreciation of our currency and reductions in our real wages. There is no trick to that. Every 
country that is so poor and so unpromising that no one will lend to it balances its trade, 
precisely by being so poor that it cannot afford to import more than it can pay for by
exporting.

And what it exports are the products of cheap labor. If American manufacturing is to win back a 
competitive edge against Japan, South Korea and West Germany, it will have to find a way to sell 
goods here, there and in third markets while paying high wages and earning a good return on 
investment. That can only happen if we catch up with, and at least sometimes
surpass, our rivals in productivity, quality and design.

The authors also make the probably valid point that, even if it were otherwise possible, the notion 
of a "post-industrial" economy fails against the proposition that modern, high-productivity 
business services are really inseparable from the production of the goods they service. The 
free-floating service sector will soon lose touch and the new producer will soon acquire
know-how.

This part of the argument is convincingly done. When Mr. Cohen and Mr. Zysman come to explain What 
Went Wrong with the United States manufacturing industry they have some interesting and reasonable 
things to say, but they also begin to flail around a bit. They tell war stories, they go in for 
heavy breathing (Revolutions and Transformations come thick and
fast), they profess confidence about things no one can possibly know and they fall into vagueness. 
Here is a representative example:

Those firms that understand, invent and implement the new possibilities of the emerging 
telecommunications technology will gain advantage. Critically, corporate strategies at home and 
abroad will use the possibilities of the new technology to capture competitive advantage. We 
cannot, of course, demonstrate how technologies that are only
now emerging will alter strategies in ways yet to be imagined.

A passage like that is not wrong; but it only appears to be saying something.

Here is a different sort of example. After 100 pages the authors announce

six hypotheses that will be used as premises from here on in.  First, technological developments 
can provoke rapid market shifts. Second, technologies are shaped by the needs and arrangements that 
exist in the nations from which they emerge. Third, some critical technologies can affect the 
competitive position of a whole range of industries;

and if one nation uses these technologies to gain a lead in a vital product, it can forge an 
important trade advantage for itself. These are strategic transformative in-dustries.

The other three "hypotheses" are similar. With all respect, these are truisms, not hypotheses.

In a way, I do not blame Mr. Cohen and Mr. Zysman, directors of the Berkeley Roundtable on the 
International Economy at the University of California, for falling into bad habits. They want to 
appear to be generalizing about a subject on which there are too few (or what is almost the same 
thing, too many) defensible generalizations. It is just a pity that they cannot be
content with the odd insight, the occasional plausible and discussable hypothesis. They do, in 
fact, produce some of those. They are interesting, for example, on the need for flexibility and 
adaptability in modern manufacturing required to give a rich, knowledgeable and finicky market what 
it wants when it wants it, quite the opposite of the mass-production philosophy
that made America great. There are other good moments. The trouble is that they do not know, any 
more than I do, exactly what let Japan and West Germany overtake United States industry. They 
should be content to tell a few good stories and give the reader furiously to think.

I do fault them for one cop-out. One of their central beliefs is that there has been a Revolution 
in manufacturing, its name is Programmable Automation, and that American industry has failed to 
capitalize on it. That may even be so. But then they go on,
We do not need to show that the new technologies produce a break with past patterns of productivity 
growth. [That] would depend not just on the possibilities the technologies represent, but rather on 
how effectively they are used.

What this means is that they, like everyone else, are somewhat embarrassed by the fact that what 
everyone feels to have been a technological revolution, a drastic change in our productive lives, 
has been accompanied everywhere, including Japan, by a slowing-down of productivity growth, not by 
a step up. You can see the computer age everywhere but in the
productivity statistics.

The authors also put some emphasis on the organization of skilled work in factories, and on the 
education of production-oriented engineers and executives. They mention the intriguing possibility 
that inattention to quality is a hangover from the age of mass production. But these side remarks 
only undermine the claim to generality, to a grand scheme. I would have
been happier with some well-deserved modesty.

On public policy, Mr. Cohen and Mr. Zysman have very little to say. They offer the advice that a 
hands-off policy is both impossible and undesirable. They suggest that public policy ought to be 
directed positively toward encouraging and assisting the achievement of indus- trial 
competitiveness. They suspect, probably rightly, that the United States Government has
allowed itself to be flimflammed by the Japanese for years on the matter of nontariff barriers, and 
ought to play a little hard-ball. All that sounds right to me. But there is nothing here to offer a 
Presidential candidate by way of something concrete to do. It would be an interesting memo, and it 
might yet get written.

Yes, there is, in Made in America, one sentence (on p. 72) and an associated footnote that refers 
to Manufacturing Matters.

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

