Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) My impression is that we are still more short of good projects to fund than we are short of 
money with which to fund them, so it is definitely worthwhile to throw your hat into
the ring if you have what you think is a good idea for how to discover important things about 
equitable growth:

Equitable Growth: 2022 Request for Proposals'. a€~O VERVIEW: The Washington Center for Equitable 
Growth seeks to deepen our understanding of
how inequality affects economic growth and stability. To do so, we support research investigating 
the various channels through which economic inequality,
in all its forms, may or may not impact economic growth and stability. Equitable Growth promotes 
efforts to increase diversity in the economics profession
and across the social sciences. We recognize the importance of diverse perspectives in broadening 
and deepening research on the topics in this request for
proposals. FUNDING PRIORITIESa€!. We support research inquiry using many different types of 
evidencea€!. Understanding the drivers of racial
stratification  is essential to identifying solutions that will lead to strong, broadly shared 
growth in the United Statesa€!. Our request for proposals is
organized   around four channels: Macroeconomics and Inequality, Human Capital & Well-being, Market 
Structure, and The Labor Marketa€!. WHAT WE
FUNDa€! Academic grantsa€!. Doctoral/postdoctoral grantsa€!. Dissertation Scholarsa€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/research-paper/2022-request-for-proposals/>

2) Michelle Holder does a very good job here. But I really wish journalists would not say a€oeyou 
get a raise, but then inflation takes it awaya€D. What is happening is that
because inflation is going on firms can afford to give nominal wagesa€”but real wages are not 
happening. Even though it is now easy to get a job, it is not easy to get a job with a
higher real wage attached to it. The labor market is thus not yet tight. But the failure of real 
wages to rise is not the fault of inflationa€”if anything, it is the fault of the fact that
there  is not enough demand pressure in the economy to rebalance factor shares, and that means that 
in a sense there is not too much but not enough inflation for real wages to grow
as nominal wage increases outpace price inflation:

Stacey Vanek Smith & Julia Ritchey: How Recent Worker Raises Are A a€oeMoney Illusiona€\3 a€~Like 
many other workers, Kristal Moorea€™ s
wages have increased since the start of the pandemic. Kristal makes her living driving around 
Hendersonville, N.C. as an Instacart shopper and an
UberEats driver. Although these gigs were profitable during the summer, the increasing price of gas 
started to eat away at her income. Now, Kristal says it
feels like ita€™ s cheaper for her to just stay at home. Today on the show, are peoplea€™ s raises 
actually real, or is it just a a€oemoney illusion?a€D
Economist Michelle Holder reveals how the economy has managed to pull off a disappearing act with 
peoplea€™ s wagesa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.npr.org/2021/11/10/1054451446/the-money-illusion-have-americans-really-gotten-a-raise>

3) This is my highly-recommended virtual seminar for next week:

Equitable Growth: Register for A Conversation with Dr. Michelle Holder. a€~In Conversation with 
Michelle Holder and Janelle Jones. The Washington
Center for Equitable Growth would like to invite you to a virtual event on Wednesday, November 17 
to celebrate Dr. Michelle Holder as Equitable
Growtha€™ s new President & CEO. Join Michelle for a conversation on the state of the U.S. economy 
and her vision for equitable, inclusive, and
sustained economic growth following the coronavirus recessionaCI

LINK: <https://pages .equitablegrowth.org/Conversation-w-Michelle-Holder.html>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) This simply does not compute. Under the aegis of Cicero Research, the University of Austin is 
starting up to fight a€oecensorship culture a€El. But Cicero Research is dedicated
to recommending free-market based solutions to public policy issues, rather than recommending the 
most effective solutions. If that is not censorship culture, what is? Cicero
Research is dedicated to the preservation of Texas a€oepolicies, values, and historya€D, rather 
than, say American ones, or humanistic ones, ora€”heaven forbid !a€’’cosmopolitan
ones.  If restricting yourself to advocating only a€oefree-market based solutionsa€D and a€oeTexas 
policies, values, and historya€D is not a censorship culture, I have no idea what
a censorship culture might be. David Mamet, Bari Weiss, Larry Summers, and Steven Pinker should 
have looked much harder at Cicero Research and thus at what they are signing
up for:

Kate Mcgee: University of Austin Wants to Combat Collegesa€™ So-Called Censorship Culture: 
a€~Therea€™ s a large yellow brick house with red trim
in Austina€™ s West Campus neighborhood, a stonea€™ s throw away from the University of Texasa€™ 
flagship campus. Inside sits the headquarters for
a new liberal arts university launching to counter what its founders believe is a growing culture 
of censorship on college campusesa€!. The announcement
garnered national attention partially for its board of advisersa€”a whoa€™ s who of higher 
education critics and iconoclasts such as former New York
Times columnist Bari Weiss, Harvard academic Steven Pinker, former Harvard University president 
Lawrence H. Summers and playwright David
Mameta€!. a€oeMost people, most institutions are really well intended,a€D Pano Kanelos, the new 
universitya€™ s president, said in an interview with
The   Texas Tribune. a€oeAnd I dona€™ t think therea€™ s like evil people out there causing this. 
Ita€™ s just a kind of cultural drift.a€Da€! Kanelos said
the proposed university has received a lot of financial support, raising $10 million in private 
donations in two months, allowing it to hire about seven staff
membersa€!. They also havena€™ t officially received nonprofit status from the federal government. 
They are using Cicero Research, which is run by
Austin-based tech investor and advisory board member Joe Lonsdale, as a temporary nonprofit 
sponsor. According to the 2020 tax filing for Cicero
Research,     its mission is to a€oecreate and distribute non-partisan documents recommending 
free-market based solutions to public policy issues,a€D and
a€oeproduce and distribute non-partisan educational materials about the importance of preserving 
Texan policies, values and historya€Da€l

LINK: <https://www.texastribune.org/2021/11/08/university-austin-founders-college-culture/>

2) I confess I do not understand why anybody thinks that the 1970s are a better model for what is 
now going on than either post-WWII or Korean War. This seems to me to be a
likely mistake that nobody who has learned any history could make:

Paul Krugman: History Says Dona€™ t Panic About Inflation: a€~Back in July the White Housea€™ s 
Council of Economic Advisers posted a
thoughtful article to its blog titled, a€oeHistorical Parallels to Todaya€™ s Inflationary 
Episode.a€D The article looked at six surges in inflation since
World   War II and argued persuasively that current events dona€™ t look anything like the 1970s. 
Instead, the closest parallel to 2021a€™ s inflation is the
first of these surges, the price spike from 1946 to 1948a€!. It was a one-time event, not the start 
of a protracted wage-price spiral. And the biggest mistake
policymakers made in response to that inflation surge was failing to appreciate its transitory 
nature: They were still fighting inflation even as inflation was
ceasing   to be a problem, and in so doing helped bring on the recession of 1948a€“49a€!. Demand in 
the United States actually doesna€™t look all that
high; real gross domestic producta€! is still about 2 percent below what we would have expected the 
economya€™ s capacity to be if the pandemic
hadna€™  t happened. But demand has been skewed, with consumers buying fewer services but more 
goods than before, putting a strain on ports, trucking,
warehouses and more. These supply-chain issues have been exacerbated by the global shortage of 
semiconductor chips, together with the Great
Resignationa€”the reluctance of many workers to return to their old jobs. So wea€™re having an 
inflation spurta€!. So what can 1946a€“48 teach us
about     inflation in 2021? Then as now there was a surge in consumer spending, as families rushed 
to buy the goods that had been unavailable in wartime.

Then as now it took time for the economy to adjust to a big shift in demanda€!. But the inflation 
didna€™ t last. It didna€™ t end immediately: Prices kept
rising rapidly for well over a year. Over the course of 1948, however, inflation plunged, and by 
1949 it had turned into brief deflationa€!. An inflation spurt
is no reason to cancel long-term investment plans. The inflation surge of the 1940s was followed by 
an epic period of public investment in Americaa€™ s
future, which included the construction of the Interstate Highway System. That investment didna€™t 
reignite inflation a€” if anything, by improving
Americaa€™ s logistics, it probably helped keep inflation down. The same can be said of the Biden 
administration^™ s spending proposals, which would
do    little to boost short-term demand and would help long-term supplya€!. People making knee-jerk 
comparisons with the 1970s and screaming about
stagflation are looking at the wrong history. When you look at the right history, it tells you not 
to panica€!


LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021Zl 1/11/opinion/inflation-history.html>

3) Adam Posen is right in that the lesson of everything since 2000 is that inflation expectations 
are very very very sticky. I see no reason to presume that, while they have proven to
be remarkably sticky on the downside, they will prove to be not sticky at all on the upside. Yet 
that is what you need to believe, plus believing that the Federal Reserve will not
respond appropriately, to be

Adam Posen: a€™ All experience since 2000 in the adv economies I contend disproves that asymmetry. 
Inflation expectations are at least as sticky to the
downside as they are to the upside. Thata€™ s why a 3% IT is not only good versus the ELB but as a 
correction to one-sided too low risk.I could of course
be wrong, but 20 yrs of data sez go for ita€!

LINK: <https://twitter. com/AdamPosen/status/1458873944652537861>

4) I disagree with this, but it is smart. After the start of the great recession America was 
starved of housing construction for a decade0(E especially construction in places where
people can get jobs of high productivity or where people can get very good value for their leisure. 
This shortage of supply means that today's elevated housing prices are quite likely
to be "fundamental". But 2005 was half a generation ago, and then the supply demand balance in 
housing was different. So values in 2005 were a bubble, I think, even though the
same inflation-adjusted values today are "fundamentals□:

Timothy B. Lee: The 2000s Housing Bubble Was Greatly Exaggerated’. a€~Housing prices are now above 
the supposedly unsustainable levels of 2006.
And thata€™ s after adjusting for inflation. And yet not very many people think wea€™re in the 
middle of a second housing bubble. Rather, most experts
believe that todaya€™ s housing prices reflect a€cefundamentala€D factors. Interest rates are at 
all-time lows, giving homebuyers more spending power.
And regulatory restrictions have created housing shortages in many metropolitan areas. But that 
leads to a question that at first glance might seem crazy:
what if those same explanations largely explain the housing boom that peaked in 2006? What if the 
big problem in the early 2000s wasna€™ t an excess of
houses but a shortage of them?a€! Thata€™ s the thesis of Shut Out, a 2019 book by Kevin 
Erdmanna€!. Erdmann argues that policymakers misdiagnosed
the causes of the housing boom, and that led to catastrophic policy errors. In particular, because 
the Federal Reserve thought housing was overvalued in
2007, it didna€™t cut rates fast enough in response to the housing crasha€!. If Erdmann and 
Schubert are right, wea€™re still living with the
consequences                                                                    of misdiagnosing 
the housing boom as a speculative bubblea€!

LINK: <https://fullstackeconomics.com/the-2000s-housing-bubble-was-greatly-exaggerated/>

5) Nominating a Republican to chair the Federal Reserve has never been a partisan issue. It is only 
nominating a Democrata€”any Democrata€”to chair of the Federal Reserve that
has been, since 1990, a "partisan" move that excites a partisan division:

Sylvan Lane (2018): Senate Confirms Jerome Powell as Fed Chairman’. a€~The Senate on Tuesday voted 
to confirm Federal Reserve Governor Jerome
Powell as the next chairman of the central bank by an overwhelming bipartisan margin. The vote on 
Powella€™ s confirmation quickly cleared the simple
majority of senators necessary to confirm him to replace Fed Chairwoman Janet Yellen on Feb. 3. The 
final count stood at 84a€“13, one of the widest
margins                                                                  of confirmation for a 
Trump nominee. Nearly all Republicans and a vast majority of Democrats supported Powella€™ s 
confirmation. Those
opposed included conservative GOP Sens. Ted Cruz (Texas), Rand Paul (Ky.), Marco Rubio (Fla.) and 
Mike Lee (Utah), and potential 2020 Democratic
presidential candidates Sens. Elizabeth Warren (Mass.), Kirsten Gillibrand (N.Y), Kamala Harris 
(Calif.) and Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.)a€!

LINK: <https://thehill.com/policy/finance/370329-senate-confirms-jerome-powell-as-fed-chairman>

6) Oliver Cromwell Cox was very wise and very insightful, and does not have nearly the influence 
today that he deserves:

Jamelle Bouie: What a€~Structural Racisma€™ Really Means’. a€~The 1948 book a€oeCaste, Class, and 
Race: A Study in Social Dynamics,a€D an
influential (if now somewhat obscure) work of sociological analysis by the Trinidadian scholar 
Oliver Cromwell Cox. If there is a reason to revisit this
specific book at this particular moment, it is to remind oneself that the challenge of racism is 
primarily structural and material, not cultural and linguistic,
and that a disproportionate focus on the latter can too often obscure the formera€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/ll/09/opinion/structural-racism.html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

