Subscribe now

FIRST:

Over at what Jeffrey Sachs once told us students was a€oethe only real newspapera€D, the Financial 
Times, Martin Wolf interviews Larry Summers, who instructs all and sundry on what they should do 
with the batons they hold:

Larry Summers: a€~The destabilisation wrought by British errors will not be confined to Britaina€™: 
a€~The only silver lining in this moment is, as Paul Krugman and others suggest, that long-term 
inflation expectations have not yet become entrenched. It is crucial that we take advantage of that 
by acting firmly to restrain inflation.

The global situation is no less problematica€!. Chinaa€!. The pressure for capital flight, the 
dependence on real estate, the magnitude of the demographic challenge, the complexity of running an 
economy in a way that both enforces political loyalty and spurs innovation, all of this suggests to 
me that there are likely to be very challenging years ahead in China.

With a tendency to turn substantially inwards and the real prospect of economic weakness in both 
the US and China, and with a European economy that will be held back at best and hobbled at worst 
by high energy prices, it is difficult to be optimistic about the global prospect. My hope, but not 
my expectation, would be that there would be serious dialogue, led by the international financial 
institutions, on:

• the need for a global stability strategya€!

• appropriated! policies in each of the major regionsa€!

• the development of capacities to provide substantial additional resources to the developing 
countriesa€!

• more satisfactory approaches than now exist fora€!r debt reliefa€!

• providing large-scale financing of a green transition

• fortifying the world against the next pandemic...

Larry is, I think, completely correct here on nearly e very thinga€’’all except two points.

The first point I would question is his belief that we are more likely than not to see another 
global plague sometime in the next fifteen years. Yes, increasing interconnection carries 
increasing risks of plaguea€”we find no Mediterranean-wide plagues before the Roman Empire, but 
under the empire we see such plagues starting in 165,249, and 541. But we are a much more 
biomedically aware and capable civilization.. What made COVIDa€“19 so difficult to
deal with for us was its asymptomatic respiratory spread. Unless we get another such, I think we 
will have a much easier time dealing with future plagues.

That said, plague prevention and control is a place we are a good dose of utilitarianism is smart: 
it is worth spending a lot to avoid even a small risk of a big catastrophe, and there is no way the 
private market sector will be willing to make the necessary upfront investments. Plague prevention 
and preparation thus ought to be done by the world government. Since we lack such a world 
government, that means: it needs to be done by the United States, with
whatever assistance we can cajole from other governments.

Larrya€™ s focus on the need to immediately build institutions to finance the rapid large-scale 
green transition is exactly on point. Green transition is now not a cost and a drag on the rest of 
the economy but a benefit. Technologies have advanced remarkably fast, and have progressed 
sufficiently far that measured real output in the future will be higher the faster we make this 
transition. It will be another Schumpeterian creative-destruction episode promising
enormous net benefits. As with all Schumpeterian creative-destruction episodes, the disruption it 
will cause will be immensea€”but less disruption than would letting global warming rip unchecked.

The disruption, however, will fall on different people and and politically powerful people than 
those who will suffer the most under global warming. Larry was in there pitching 30 years ago as Al 
Gore led the Clinton administration in its attempt to start this serious green transition 30 years 
ago. We got within one Senate vote of making it happen. Now we are 30 years late. The sorrow those 
30 wasted years will bring will be immense. We should not add more
years to the generation that the locust hath eaten.

Larry is also right on the need for more and better debt relief, and for more and better financing 
of productive investment in the global south. That is a World Bank standby, almost universally 
acknowledged by anyone who has spent any time at the World Bank, or, indeed, simply being aware of 
the state of the world and of the hideous tragedy that the extraordinarily unequal geographical 
distribution of economic growth. Building such institutions is, however, a
wicked problem: genuinely hard to deal with even with the best will and with proper attention from 
those who guide the worlda€™ s allocation of resources. The attention has almost never been 
present. And good will has often been absent.

Larry is also right on what he uphemistically callsna a€oeglobal stability strategya€D. That 
should, I think, be unpacked.

I think he means is that we are no longer in the pre-World War I world where Britain was the 
semi-benevolent hegemon or the pre-George W. Bush world in which the United States understood that 
it was Atlas, bearing the weight of the world on its shoulders. What would happen in a good world 
is that the governments and central banks of the United States, the European Union, and China would 
all recognize that there is too much potential blowback for all of
them from an inward an inward focus. They would instead recognize that they are global stewards, 
and that their successors will harshly condemn them if they focus on the impact of their policies 
on their own countries rather than on the globe as a whole.

Getting this message across has been, and will continue to be, very difficult.

The only other disagreement I have with Larrya€”and it is a relatively minor one in the grand 
scheme of thingsa€”is with respect to his position on inflation. He says that the a€oeonly silver 
lininga€D is that long-term inflation expectations have not yet become entrenched. I would prefer 
to put that differently: long-term inflation expectations are still anchored at a very low level. 
In fact, the bond-market five-year five-year forward expected inflation rate
breakeven is in the range in which I would normally start worrying that markets believe that long 
run monetary policy is going to be inappropriately tighta€”that the Federal Reserve will fail to 
keep inflation up at its 2% PCE chain-index target.

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

3.0

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

<D  2.0

k.

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0


0.8

2015              2016              2017              2018              2019              2020      
       2021              2022

Yes, we have short-run inflation. But at least some of this short-run inflation is something the 
market needs to deal in order to deal appropriately on the resource allocation with the tasks of 
rapid post-plague reopening and supply disruptions. Having an inflation target does not mean one 
should automatically get upset when there is a substantial deviation from that target for one year, 
or even two.

We need to balance the long-run risks: the risk of not tightening monetary policy enough, and of 
the deanchoring of inflation expectations followed by stagflation; the risk of tightening too far, 
and landing back in the long-run trap of secular stagnation at the zero lower bound; plus there is 
the additional risk of not tightening enough in the short run, and then over tightening in the 
medium run, which would bring us stagflation followed by a return to secular
stagnation. To imply, or to state, that there is a big risk only on one side is, I think, to get it 
wrong.

Larrya€™ s rhetorical tone is also, I think, a source of additional danger. Jay Powell as chair of 
the Federal Reserve has so far done a superb job. But he is not a Keynesian macroeconomist. Rather, 
he is a highly effectivea€’’indeed superba€’’manager and consensus-builder, and a Republican 
worthy. As such, he hearing from every single other Republican worthy that his policies have to 
date been inappropriately loose, and that he is well behind the curve.
(Never mind that Alan Greenspan was also said to be a€oebehind the curvea€n in the 1990s as he 
triggered the dot-com boom and what Janet Yellen called a€oethe fabulous decade .a€D)

If Lael Brainard were Chair of the Fed, I would think Larrya€™ s rhetorical tone largely 
appropriate. But she is not.

Hence I do not think it is wise to point to the danger of Charybdis, without also noting the threat 
of Scylla on the other side of the strait though which we are trying to row.
Share

One Video: Me on Bloomberg Surveillance

Tom Keene & co.: Bloomberg Surveillance : BLOOMBERG : September 26,2022 6:00am-9:00am EDT : Free 
Borrow & Streaming : Internet Archive

• <https://archive.org/details/BLOOMBERG 20220926 100000 
Bloomberg_Surveillance/start/10140/end/10620>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Matthew Yglesias: Europe should look at hard rationing and price controls for natural gas: 
a€~Europe has a problem this fall and winter... home heating... electricity generation... chemical 
manufacturing.... Lots of European governments are breaking out the subsidies.... In my view, 
Europe really needs a different approach... less... market mechanisms and subsidies... more... 
explicit rationing and price controls...

•  Helen Thomas: Liz Truss and business are at cross-purposes: a€~The UK prime minister is serving 
up an outdated version of what companies actually want.... In the absence of progress on 
supply-side reforms to immigration, infrastructure and planning, the temptation to reach for 
ideologically compliant but largely pointless wins will prove overwhelming...

•  Derek Thomson: A Simple Plan to Solve All of Americaa€™ s Problems: a€oeThe U.S. doesna€™ t have 
enough COVID testsa€”or houses, immigrants, physicians, or solar panels. We need an abundance 
agendaa€!

•  Jeremy Shapiro: We Are On a Path to Nuclear War: a€~The war in Ukraine has a direction that 
observers can see and that we should name. What began as a criminal Russian aggression against 
Ukraine has become a proxy war between Washington and Moscow...

•  Micah Sifry: How "Democracy Centers" are Sprouting Across the South: a€~Place-based year-round 
organizing aimed at combating voter suppression by meeting people where they live and around their 
community's pain points...

• Gregory Allen: Choking off Chinaa€™ s Access to the Future of AIa€!

•  Ben Thompson: Meta Meets Microsoft: a€~This Article was going to be easy: writing that Metaa€™ s 
metaverse wasna€™ t very compelling.... Trying the Quest Pro... was the turning point: I was really 
impressed, and that makes this Article much harder to write...

•  Rohit: Divining Talent: a€~The biggest question that I was left with immediately having read the 
book was, if youa€™re not Tyler Cowen or Daniel Gross, can these techniques work?a€!

• Zach Bleemer & al.: Metrics That Matter: a€~Counting What's Really Important to College 
Studentsa€!
Leave a comment

AJs:

Heather Cox Richardson: October 11,2022: a€~Last Thursday, October 6, the Republican members of the 
House Judiciary Committee tweeted: a€oeKanye. Elon. Trump.a€D... Antisemitism, Putina€™ s demands 
in Ukraine, and stolen documents seem like an odd collection of things for the Republican members 
of the House Judiciary Committee... to endorse before Novembera€™ s midterm elections. But... the 
Republican Party is demonstrating that it has
fallen under the sway of its extremist wing.... Marjorie Taylor Greene (R-GA)... that a€oeBiden is 
Hitler.a€D... Tommy Tuberville... Democrats are in favor of a€oereparationa€D because they are 
a€oepro-crime.a€n... Senate Republicans have introduced a bill to get rid of the drug pricing 
reforms the Democrats passed in the Inflation Reduction Act... strong signaling for their 
intentions going forward...

Edward Luce: The world is starting to hate the Fed: a€~It is Joe Biden, not Americaa€™ s central 
bank, who has the tools to cushion the global blow caused by domestic policy.  Biden has so far 
found little bandwidth to confront these challenges. He had a chance to make US vaccine technology 
available to the developing world. Indeed, he initially vowed to suspend Covid vaccine patents. 
That now looks like an empty gesture since his administration did not

follow up. As a result, a third of the worlda€™ s population has not yet had one vaccine while most 
westerners have had at least two a€” some as many as five. Had the US taken a stronger lead, the 
worlda€™ s inflation-inducing supply bottlenecks would not have been as chronic.  Americaa€™ s big 
shortcoming is political not technocratic. The global face of the problem is the mighty dollar but 
its causes lie deeper. The US can be oblivious at big moments to

the spillover effects of what it does at home, which often come back to bite it. Call it exorbitant 
indifferencea€!

Tom Nichols: J. D. Vance and the Collapse of Dignity: a€~One moment... struck me.... Trump 
declared, a€oeJ. D. is kissing my ass, he wants my support so bada€Da€’’while Vance was standing 
right by the stage. Last night, Ryan slammed Vance for selling his dignity.... Vancea€™ s reaction 
to Trump calling him out as a spineless loser at his own rally was to run up to Trump like a puppy 
that just got a treat, wagging his tail for another tasty biscuit  The

new American right, however, has blown past the relatively innocuous populism of the past 40 years 
and added a fetid cynicism about almost everything related to public life. Not only are the MAGA 
Republicans seemingly repelled by the idea of voting for someone better than they are; they support 
candidates who are often manifestly worse people than the average citizen, so that they may slather 
their fears about their own shortcomings and prejudices under a
sludgy and undifferentiated hatred about almost everyone in public officea€!a€™ m an adult. I get 
it. Our elected officials arena€™t saints, and only rarely are they heroes. But must they now be a 
cavalcade of clowns and charlatans, joyously parading their embrace of vice and their rejection of 
virtue? The Republican Party seems to think soa€!

Robert Tracinski: There Is a Name for Meloni's Blend of Socialism and Nationalism: a€~What is more 
striking about... Melonia€™ s speech is the weird combination of the conservative culture war and 
an anti-capitalist conspiracy theory about a€oefinancial speculators.a€D... There is no sane reason 
to believe that contemporary a€cewokenessa€D underpins big business or consumer culture or an 
international conspiracy of bankers. This Underpants
Gnomes-style theory in which wokeness equals profits doesna€™ t add up. But dona€™ t bother to 
examine this particular folly, ask only what it accomplishes. It allows for a kind of illiberal 
synthesis that combines the rhetoric and priorities of the illiberal righta€’’nationalistic, 
religiously intolerant, and socially conservative^’’with the appeal to envy of the illiberal left. 
Europe has a history of a more traditionalist style of conservatism, which rejects

capitalism as a symptom of modernization...

Heebie-Geebie: Tracking and Entrenchment of Status: a€~There's robust ed literature about how kids 
seem to fall off a cliff when they enter middle school, and I know that all complex phenomenon have 
a million contributing factors. But at the moment it seems starkly like a result of the heavy 
tracking into honors/general that starts right then.  You vaccuum out all the kids who are most 
successful in the classroom and who get the most positive feedback for

modeling good habits, and leave behind a critical threshold of students who are in a negative 
feedback loop for behavior and quickly becoming more and more disengaged. At the same time, I would 
not want to condemn my kid to a class that moves as slowly as you would need to move in order to 
ensure that everyone is understanding the new math. That is also soul-deadening. Bleagh...
Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription

Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Leave a comment
Subscribe now

