Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) This is truly excellent. Brand new:

Daniel Reck, Max Risch, & Gabriel Zucman: Tax Evasion at the Top of the U.S. Income Distribution & 
How to Fight If. a€~How much taxes do high-income Americans evade?
And what kinds of evasion tactics do they use?a€! In collaboration with researchers at the U.S. 
Internal Revenue Service, we show that American taxpayers with incomes in the top
1 percent are much more sophisticated than the other 99 percent at tax evasion. As a result, 
conventional estimates significantly underestimate the income and taxes evaded by the
rich. Our findings point to several key steps that policymakers could take to combat widespread tax 
evasion by the very top income earners in the United States. First and foremost
is the need for greater fiscal support for the IRS. Second, the IRS and Congress can target the 
ways in which the rich hide their incomes and obscure their actual tax obligations via
so-called pass-through businesses and hidden offshore accountsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/tax-evasion-at-the-top-of-the-u-s-income-distribution-and-how-to-fight-
it/>

2) How should economic policy be shaped over the next 4 to 8 years for equitable growth and 
inclusive prosperity? The Washington Center for Equitable Growth is re-launching
our research happy-hour conversations. I always found this to be an extremely excellent series. And 
it looks like the relaunch will be definitely up to par:

Equitable Growth: Research on Tap: Investing in an Equitable Future'. a€~April 6,2021 :: 3:00 
PMa€“4:30 PMET: Join the Washington Center for Equitable Growth and the
Groundwork Collaborative for the relaunch of our popular event series Research on Tap, a space for 
drinks, dialogue, and debate. In this installment, wea€™ 11 discuss the role of
increasing investments and revenues to address the underlying structural inequalities laid bare by 
the coronavirus recession and advance a sustained economic recovery that puts the
United States on a path to strong, stable, and broadly shared growtha€!. Featuring a fireside 
Firechat with Cecilia E. Rousea€!

LINK: <https://web .cvent.com/event/3c55e844-d0e2-4392-9d 1 c-5a2dd4e08199/summary>

3) Why I believe that the Democratic center left has to accede to the leadership of those of us 
further to the left, for the next four years at least. Yes, some of the things that a
Democrats-only coalition will do will be low-value things. But the alternative is to do nothing at 
all. While Republicans are no longer pushing to eliminate Medicare and privatize
Social Security, they remain unwilling to vote for anything that they cannot spin as a big defeat 
for a Democratic President. I did see this coming. Two years ago:

Brad DeLong (2019): a€xePassing the Batona€L2: The Interview. Herea€™ s Zack Beauchampa€!. 
a€DDeLong believes that the time of people like him running the Democratic
Party has passeda€!. Ita€™ s not often that someone in this policy debate a€” or, frankly, any 
policy debate a€” suggests that their side should lose. So I reached out to DeLong to
dig into the reasons for his position: Why does he believe that neoliberalsa€™ time in the sun has 
come to an end? The core reason, DeLong argues, is political. The policies he
supports depend on a responsible center-right partner to succeeda€!. This is no longer the case, if 
it ever wasa€!" Herea€™ s me: We are still here, but it is not our time to leada€!.
Our current bunch of leftists are wonderful peoplea€! social democratsa€! very strong believers in 
democracya€! very strong believers in fair distribution^!. And: We learned
more about the worlda€! [which] appears to be more like what lefties thought it was than what I 
thought it was for the last 10 or 15 yearsa€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/hoisted-from-the-archives-2019-passing-d0e>

4) The individual checks are very badly targeteda€’’neither an efficient relief nor a powerfully 
redistributive program. The rest of Biden-Rescue is, in my judgment, doing the right
things at the right time. Is it at the right scale? I certainly would not be happier if it were 
much smaller. And I really do not understand the judgments of those who say that it is too
largea€”unless they, somehow, have 15 Republican senators in their back pockets, willing to vote 
for infrastructure provided their debt-size a€oeconcernsa€n can be paid some lip-
service:

Erica Handloff: Equitable Growth Responds to Passage of American Rescue Plan: a€~Biden yesterday 
signed the American Rescue Plan, which provides $1.9 trillion in critical
public health investments to fight COVIDa€“19, support struggling families, and grant aid to 
states, localities, tribes, and territories. The Washington Center for Equitable Growth
commends Congress and the president for passing a federal rescue package that meets the scale of 
the problem and for taking steps to put our nation on a path to recovery that is
strong, stable, and broadly shared. In particular, the plan provides a third round of critical 
relief checks in response to the coronavirus recession and extends enhanced
Unemployment Insurance, ensuring workers who have lost their jobs or had their hours cut will 
continue receiving the supplemental $300 per week through September 6. Research
supported                                                                                 by 
Equitable Growth shows that robust UI benefits and direct stimulus, scaled to meet economic needs, 
can help mitigate hardship for individuals and families while also
boosting the wider economy, preventing a more severe downturn. Also notable is the lawa€™ s 
commitment to invest so that our nation emerges from the coronavirus recession
stronger, more resilient, and more equitable. Key investments include: Nearly $100 billion to 
combat the public health crisisa€l $350 billion in funding for state and local
governmentsa€! More than $100 billion to expand and improve the Child Tax Credit and Earned Income 
Tax Credita€! $130 billion to help schools reopen safely and $45 billion
for child care reliefa€l $12 billion for nutritional assistance^! But while the investments made in 
the American Rescue Plan are at an appropriate scale given current conditions, a
growing body of research highlights the ongoing structural reforms that are necessary to address 
the underlying racial, climate, and economic crises laid all the more bare by the
coronavirus pandemica€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/press/equitable-growth-responds-to-passage-of-american-rescue-plan/>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) The useful part of macroeconomic theory have always been very very small. The fact that we now 
recognize that is progress, of a sort:

Noah Smith: The Return of the Macro Wars: a€~Everyone quietly stopped believing in the usefulness 
of academic macro theory. Macro profs are still out there doing their jobsa€!.
With folks like Emi Nakamura, Jon Steinsson, Yuriy Gorodnichenko, and Ivan Werning on the job, the 
field of macro theory is chock full of top talenta€!. Buta€! macro theory is
just really, really harda€!. The financial crisis and the Great Recession really exposed the fact 
that macro theory wasna€™ t ready for prime time. When I gave a talk at the bank of
England in 2013, the central bankers there lamented how little usable insight and advice their 
complex academia-derived models had offered in a cruncha€!. Macro theory is going
to remain confined to the ivory tower for a while. In the meantimea€! heuristics, rules of thumb, 
and simple calculationsa€! are the order of the daya€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/the-return-of-the-macro-wars>

2) No. The United States is not yet close to exceding its debt capacity. And refusing to run up the 
national debt to finance the war against global warming carries with it much, much
greater risks than does doing so:

Peter Orszag: Joe Bidena€™ s Climate Bill Deserves Bold Fiscal Support. a€~Finally, and perhaps 
most crucially, the nature of the underlying risks is fundamentally differenta€!.
Government policy alone is clearly insufficient to bend down the carbon emissions curve. Innovation 
and changes in business and private activity must do a lot of the work. Yet if
we    are to have any chance of meeting the 2050 goal of net zero emissions, we cana€™ t afford to 
miss this moment on the policy front. Climate change is irreversible; the world
will never be the same. But fiscal risk is not and, if a fiscal crisis were to arise, we would 
still have options available. Over the next few months, the US is going to choose between
these two. In this unusual moment, the priority should be protecting the globe rather than the 
budgeta€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/d080f09e-efcd-490c-91be-8db8dccc56b0>

3) Dani Rodrik tries to make peace among and find common ground for economists, sociologists, 
ethnographers, and so forth. I agree with Dani that an exclusive focus on
a€oeinternal validitya€D does not get us nearly took where we need to be. But I have a different 
view of where the low-hanging fruit is. I think it lies in using reduced forms and
correlations to constrain our set of possible scenarios about how the world might be. We need to 
recognize more that, even where we cannot conclusively fix either a supply or


demand curve, we can say intelligent things about how the data correlations constrain their 
possible positions:

Dani Rodrik: How Economists and Non-Economists Can Get Along : a€~Other sleights of handa€! cause 
economists problemsa€! a€ceidentificationa€Da€! that answer[s] either
a narrower or a somewhat different version of the questiona€! randomized social experimentsa€! may 
not apply to other regions or countriesa€! variation across space may not
yield the correct answer to a question that is essentially about changes over timea€!. 
Economistsa€™ research can rarely substitute for more complete works of synthesisa€!.

Judgment necessarily plays a larger rolea€! which in turn leaves greater room for disputea€!. 
Nevertheless, such work is essential. Economists would not even know where to start
without the work of historians, ethnographers, and other social scientists who provide rich 
narratives of phenomena and hypothesize about possible causes, but do not claim causal
certainty a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/economists-other-social-scientists-and-historians-can-
get-along-by-dani-rodrik-2021-03>

4) This is a remarkably superb piece of work, and a great deal of it comes as a considerable 
surprise to me. Why is labor-side hysteresis not a bigger thing? How do I reconcile the
fact that productivity-side hysteresis is a very big thing with what I think I know about 
technological progress during the boom of the 1930s? Big questions that I need to grapple
with:

A’scar JordA , Sanjay R. Singh, & Alan M. Taylor: The Long-Run Effects of Monetary Policy. a€~Does 
monetary policy have persistent effects on the productive capacity of the
economy? Yes, we find that such effects are economically and statistically significant and last for 
over a decade based on: (1) identification of exogenous monetary policy
fluctuations using the trilemma of international finance; (2) merged data from two new 
international historical cross-country databases reaching back to the nineteenth century; and

(3) econometric methods robust to long-horizon inconsistent estimates. Notably, the capital stock 
and total factor productivity (TFP) exhibit strong hysteresis, whereas labor does
not; and money is non-neutral for a much longer period of time than is customarily assumed. We show 
that a New Keynesian model with endogenous TFP growth can reconcile
these empirical findingsa€!

LINK: <https://www.nber.org/papers/w26666>
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

5) It is already the case that everything that takes place is potentially observable. Access to the 
cameras and the satellites is, however, about to become democratized. How will
human society change when, once again as it once was, everything takes place in public in the 
village square?:

Economist: Small, Cheap Spy Satellites Mean ThereaC™ s No Hiding Place'. a€~Fleets of them will 
eavesdrop on every part of Eartha€™ s surface: In the middle of last year,
Ecuadorians watched with concern as 340 foreign boats, most of them Chinese, fished just outside 
the Exclusive Economic Zone (eez)a€!. There were more than 550 instances of
vessels  not transmitting their locations for over a daya€!. Both local officials and Chinaa€™ s 
ambassador to Ecuadora€! said all the boats were sticking to the rules. In October,
however, HawkEye 360a€! announced it had detected vessels inside Ecuadora€™ s eez on 14 occasions 
when the boats in question were not transmitting ais (see map)a€! fainta€!
froma€! navigation radars and radio communications^!. Smallsatsa€! the size of a large micro wave 
ovena€! cheap to build and launcha€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/science-and-technology/2021/03/18/small-cheap-spy-satellites-mean-theres-
no-hiding-place>

6) Trump lawyer Sidney Powell now says that all her claims about Dominion Voting Machines and 
Venezuelaa€”and many other claims as wella€”were transparently and
obviously false. Trumpa€™ s criminal insurrectionists say that they are entitled to believe that 
what the president says is the trutha€”and then act on that belief. The United States is
still  in huge, huge troublea€’’because of the current state of the Republican Party. Economic 
policy may well be the most important long-run issue facing America. But maintaining
democracy a€”in the public sphere and in the voting bootha€”is a much more important short-run 
issue:

Heather Cox Richardson: March 19, 2021: a€~Asked about what happened at the Capitol on January 6, 
87% percent of Americans say it is either a€oevery importanta€D (69%)
or a€oesomewhat importanta€D (18%) for law enforcement officials to find and prosecute the 
insurrectionists. Where those numbers fall apart is among Republicans who believe
that former president Trump won the 2020 electiona€!. 66% of people who believe that Trump won the 
election say that the riot at the Capitol is getting too much attention. Eighty-
two percent of them said Trumpa€™ s conduct leading up to the insurrection was not wrong and that 
the House should not have voted to impeach him. The danger of the Big
Liea€”the false idea that Trump actually won the 2020 electiona€”was always that it would convince 
Trump supporters to fight for him not because they thought they would be
fighting  to overturn the U.S. government, but because they thought they would be defending ita€!. 
The lawyer for Schaffer, the Indiana man, is trying to get leniency for his client
by arguing that the man was encouraged by Trump. a€oePeople have the right to believe the highest 
elected officiala€!. My client is not responsible for what happened on January
6a€Ua€!

LINK: <https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.eom/p/march-19-2021>

7) The use of one word "populism" to describe (a) the circa 1900 American movement for antitrust, 
utility regulation, access to finance, and easier monetary policies; (b) Latin-
American post-WWII inflation-redistribution leftist governance; and (c) current xenophobic 
ethnicisma€”that has led to a great deal of fuzzy thinking.

I have long noted current movementsa€™ much greater similarity to itaya€™ s Mussolini than to 
Nebraskaa€™ s William Jennings Bryan or Brazila€™ s Getulio Vargas. Frank
Fukuyama says that we should not do what would then be the natural thing, and call our current 
movements a€cefascista€D, because fascisma€™ s essence is one of military
expansion and social darwinist struggle against other nations. I am not sure that that is right. 
The current movements want to wage a war against a weak enemya€’’internal
dissenters and immigrantsa€”in a struggle to keep the nation a€cepurea€D. That seems to me to be an 
effective substitute:

Sergei Guriev & Elias Papaioaimou: The Enduring Populist Threat: a€~With so many populists still 
firmly in power, the notion that the trend will simply dissipate following
Trumpa€™ s defeat seems like wishful thinkinga€!. Trumpa€™ s brand of right-wing populism has not 
been definitively repudiateda€!. Economists often used a€cepopulisma€D
as shorthand for a particular brand of inefficient macroeconomic policya€! Latin American-style 
left-winga€!. [Now] a right-wing varianta€! xenophobic nationalism and religious
conservatisma€! identity and morality, not classa€! a a€oethin-centered ideologya€D that divides 
society into two a€oehomogenous and antagonistica€D groups: the pure people
and     the corrupt elitea€! brooks no nuancea€!. Post-crisis austerity only intensified votersa€™ 
resentmenta€!. The coronavirus pandemica€! could well fan the populist flamea€!.
Nota€! a conflict between haves and have-nots. If it did, a cartoon plutocrat like Trump would not 
have been able to campaign as the voice of the peoplea€!. Populism reflects the
rejection ofa€! freedom of expression, environmental protection, gender equality, racial and 
cultural diversity, and tolerancea€!. Economic insecurity likely compoundsa€! feelings
of uncertainty and isolationa€!. The link between cultural and economic insecuritya€! may explain 
why immigration is so centrala€!. As for Trumpa€! his policies did not have a
profound economic impact. But, like many populists, he did mount attacks on institutions, 
undermining confidence^! significantly undermined civility and trust, with its associated
impact on productivity and well-beinga€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/onpoint/the-enduring-populist-threat-by-sergei-guriev-and-elias-p
apaioannou-2021-03>

8) I do not understand how global public health did not recognize immediately what it was dealing 
with. Think of it: a disease that evolved to spread from bat lung to bat lung while
the bats hang upside down in their batcaves. Such a thing would not spread from human to human by 
touch. It would spread, overwhelmingly, through the air under conditions of
low air circulation. Surface disinfectants? Fomites? That's touch things with their feet, and do 
not then bring their feet up to their noses. And now millions are unnecessarily dead.
Please explain this to me:

Zeynep Tufekci: Aerosols: a€~Incredible New Zealand study on a mystery transmission in a quarantine 
hotel. For a while, a garbage can was suspecteda€”one of the very, very
few known suspected cases of fomite transmission. Turns outa€! ita€™ s aerosols. What a Kuhnian 
year this has beena€!. This year will clearly force an updating of our
understanding of role of aerosol transmission for respiratory pathogens. PLUS ita€™ s almost 
text-book Kuhnian in how ita€™ s happening: resistance, a€ceepicyclinga€D and
then  paradigm shift. Yes, feels like cold-comfort now as we are and have been late, but wea€™ re 
here. The new CDC director has already cited importance of aerosols as one of
things that most surprised hera€’’along with a good chunk of peoplea€!. Nothing wrong with a 
(sensible) amount of hand-washing but the issue is that our mitigations need a
hierarchy of energy and resources. Deep cleaning is still a big thing, parks/beaches are still shut 
down. Clearlya€’’very clearlya€”our stack was wrong-ordereda€!. Ita€™ s places
like Japan and South Korea and Hong Kong etc., whose scientists knew from day one that airborne 
transmission was a key routea€’’disregarding global official guidance
essentiallya€”that managed to beat back outbreaks to get back to near normalcya€!. Many had been 
through SARS and they have top-notch infectious disease specialists and
epidemiologist. Reading their documents from February/March of 2020 is mind-blowing. They went 
their own way. Ita€™ s all there. Ia€™ m still not sure why the global orgs
were     so wrong on this. Did these countries have special institutional knowledge (e.g. from 
previous outbreaks) that just wasna€™ t considered by the rest of the world? What
happened?a€! Sometimes people say a€oewait, doesna€™t everybody know airborne transmission is 
important?a€D If you follow the right experts on Twitter, I guess?


Meanwhile, a library in one ot the highest-educated US counties is afecequarantmingafeD returned 
books tor seven day safe ■

LINK: <https://twitter.com/zeynep/status/1373825780384432130%3E%3>
Leave a comment

My hope is that some stacks email push and discovery frameworks will allow me to return my 
weblogging audience to the state it was five years ago, back before the decline. I do
not think that this will ever become a profit center. But if you think that this is worthwhile 
enough that I should hire a research assistant to work on it, in addition to what time I can
spare, please subscribe:

Subscribe now

