I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for
your email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of 
supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the world. If you are enjoying the 
newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, please press the button below 
to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in

Subscribe now


FIRST: Nick Lichtenberg Interviews Brad DeLong

Brad DeLong & Nick Lichtenberg: Student Debt, NIMBYism, Inflation & His New Book on Our Economy: 
a€~[DeLong] sat down with Fortune ahead of his booka€™ s release to talk about whether the 
economya€™ s best days are behind us, or if we are doomed to live in a dystopia full of
killer robots flying through the air, scorching summer temperatures wrought by climate change, and, 
to paraphrase Allen Ginsberg (DeLong loves economic paraphrases, as the title of his book 
indicates), the best technical minds of the world turned to selling ads by figuring out how to scare
people. But he says he still believes that the United States is the a€oefurnace where the future is 
being forgeda€Da€!

Sometime between 2002 and 2020, the whole complexa€! that gave us the long 20th centurya€! 
technologically progressive, globalized[, the] United States [as] the furnace where the future was 
being forgeda€! dissolvesa€! leaves us in a new world in which China and India are likely 
superpowers and in which dealing
with global warming is likely to become all importanta€!.

On inflation, my view was that we were going to have some coming out of the plague. And it was 
going to be by and large, a good thinga€!. The plague has given us maybe 15 years of 
metaverse-style technological development in just over two yearsa€!. [Thus] the economy has a new 
[equilibrium] configuration: fewer
in-person workers in retail establishments, a lot more deliverators, substantially more goods 
productiona€! and information entertainment and production as wella€!shift[ing] a lot of people 
into new jobsa€! raise wagesa€! to pull people into what are the growth sectors of the post-plague 
economya€!. Plus, when you
reopen  the economy you discovera€! the supply-chain bottlenecksa€!. You need the prices of things 
where there are bottlenecks to go upa€! get people focused on how do we produce more of this 
stuffa€!

Wea€! shouldna€™t underestimatea€! that while three-quarters of the world went to bed seriously 
hungry in 1870a€! only about one-fifteenth of the world that does so today. Ita€™ s a huge 
accomplishment^!

There are people, my colleague and neighbor Fred Block among them, who think that one of the big 
things my book misses is [how] the neoliberal turna€!pushed corporations towarda€[maximum 
short-term profits, which meansa€! the Xerox Parcs and the IBM Labs and the Bell Labs werea€! 
dismantleda€!. The
lossa€! has been a huge minus and [perhaps] a major cause of the slowing down of technological 
progress. Another huge cause of the slowdown is our failure to keep expanding education. When my 
father went to Harvard in 1955, it admitted 900 men and 300 women. Now it has 700 men and 900 
women. Thata€™ s
only gone up from 1,200 to 1,600 in total over 65 years, not a huge increase in capacity in a 
country thata€™ s much more than doubled in sizea€!

People do not like creative destruction^!. The idea that your job or your industry, the fabric of 
your life, might blow away if some rootless Cosmopolis decides the business you work for no longer 
satisfies a maximum profitability testa€”that gets people very angry. Thus things have beena€! ever 
since the days of
William Jennings Bryana€!

I hopea€! younger people read my booka€! Ia€™ d like the younger generation to have a stronger 
sense of howa€! conflict between property rights and other rightsa€! in an environment of repeated 
creative destruction^! has greatly hobbled our ability toa€! use our huge technological powers to 
build aa€! human
worlda€”as opposed to a world in which Beijinga€™ s temperature reaches 120a€! anda€! killer 
robotsa€! flya€! above Ukrainea€!. Back when I was 12 or 13a€! utopian science fiction novels [had] 
amazing technolog[ies]a€! virtual reality and so fortha€! [while] dystopian science fiction 
novelsa€! [had] greenhouse
effect[s] and killer robotsa€!. We have manageda€! botha€!

Christina Romera€! [said:] a€oeWow, this [book] is actually readable.a€D And the more people who 
say that, the happier I ama€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• Simon Kennedy: How High to Hike?: a€~Chair Jerome Powella€™ s declaration that the increase had 
lifted rates into the range of neutrala€!. Mohamed El-Erian, chief economic adviser to Allianz SE 
and a Bloomberg Opinion contributor, said a€oethe zip code for neutral is above where we are now,a€D
and at least 50 basis points highera€!

• Robin Wigglesworth: How Passive Are Markets, Actually?: a€~As a percentage of the overall $42tn 
open-ended investment fund market tracked by Morningstar, the passive share has more than doubled 
from 16.8 per cent in 2012 to about 35 per cent todaya€!. Open-ended investment funds only hold a
slice of markets, and [people] conflate passivea€™ s mutual fund industry market share with its 
overall market ownershipa€!

• Lawrence Freedman: The Economic War: 'Cutting off Europe's gas supply is Putin's last throw of 
the dicea€!

• The Browser: Mother Utopia: 'Book Of The Week: 'Slouching Towards Utopia J. Brad DeLong I Basic 
Books I 2022a€!

• Ben Thompson: AI Chips and China, Geopolitical Considerations, Nvidia Considerations: a€~A 
long-time reader remarked to me last week about the amount of time that has been spent on chips 
over the last couple of yearsa€’’including an update last week about Nvidiaa€”but ita€™ s a topic 
that is
difficult to escape right now. Look no further than this seismic announcement from last week; from 
the Wall Street Journala€!

•  Economic & Business History Podcast: New Books Network: a€~Interviews with scholars of the 
economic and business history about their new books: J. Bradford DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia: 
An Economic History of the Twentieth Centurya€\

• Emily Linder/Friendly City Books: Book Talk: Brad DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia: a€~Mon, Sep 
12,2022,9:00 AM PDTa€!

AJs:

John Quiggin: a€oeRepublicana€D as an Identity: a€~Throughout his careera€! DouthataC™ s central 
theme has been the need for the Republican party to do something, anything, that would justify his 
unshakeable supporta€! a€oefamily-friendly tax reforma€! improving the stock of affordable 
housinga€! progressive
[health care] cost-sharinga€! a reduction in payroll taxes for lower-income workersa€! wage 
subsidies for low-income workersa€!a€D To say that the Republican Party has done nothing of the 
kind, while the Democrats have pushed many policies on this list, is to state the obvious. Yet 
Douthat continues to come up with
ways the Repubs could be kinder and gentler, while playing down the insurrection, attempted 
election theft and morea€!. The original cause of his Republican attachment was opposition to 
abortion. But even as ita€™ s become obvious there will be no grand resolution of this issue, 
therea€™ s no likelihood he will
change. And the same is true of Collins, who is supposedly a moderate on the questiona€!. being a 
Republican (or maybe, not a Democrat) is a central part of personal identitya€!. No matter what 
Trump or other MAGA leaders do, they will followa€!. Even as Trump is installed as President for 
Life, Douthat will still be
looking for silver linings, and Collins will be sure that this time, he has really changed for the 
bettera€!


AJs:

John Quiggin: a€ceRepublicana€D as an Identity: a€~Throughout his careera€! Douthata€™ s central 
theme has been the need for the Republican party to do something, anything, that would justify his 
unshakeable supporta€! aCcefamily-friendly tax reforma€! improving the stock of affordable 
housinga€! progressive
[health care] cost-sharinga€! a reduction in payroll taxes for lower-income workersa€! wage 
subsidies for low-income workersa€!a€D To say that the Republican Party has done nothing of the 
kind, while the Democrats have pushed many policies on this list, is to state the obvious. Yet 
Douthat continues to come up with
ways the Repubs could be kinder and gentler, while playing down the insurrection, attempted 
election theft and morea€!. The original cause of his Republican attachment was opposition to 
abortion. But even as ita€™ s become obvious there will be no grand resolution of this issue, 
therea€™ s no likelihood he will
change. And the same is true of Collins, who is supposedly a moderate on the questiona€!. being a 
Republican (or maybe, not a Democrat) is a central part of personal identitya€!. No matter what 
Trump or other MAGA leaders do, they will followa€!. Even as Trump is installed as President for 
Life, Douthat will still be
looking for silver linings, and Collins will be sure that this time, he has really changed for the 
betteraCI

