Subscribe now

FIRST: a€oeSlouchinga€C Q&A:

Anehita Okojie: Q&A with Blum Center's Chief Economist, Brad DeLong, on his new book, Slouching 
Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>: a€~In his new book, Brad DeLong, a UC Berkeley professor of 
economics and the Blum Centera€™s chief economist, offers an extensive account of the economic 
history and technological advancements of the a€oelong twentieth centurya€Da€”1870 to 2010. 
Slouching Towards Utopia presents a a€cesurvey of the
monumental transformations a€” and failed promises a€” brought about by an extraordinary rise in 
prosperity.a€D

Released Sept. 6, Slouching Towards Utopia has already been nominated for Best Book of the Year by 
the Financial Times.

a€oeWhat a joy to finally have Brad DeLonga€™ s masterful interpretation of twentieth-century 
economic history down on paper,a€D Christina Romer, a professor of economics at UC Berkeley wrote. 
a€ceSlouching Towards Utopia is engaging, important, and awe-inspiring in its breadth and 
creativity.a€D

a€oeOne thing I hadna€™t fully realized until reading Slouching Towards Utopia,a€D wrote Paul 
Krugman, a€oeis the extent to which progress hasna€™t brought felicity. Over the 140 years surveyed 
by DeLong, there have been only two eras during which the Western world felt generally optimistic 
about the way things were going.a€D
a€oeDeLong puts together the puzzle of the past to tell a story of remarkable achievements as well 
as setbacks,a€D wrote Minouche Shafik, director of the London School of Economics, calling the book 
a€oea great way to understand the forces that have shaped the world today.a€D


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: NYRB Ad:


September 22, 2022

"MAGISTERIAL."


6                  Wyatt Mason

10                  Martin Filler

16                Sophie Pinkham

20                Fintan O’Toole

26                   Clair Wills

32                    Eric Foner

38              Deborah Eisenberg

41               Anthony Grafton

44                   Elaine Blair

48                  Tim Flannery

50                    Wendy Xu

51               Steven Simon and

Jonathan Stevenson

54                 Nicole Rudick

58        Keeanga-Yamahtta Taylor

63                 David Motadel

Outdoing Reality

The Haunting of Hajji Hotak and Other Stories by Jamil Jan Kochai

Xanadu’s Architect

Julia Morgan: An Intimate Biography of the Trailblazing Architect
by Victoria Kastner, with photography by Alexander Vertikoff
Julia Morgan: The Road to San Simeon: Visionary Architect of

the California Renaissance by Gordon L. Fuglie, Jeffrey Tilman, Karen McNeill,
Johanna Kahn, Elizabeth McMillian, Kirby William Brown, and Victoria Kastner

Immune to Despair

The Orphanage by Serhiy Zhadan, translated from the Ukrainian
by Reilly Costigan-Humes and Isaac Stackhouse Wheeler

Boris Johnson: The Party’s Over
Family Lore

Esmond and Ilia: An Unreliable Memoir by Marina Warner, with vignettes
by Sophie Herxheimer

The Complicity of the Textbooks

Teaching White Supremacy: America s Democratic Ordeal and the Forging
of Our National Identity by Donald Yacovone

Their Glorious Facades

The Goodby People by Gavin Lambert

How to Cast a Metal Lizard

From Lived Experience to the Written Word: Reconstructing Practical Knoivledge
in the Early Modern World by Pamela H. Smith

Questioning Desire

The Right to Sex: Feminism in the Twenty-First Century by Amia Srinivasan

It’s Not Easy Being Green

Regenesis: Feeding the World Without Devouring the Planet by George Monbiot

Poem

These Disunited States

Where Does the Buck Stop?

Trust by Hernan Diaz

‘Hell, Yes, We Are Subversive’

Angela Davis: An Autobiography by Angela Y. Davis

Organize, Fight, Win: Black Communist Women's Political Writing

edited by Charisse Burden-Stelly and Jodi Dean

My Husband the War Criminal

—PAUL KRUGMAN

I SfijUCHTNt
TOWARDS-

UTOPJA

IN ECONOMIC BISTORT

IF TM TWENTIETH CEWtONV

J. BRADFORD DELONG

J. BRADFORD DELONG

SLOUCHING
TOWARDS UTOPIA

An Economic History of the
Twentieth Century

"J. Bradford Delong learnedly
and grippingly tells the

story of how all the economic
growth since 1870 has


66                 Dan Chiasson

68              Michael D. Gordin

70               Geoffrey Nutter

71              Joyce Carol Oates

73               Joshua Hammer

79             Adrian Nathan West

81              Laurence H. Tribe

85                  Letters from

The Hangman and His Wife: The Life and Heath of Reinhard Heydrich

by Nancy Dougherty, edited and with a foreword by Christopher Lehmann-Haupt

Rococo Risks

Venice by Ange Mlinko

Our Toxic Nuclear Present

Blown to Hell: America's Deadly Betrayal of the Marshall Islanders by Walter Pincus

Atomic Steppe: How Kazakhstan Gave Up the Bomb by Togzhan Kassenova
Atoms and Ashes: A Global History of Nuclear Disasters by Serhii Plokhy
Political Fallout: Nuclea r Weapons Testing and the Making of a Global
Environmental Crisis by Toshihiro Higuchi

Poem

Disaster Was Her Element

I Used to Live Here Once: The Haunted Life of Jean Rhys by Miranda Seymour

Promise and Disillusion in South Africa

These Are Not Gentle People: Two Dead Men, Forty Suspects. The Trial That Broke
a Small South African Town by Andrew Harding

Prisoners of the Past: South African Democracy and the Legacy of Minority Rule

by Steven Friedman

The Inheritors: An Intimate Portrait of South Africa's Racial Reckoning

by Eve Fairbanks

Bricky Mortar, and Rot

Cremation by Rafael Chirbes, translated from the Spanish by Valerie Miles

Deconstructing Dobbs

Robert Shapiro, Robert Kuttner, Harry C. Merritt, Gordon F. Sander,
and Kathleen Parthe

Joshua Leifer: The Road to the Israeli Elections
Lucy Scholes: Maeve Gilmore's Private Paintings
Lola Seaton: Scorched London

Phoebe Chen: Apichatpong's Soundscapes

Omar G. Encarnacion: Spain's Emptying Heartland

Subscribe to our ne wsletters for the latest reviews, dispatches, and intervie ws

A a bn z* n zxkrwi ZM           zw zV M/irer/                                   z>z7 zt/i/vizvzi r

created a global economy

that today satisfies

no one's ideas of fairness."

—THOMAS PIKETTY.

#1 New York Times-bestselling
author of Capital in

the Twenty-First Century

“Engaging, important,
and awe-inspiring."

—CHRISTINA ROMER.

University of California. Berkeley

“Slouching Towards Utopia

should be required
reading for anybody who
cares about the future

of the global system, and that
should be everyone."

—LAWRENCE H. SUMMERS.

Harvard University
basicbooks.com

M hachette X


9^yUWr\,&.^V 991,/               9 U/m 9 VWA G W 9 y COOUC U/O VC j/MVUWXK/a O^M/G -I <Z W

at nybooks.com/issues.

Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Jean Boivin and Alex Brazier: The Missing Inflation Debate: 'Central bankers... would rather 
just let the economy die to avoid any risk of inflation expectations de-anchoring (i.e. people 
believing that permanently higher inflation is a foregone conclusion from now on). They may be 
right. But ita€™ s not as simple as they make out. There is noperfect outcome, and a debate is 
needed about the relative merits of those available...

•  Michael Tomasky: Behind Bidena€™ s Policies Is a Sea Change in How Economists Think: 'For 
decades, economic theories and mathematical models were valued more than real-world evidence. But 
that has changed, and the impact on public policy will be hugea€!

•  Adam Gopnik: Calling Trump the F-Word - The New Yorker: 'I will lay claim to having been among 
the first to use the F-word about Donald Trump. This was in early 2016.... "Semi-fascisma€D... 
brings to mind George Carlina€™ s old joke about a€cesemi-boneless hama€Da€’’either the ham has a 
bone, or it doesna€™ t. This one does...

•  Joseph E. Stiglitz and Dean Baker: The Fed Should Wait and See: a€~With recent data showing that 
both inflation and inflation expectations have eased, it would be irresponsible for the US Federal 
Reserve to create much higher unemployment. Amid so much uncertainty, it should instead pause 
interest-rate hikes until a more reliable assessment of macroeconomicconditions is possiblea€!

•  Edward Luce: The Republicans Are Trying Hard to Defeat Themselves: a€~Trump-endorsed Senate 
candidates threaten to harm the partya€™ s chances in the midterm electionsa€!

• Substack: Substack Product Lab
Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

