From <http://deiongtoday.com>


I am Brad DeLong, an economics professor at the University of California at Berkeley and a sometime 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury. This is the weekly DeLongToday briefing. Here I 
hold forth here on the Leigh Bureaua€™ s vimeo platform on my guesses as to what I think you most 
need to know about what our economy is doing to us right now.
I promised Wes Neff when he agreed to provide the infrastructure for this that I and my briefings 
would be: lively, interesting, curious, thoughtful, and relatively brief.

Relatively.

I promised I would provide briefings on a mix of: forecasting, politics, macroeconomic analysis, 
history, and political economy.
Today is an economic analysis & policy briefing: is Biden doing the right thing?

But firsta€!

Wednesday the Republican House of Representatives caucus voted 145-61 to endorse Liz Cheney as one 
of their leaders, and thus to approve of her for her conscience vote to impeach Donald Trump. On 
Wednesday half the Republican caucus also gave bigoted conspiracy theorist, Marjorie Taylor 
Greenea€”she who has called for the assassination of Democratic House leaders, denied that mass 
school shootings really happened, and blames Jewish Space lasers
for forest firesa€”a standing ovation. The difference? The Cheney vote was a secret ballot. The 
Greene applause was public.

I harken back to 1993 and then-Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen from Texas describing to some of 
his senior staffa€”and to us junior spear-carriers standing in the back of the room against the 
walla€”what his long-time friend Bob Dole, the Republican senate minority leader, from Kansas had 
said to him. Dole had said that the Republican senate caucus was going to go all-in against 
Clintona€™ s deficit-reducing reconciliation bill. It needed to be done for the
countrya€™ s sake, Dole said, but we Democrats would do it. And he needed to position the 
Republicans to pick up seats, and the best way to do that was for none of the Republicans to be 
onboard voting for any of ClintonaC™ s initiatives so that Democrats could be blamed for whatever 
went wrong, with no water-muddying possible.

Ita€™ s been this way for thirty years. And I am tired of it. I would call the Republicans cowardly 
quislings, except that a not-inconsiderable portion of them appear to be true fascists rather than 
just going along with the Trump- and Fox-addled base, and World War II-era Vidkun Quisling stood up 
and was counted when he decided that enthusiastically backing Hitler was best for his career and 
the only political strategy that promised some hope for Norway.
So whatever is to be done needs to be done by the 50 Democratic senators and Kamala Harris, by 
Pelosia€™ s narrow House majority, and by President Biden.


So what needs to be done to bring about full economic recovery?
First, scotch the virus.

Status of the Plague


New confirmed cases of Covid-19 in United States, United Kingdom, Germany, Canada
and Australia

Seven-day rolling average of new cases (per 100k)

80

70

60

50

40

Reported New Cases Are Inadequate:

•  Australia almost surely detects the overwhelming majority of
its cases...

• Canada & Germany probably detect %...

•  The U.S? Maybe 16 now? But surely less before...

• Britain? The death toll suggests %...

The U.S. Right Now Is Moving:

Towards herd immunity...

T? m i nr H 1 A I 2Z f rm i nrLi vanpinotinn


~               /J ULAA V/14£^AA V Civ, V/111C4X AWAI* • •

• Roughly */3 via cases...

•  Great undertainty as to how long immunity will last, & how
effective it will be...

• Figure June 1 for the reopening...

2020-02-04

The new-case counts are, as always, hopelessly flawed. We guess that Australia detects pretty much 
every coronavirus case, that Canada and Germany detect 3/4, that the United States detects about 
half of cases now and a much smaller fraction last spring and summer and even into the fall, that 
that the United Kingdoma€”well, a case count per 100,000 roughly equal to the United States since 
mid-December, but 50% more deaths suggests that Boris
Johnsona€™ s MBGA government is only detecting a third. An Australian result was not out of reach 
for the United States, except for Trump. A German or Canadian response and result was definitely 
something we should have been able to achieve. We didna€™ t. 1 in every 100,000 Americans is now 
dying of COVID-19 every day. That means that roughly 1 in every 500 Americans is catching CO VID 
every daya€”that is 700,000 per day, and we are only
vaccinating 1,000,000. So far we have vaccinated 10% of the population with at least one dose. 
American Samoa has vaccinated 20%. Israel has vaccinated 60%.

Until the virus is scotched, opening up the country to restore full employment is a foola€™ s 
errand: the government needs to be focused on reliefa€’’getting families the incomes they need to 
live, and avoiding permanent shutdowns of businesses that we will want to have when summer comes 
around and the virus is scotched. But after relief, when the virus is scotched, it will then be 
time for recovery.

Employment & Prices

Employment-Population Ratio - 25-54 Yrs.

FRED   — Employment-Population Ratio - 25-54 Yrs.


67.5

2000             2010             2020               Jan 2017       Jan 2018       Jan 2019       
Jan 2020

2020-02-04

Recovery is going to start from a bad place: 143 million people at work when we want to have 155 
million. This 12 million job gap cannot be filled right now: it consists overwhelmingly of workers 
who do not want to be at work during the plague either for personal-safety or for caring-for-family 
reasons plus absent customers who do not want to buy during the plague for personal- and 
family-safety reasons. But it is not worthwhile trying to rejigger the
economy to find those 12 million people other jobs in other sectors, because we are highly likely 
to want them back in their old sectors by late summer at the latest. So right now we stand pat. And 
as we approach herd immunity we reopen. At the moment we are at, perhaps, 85 million with at least 
temporary immunity from past infection, 35 million with at least temporary immunity from one-dose 
vaccination, with that today total of 120 million growing at 2
million per day. That would mean May 1 for being close enough to herd immunity.

Will the economy then pick up its mat and walk? Will people then return to the businesses that they 
worked for in February 2020, and will those businesses reopen? The experience of 2008 to 2010 
strongly suggests that they will not. Back then there was not a biological plague, but there was a 
psychological and financial plague: a collapse of finance and credit that caused the absence of 
financing for business and of customers for products that produced an
employment gap of about our current magnitude. This financial and credit plague however, was over 
by the start of 2010. Interest rate risk premium had normalized. And financial institutions were 
recapitalized.

There was by 2010 no reason why the businesses that were in operation in December 2007 and 
profitable could not have resumed operation. You may object: but we needed to move workers out of 
construction, for, as Chicago economist now hiding out at the Hoover institution John Cochrane 
claimed in late 2008, "workers pounding nails in Nevada need to find something else to doa€D. But 
Cochrane and company never did their arithmetic. Employment in
construction was back below its long run average share of the economy by December 2007. The 
fundamental sectoral labor adjustment in response to the collapse of the housing boom had already 
been accomplished, and had been accomplished without mass unemployment.

And yet there was no rapid recovery. There were no green shoots. There was no "recovery summer". 
People did not return to the jobs in the businesses, or to the types of jobs and businesses, that 
they had been working in December 2007 overnight, or even in years. People needed to be pulled back 
into the labor market by stronger aggregate demand. And a Federal Reserve desperate to normalize 
interest rates and its asset portfolio and fearful of letting inflation
even kiss 2% per year, let alone climb above it even for a short period of time did not help. And a 
Republican Party eager to hamstring Barack Obama by demanding massive deficit reduction immediately 
without tax increases did not help. And an Obama administration conflicted and divided between 
those who saw the situation clearly, those who really believed that deficit reduction was Job One, 
and those who thought they were being clever by pretending to
prioritize deficit reductiona€”they really did not help the situation either.

Status of the Economy


FRED — All Employees, Total Nonfarm

156,000

FRED — Real Disposable Personal Income

— Real Personal Consumption Expenditures

18,000


152,000

i/Q nnn

17,000

in

16,000


£ 144,000

o
in

•O

S 140,000

in

□
O

c

h

136,000

132,000


128,000

2018           2019           2020

10,000

2018            2019            2020

2020-02-04

But might things be different this time? They might. And there is one important way in which the 
situation is different which might matter.

The way in which things are different is that there are now $3 trillion of extra savings on 
household balance sheets. There was no analog to this back in 2010. Then the shortfall in spending 
was tied to a shortfall in income with no massive household asset accumulations. There were no 
extra piles of savings that raised peoplea€™ s wealth to income ratios substantially above their 
previous targets. Now there are. Is this extra $3 trillion burning a hole in
peoplea€™ s pockets right now? If people spend 5% of it in the year after they feel safe from the 
plague Jf people spend 5% of it in the year after they feel safe from the plague, that would boost 
economic growth over the year from mid-2021 to mid-2022 by 3/4%-point relative to mid-2020 to 
mid-2021, if they spend 10%, the boost would be 1.5%-points. If they spend 20%, the boost would be 
3%-points. "We will", as my colleague Andres Rodriguez-Clare said
earlier this week, a€oelearn a lot about savings behavior in the American economy over the next 
year". I think that we are as likely to see 20% as 5% because I have been persuaded by Chris 
Carroll's theory that Americans savers are prudent but impatient: those with money are anxious to 
spend as long as they can convince themselves that they are unlikely to run out and find themselves 
even temporarily squeezed.

This time may well be different. I would not be surprised to find this timea€’’because of the great 
savings accumulation, itself for the result of the wise relief and income support policies of 
2020a€”we do get the semi-spontaneous market led recovery without extraordinary government support 
and action going forward that we did not get after 2010.
So does that mean that we should not enact extraordinary fiscal support for the economy right now? 
Does that mean that the Biden administration is barking up the wrong tree, as are Pelosi and 
Schumer, in moving their $1.9 trillion reconciliation relief, support, and stimulus bill right now?

No it does not. I might be very wrong about what the central tendency likely going forward is. And 
even if I am right, the balance of risks is extraordinarily asymmetric, and that calls for Biden 
$1.9 trillion reconciliation relief, support, and stimulus bill as insurance against a repeat of 
the anemic post-2010 recovery.

Edelberg & Sheiner


Projection of Real GDP under Biden Package and under Various CBO Paths

21.0

HAMILTON

OIECT

Papers Events Data Visualization Blog P

Uncertainties

• Where is the potential output


205

3

Pre* pandemic
(CBO, Jan. 2020)

Potential output
(CBO, Feb. 2021)

time path?


Projection of Real GDP under Senate Republican Package and under Various C1U) Paths

2022            2023

Q2 Q3

2023

Fob 3, 2021

A Macroeconomic
Analysis of a Senate
Republican COVID Relief
Package

Emp/oymentA Wages, Economic Security A Awerty, Effective Government

Ten Senate Republicans recently nop । i a $6i8-billion COVID relief
package. In this piece, we provide an analysis of that package and update our
analysis of the Biden Administration s $ 1.9 trillion fiscal package, using the
current-law GDP projections Out the Congressional Budget Office (CBO)
released   on Monday.

We estimate that the Republican plan would raise the level of real (inflation
adjusted) gross domestic product (GDP) by 1.6 percent in the fourth quarter
of                                      2021 and 0.8 percent in the fourth quarter of 2022, above 
the baseline
level that CBO projects under current law (which assumes no additional
fiscal support). This would leave GDP about 0.8 percent below its pre-
pandcmic trajectory at the end of both and 2021 and 2022, but a touch above
CBO's estimate of potential GDP-the maximum sustainable level of output
(see figure 1).

What is the appropriate
target relative to potential
output?

• Because of the need for
offset

• Because of the asymmetry
in risks

• Because of the option
value of Federal Reserve
response

• What is going to happen
with all of the pent-up
savings from the plague
year?

<https://www.hamiltonproject.org/blog/a_macroeconomic_analysis_of_a_senate_republican_covid_relief_p
ackage> 2020-02-04

Louise Sheiner of Hutchins and Wendy Edelberg of Hamilton have just carried out a nice exercise. 
Let me enlarge it so that you have a chance of seeing ita€”I have clearly failed at the task of 
slide construction here. There.

Sheiner and Edelberga€™ s standard Keynesian counterfactual forecasting exercise is truly useful. 
It shows us that the Biden $1.9 trillion reconciliation bill is not well targeted as a fiscal 
stimulus. Indeed, it is not: it is aimed at relief and support, as well as stimulus. Doing it 
through reconciliation, and doing it in such a way as to hold all 50 Democratic senators in 
supporta€’’those impose considerable constraints on the form that it can take. As optimal policy, it
fails. As politics as the art of the possible, it succeeds. And as boosting an economy that may 
well need boosting, it seems effective. By contrast, the Republican bill isa€! too small unless you 
accept CBOa€™ s depressed view of what potential output is, and unless you in addition hold on to 
the belief that there should be no recoupment of output gaps: that potential output is a ceiling 
rather than an average that you should aim to fluctuate around.

But it is a mistake to conceptualize the problem of policy design here as one of producing a policy 
that is forecast, in the central case, either to get back to potential quickly or to overshoot 
potential and then return in such a way as to balance out the demand-side component of the 
coronavirus plaguea€™ s depression of economic activity below potential.

Instead, optimal policy design at this point in time needs to deal with uncertainties, asymmetry, 
and option value. It all discussion needs to start from the premise that this is quite likely going 
to be the only bite at the apple. It might be possible to provide a further substantial fiscal 
boost to the economy at sometime in the future if it is needed. But it might well not be 
politically possible. And it would be massively imprudent to plan on and expect that it will be
politically possible to do so.

What that means is that we need to make the chance that we will wish in the future that we had done 
more today very low.

How about the chance that we will wish in the future that we had done less today? Do not we need to 
worry about that? We do need to worry about that to the extent that we do not trust the Federal 
Reserve to take appropriate steps to control inflation should such steps become necessary. Let me 
postpone the question of whether we trust the Federal Reserve to the next slide.
In order to calculate what we should do in order to have a low probability of wishing in the future 
that we had done more, we need to push our judgments to the edge of significant probability in 
three respects:

1. We need to act as though we are highly optimistic as to the pace of potential output growth: we 
do not want, after the fact, to look back and say: a€oegee, we really underestimated potential 
output growtha€D.

2. We need not to be optimistic about the multiplier in this case. We need to suppose that that 
portion of the reconciliation bill money that is going to those who normally have a low marginal 
propensity to consume will not materially boost the pile of savings that are burning a hole through 
their pockets and that they will spend quickly. It is thus prudent to suppose that only those 
income boosts that hit the truly liquidity constraint will be spent. And that
is significantly less than half of the total spending bill.

Shouldn't we then take steps to craft the bill more carefully? If we are giving money away to 
people who are not liquidity constraint for no good macroeconomic purpose, shouldn't be halt those 
expenditures and so avoid such a great increase in the national debt? If interest rates were 
positive, the answer to that question would be yes. But since interest rates are not positive and 
since we want to have this bill having its impact on the economy over the
summer, it seems best to postpone issues of debt management and income distribution and so forth 
into the future, and right now focus on relief, support, and stimulus.

3. We need to presume that Americans understand that the world is now a riskier place then we 
thought it was a year and a half ago. Thus we need to presume that increases in wealth to income 
ratios even among rich households reflect the changing definition of prudence rather than sums that 
are going to be rapidly spent-down as a result of impatience.
All of these, I think militate strongly in support of the Biden packagea€”as long as we can trust 
the Federal Reserve to handle problems that emerge if the policy does what it is supposed to do, 
that is, boosts production and employment up above potential output and beyond full employment in 
the absence of monetary policy offset.


JEROME POWELL

Federal Reserve Chair

Jay Powell

Will not make the “tamper
tantrum” mistake again...

•  May make other mistakes...

•  Has enormous power to cool off the
economy quickly

•  To shift people out of construction
(and export and investment goods
industries more generally)

•  And into providing services

•  A powerfully asymmetric situation...

2020-02-04


JEROME POWELL

Federal Reserve Chair

iviay maKe omer mistakes...

Has enormous power to cool off the
economy quickly

•  To shift people out of construction
(and export and investment goods
industries more generally)

•  And into providing services

A powerfully asymmetric situation...

2020-02-04

So can we trust the Federal Reserve? One thing seems certain about Federal Reserve chair Jerome 
Powell: he will not make his "temper tantrum" mistake again. He and his open-market committee will 
not prematurely withdraw monetary stimulus before he sees the whites of rising inflation's eyes.

Does that mean that he will hesitate to withdraw monetary stimulus and impose monetary austerity if 
we do reach a situation in which inflation control is rightly the highest priority of the Federal 
Reserve? Will Jay Powell, if faced with a return of the 1970s, turn into the equivalent of an 
Arthur Burns or a G. William Miller and, either out of a sense of loyalty to his political patrons, 
or out of fear of losing the Federal Reservea€™ s independence through policies
Congress judges as excessively austere, or by misjudging the situation?

Never say a€cenevera€D.

But the odds of that seem to be extremely low. First, the more we look at how industrial economies 
behave, the more it looks as though the inertial inflation of the 1970s was a one off produced by a 
unique confluence of a central bank that did not take its price-stability mission seriously and an 
economic structure in which major moves in the price of a single crucial commoditya€”oila€”both of 
very powerful fundamental importance and served as a signal on
which market participants could condition their own inflation expectations. No key fundamental role 
of oil, no conditioning of market expectations of inflation on the oil price, no absence of trust 
in central banks, then no inflation of the 1970s.

I am highly confident that Jerome Powell will neither make the Greenspan mistake of viewing 
unregulated bubble finance with benign neglect, the Bernanke mistake of premature normalization 
come hell or high water, nor the Burns-Miller mistakes. He will make his own mistakes. But we do 
not know what those will be. And we should not fear him making Burns-Miller mistakes in the future 
and have that fear lead us into avoiding appropriate fiscal stimulus
out of fear of what is in the shadows.

So, yes, I do think that the Biden reconciliation bill for relief, support, stimulus is highly 
appropriate at this moment and deserves to pass. And I think it will do a lot of good in easing 
America's recovery. At this point it is traditional to say something about sausage and legislation. 
But I do not think we really need to say that: this looks to me like as much of a technocratic 
triumph as one can have in this fallen sublunary sphere, in this sewer of Romulus in which
we live and work.

I am impressed with the policy design and with the marshaling of the political coalition.

That is, I am impressed with the policy design and the marshaling of the political coalition among 
the Democrats.

I am not so impressed with the Republicans. These do not seem to me to be partisan issues here. I 
could understand if the right wing of the Republican Party, with its ideological blinders and its 
deficiencies and its inability to avoid thinking of an optimal policy is very different when a 
Democrat than when a Republican is president were to show up with a $600 billion proposal. I am 
rather embarrassed for the moderate, non-fantasy-based wing of the Republican
Party when that is what it brings to the pot-luck

Ia€™ m Brad DeLong. This is the DeLongTODAY Briefing. Thank you for watchinga€!

3070 words 31:36 2020-02-05

