a€\fy their goal as a minority ethnocentric demogocracy? "Neofascist" still seems the best word to 
me, but I am told that is much, much, much too impolite to use, even on the
internet:

No, Alexander Hamilton was not a president. But he should have been:

Alexander Hamilton (1787): America as "Grand Experiment": Federalist #9: It is impossible to read 
the history of the petty republics of Greece and Italy
without feeling sensations of horror and disgust at the distractions with which they were 
continually agitated, and at the rapid succession of revolutions by
which they were kept in a state of perpetual vibration between the extremes of tyranny and 
anarchya€l. From the disordersa€l advocates of despotism have
drawn argumentsa€! against the forms of republican governmental [and] decried all free government 
as inconsistent with the order of societya€!. I trust
America will be the broad and solid foundation of other edificesa€! which will bea€l permanent 
monuments of their errors.

But it is not to be denied thata€! if it had been found impracticable to have devised models of a 
more perfect structure [than the petty republics of Greece
and Italy], the enlightened friends to liberty would have been obliged to abandon the cause of that 
species of government as indefensible. The science of
politics, howevera€! has received great improvement^! distribution of power into distinct 
departmentsa€l balances and checksa€! judges holding their
offices during good behaviora€l representation of the peoplea€! by deputies of their own 
electiona€! are means, and powerful means, by which the
excellences of republican government may be retained and its imperfections lessened or avoideda€!

LINK: chttps://www.gutenberg.org/cache/epub/18/pg 18 .html>

Plus, as always:

Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived 
in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men
are created equal. Now we are engaged in a great civil war, testing whether that nation, or any 
nation so conceived and so dedicated, can long endurea€!.

It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before usa€”that from these 
honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for
which they gave the last full measure of devotiona€”that we here highly resolve that these dead 
shall not have died in vaina€”that this nation, under God,
shall have a new birth of freedoma€”and that government of the people, by the people, for the 
people, shall not perish from the earth.


