Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) 62 very good people funded for the net year. I confess that this program has been even more of a 
success than I had projected. It turns outa lot of very good people really were
budget-constrained in doing the very good work that they wanted to do. And I confess that I had 
underestimated how much the research-university system as it worked a decade ago
was  constraining visible economic research away from policy-relevant and equitable growth-relevant 
topics:

Equitable Growth: [A] Record $1.39 Million in Research Grants for Scholars Examining Economic 
Inequality & Growth'. a€~The Washington Center for
Equitable Growth today announced its 2021 research grants, with funding of $l,392,795a€”a 
record-breaking levela€”awarded to 62 researchers. These
scholars are studying the various channels through which economic inequality, in all its forms, 
impacts economic growth and stabilitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/equitable-growth-announces-record-l-39-million-in-research-grants-for-s
cholars-examining-economic-inequality-and-
growth/>

2) It was Martha Bailey who first hammered it into me how incredibly important fertility control 
and child spacing is for womena€™ s economic opportunity in America over the
past centurya€”how huge a friction the fact that you might, any year, find yourself bearing a child 
was. This was the case even after the demographic transition. While before the
demographic transition in the time of astronomical child and maternal mortality the biosocial 
fertility load on women was enormous, even afterwards the inability to engage in
reliable family planning was extraordinarily disruptive for womena€™ s economic activity. Here Kate 
Bahn and Maryan Janani-Flores review the evidence:

Kate Bahn & Maryam Janani-Flores: Economic security & Opportunity for Women Under Threat After U.S. 
Supreme Court Takes Anti-Abortion Stance
in Texas: a€~Nearly 1 in 4 women in the United Statesa€! will have an abortion by the age of 45, 
and nearly 1 in 20a€! will have an unintended
pregnancya€!. An intrinsic link between reproductive justice and economic opportunitya€! 
contraception^! access to abortiona€!. Bodily autonomy and a
persona€™  s ability to decide when, how, and under what circumstances to plan for a family is 
critical toa€! a womana€™ s job opportunities and financial
securitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/economic-security-and-opportunity-for-women-under-threat-after-u-s-supr
eme-court-takes-anti-abortion-stance-in-
texas/>

3) Theoriesa€”very good theoriesa€”that economists were exploring around 1900 are now back again. 
But why did they all but vanish from, say, the 1920s through the 2000s? My
view is that first the a€oeliquidationista€n ideological turn of macroeconomics toward solving the 
problem of finding some reason that business cycles were functional for the
system and then the neoclassical synthesisa€™ s prioritization of rational representative-agent 
model made such a€ceHobsoniana€D theories profoundly uncool:

Atif Mian: Understanding the Macroeconomic Consequences of Rising Income & Wealth Inequality in the 
United States - Equitable Growth: a€~With
Ludwig Strauba€! and Amir Sufia€! we show that when the rich save morea€! an increase in inequality 
leads to a persistent fall in the long-term interest
rate and an growing reliance on credit for sustaining aggregate demanda€!. Downward pressure on 
aggregate demanda€! countered through increased
borrowing by nonrich households. This kind of upswing in aggregate demand, however, is 
a€oeindebteda€na€!. It can only be sustained over time if
interest rates falla€!. The theory of indebted demand fits the empirical patterns observed in the 
United Statesa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/understanding-the-macroeconomic-consequences-of-rising-income-and-wealt
h-inequalitv-in-the-united-states/>

4) Ever since the days of Alexander Hamilton, investors have regarded the debt of the U.S. 
government as a very valuable and safe asset. In all but rare and exceptional times, the
only return return debt purchasers and holders have demanded from the U.S. government is that it 
maintain the real value of the wealth they have entrusted to it. The U.S.
government should invest this wealth wisely and prudently, yes, in the highest societal-value 
projects, yes. But the main consideration and the bottom line is thata€’’except in the
1870s  and 1880s, and in the 1980sa€”the U.S. government has never faced a debt-financing 
constraint as long as long as its investments yield any possible positive return in the
form                                                                                of additional 
taxes collected downstream at all. Worried that this may change in the future if interest rates 
rise sharply? Then issue inflation-adjusted consols, and lock in real
debt payments permanently:

Barry Eichengreen: The Coming Public Debt Scare Should Not Spook U.S. Policymakers from Investing 
in Physical and Social Infrastructure: a€~[In
our] In Defense of Public Debt, my co-authors and I show how governments, through the ages, have 
resorted to issuing public debt to meet emergencies
and address pressing social needsa€!. My co-authors and I argue [that] expenditure restraints that 
limit the U.S. economya€™ s capacity to grow would be
counterproductive from even the narrow standpoint of debt sustainabilitya€!. Do our nationa€™ s 
infrastructure problems rise to the level of a national
emergency?  Some answer yes, on the grounds that our physical infrastructure is old, dangerously 
vulnerable to climate change, and inadequately green and
digital.  A significant minority in the U.S. Senate insists otherwisea€!. One way of adjudicating 
the dispute is to ask whether additional infrastructure
investments will pay for themselvesa€!. We really should be comparing apples with applesa€”real 
returns with real returns. Currentlya€l any investment
that  yields a positive real return is effectively self-financinga€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-coming-public-debt-scare-should-not-spook-u-s-policvmakers-from-inv
esting-in-phvsical-and-social-
infrastructure^

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)I confess I do not understand why a President Biden should shy away from a a€oepotentiallya€! 
contentious confirmation fighta€!a€D to get the most-qualified person who
agrees with the administration^™ s view of what Americaa€™ s interest is as Chair of the Federal 
Reserve Board. Ita€™ s not like a a€cecontentiousa€D Senate debate over the
nomination of Lael Brainard to be Fed Chair would reduce the number of Republican senators who vote 
for Biden initiatives in the future, is it? And yet the Washington Blob thinks
that avoiding a€oecontentiona€D is a thing that has immense valuea€”but only when Democrats do it. 
Supporters of a Jay Powell renomination seem overwhelmingly concerned
with dodging the question of a€oels Jay Powell the best possible Fed Chair for the next four 
years?a€D:

Gregg Gelzinis: a€™ The best case (yet still realistic) scenario with a Powell reappointment is 
that the ceiling on the progressive FinReg agenda is
materially lowered. The worst case is that the entire progressive FinReg agenda is stymied 
&Trumpa€™ s FinReg agenda persists at the Feda€!

Jordan Weissmann: a€™ Ita€™ s pretty obvious hea€™ s not ideal on FinReg, either from the lefta€™ s 
or the admina€™ s perspective. The question is
whether the status quo there is so terrible that ita€™ s worth ditching him and facing a 
potentially more contentious confirmation fight. Ia€™ d say noa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/FinGregg/status/1429159236274204675>

2) I take Matthew Yglesiasa€™ s point here. But is this the right way to frame the question? The 
answer to a€oeshould local governments commit the additional money to make the
bus free?a€D is almost surely yes. The answer to a€oeshould local governments that have a fixed 
pool of money to spend on buses provide a lower-quality free bus than the current
system?a€n is almost surely no. To fail to distinguish between these two questions leaves Matt, I 
think, somewhat confused. The real question is: which of the many worthwhile
things   that bus systems could do with more money can be framed so as to win voter support and 
enthusiasm?

Matthew Yglesias: Should the Bus Be Free?: a€~In most cases, the better investment is to make the 
buses bettera€!. In a very abstract way, free transit
makes sense. Cars generate pollution and traffic externalities. Ideally, we would fully price those 
externalities with a carbon tax and congestion charges.
But  in the real world, both are politically difficult, so an equivalent way of addressing the 
issue would be to subsidize the low-externality optiona€”the
busa€”by making it freea€!. [but] the question becomes: if you assume your transit agency has a 
bunch of extra money, is eliminating fares the best way to


turn money uno nuersiup r BUS nuers want oeuer ouses, not cneapera^।. suiting lares is a relatively 
low priority compared to oilier tilings you can

straightforwardly achieve with more money, like improving bus frequency and reducing bus crowdinga€!
LINK: <https://www.slowboring.eom/p/free-bus>

3) At a $2 billion/year burn rate, Uber has three more years before something big has to change. I 
used to think that it would end by (a) shareholders getting close to zeroed-out, (b)
top managers getting stock in a reorganized company, (c) some investment bank putting in a little 
money in exchange for equity, and for a company that had feature parity a€’’costs,
wait times, etc.a€”with licensed taxicabs with the exception of a less-friction front end in the 
form of an app. The problem for Uber appears to be that they have done that, and the
ride-hailing business still is not profitable. So I do not know how it will end in three years or 
so:

Cory Doctorow: End of the Line for Uber. Accounting Tricks & Tech Gimmickry: a€~Uber is a bezzle 
(a€oethe magic interval when a confidence trickster
knows he has the money he has appropriated but the victim does not yet understand that he has lost 
ita€D). Every bezzle ends. Ubera€™ s time is upa€!.

Uber didna€™ t need self-driving carsa€”it needed us to think it would have self-driving carsa€!. 
Thata€™ s the bezzle at worka€”a dazzle op that keeps
new money flowing ina€!. $3.7b of its assets are actually worthless paper from failing overseas 
ridehail companies. Ubera€™ s cash reserves declined by

$4.7b in 2020 and $937m more in the first half of 2021. Theya€™ ve got $6.7b in the banka€!. 
Ubera€™ s invented a new field of accounting:
a€oeAdjusted EBITDA profitability .a€D EBITDA is a€oeearnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, 
and amortization.a€D a€oeAdjusted
EBITDAa€Da€! ignored $2b in expensesa€!. I live in Burbank, where Ubers were never more than 5 
minutes away. Now, a 30 minute wait is
commona€”and the fare is comparable to the licensed taxi companya€!

LINK: <https://marker.medium.com/amp/p/901 e3077bbbc>

4) I think Paul Krugman has this right. That is, I think there is a 75% chance he has this right:

Paul Krugman: Ia€™ m Still on Team Transitory. a€~Consumer prices have risena€! over the past six 
monthsa€! [by] an annualized inflation rate of
almost 9 percenta€!. There are plenty of people out there proclaiming the return of stagflation^!. 
What was the difference between the a€™70s inflation
and  the inflationary spikes associated with World War I, the end of World War II or the Korean 
War? The answer is that those earlier bursts of inflation
were easy come, easy goa€!. What explained that difference? In the 1970s inflation became 
a€ceembeddeda€D in the economya€!. The question is
whether inflation is similarly becoming embedded nowa€!. The best way to figure out whether 
inflation is getting embedded is to ask the people who
would   be doing the embedding. That is, are companies acting as if they expect sustained inflation 
in the future? The answer, so far, seems to be noa€!.
Companies arena€™t acting as if they expect lots of future inflation, where they can hike wages 
without losing competitive advantage. Theya€™re acting,
instead, as if they see current inflation as a blip. So far, then, Ia€™ m still on Team Transitory: 
I think things are looking more like 1951, when inflation
briefly hit 9.3 percent, than 1979. And if we finally get this pandemic under control, the 
inflation of 2021 will soon fade from memorya€! L

LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2>

5) This is not an existential threat to the pharmaceutical industry. It is an existential threat to 
a PhRMA CEO who has pushed the line of maximum confrontation vis-a-vis a
government seeking to reduce the growth rate of the cost of the pharmaceutical part of the public 
health care programs:

Margot Sanger-Katz: Biden Administration Goes Bigger on Cutting Drug Prices: a€~The administration 
endorses a proposal for the government to
negotiate on prices for all U.S. purchasers, not just Medicarea€!. It amounts to a signal to 
congressional Democratsa€!. Senators working on the package
have released few policy details as they wrestle with their approach. Steve Ubl, the C.E.O. of the 
industry trade group PhRMA, called the policy a€oean
existential risk to the industry.a€D Major across-the-board price reductions would result in 
reduced revenues for drug companies, and could hurt
companiesa€™ ability to spend on research as well as cause smaller companies to close if investors 
leave the sector, he said. His group and the companies
it  represents have mobilized to fight such a plana€!

LINK: 
<https://www.nvtimes.com/2021/09/09/upshot/biden-drug-prices-analvsis.html?te=l&nl=the-upshot&emc=ed
it up_ 20210910>

6) This is an extremely good introduction to what the Chinese government is hoping to do with 
respect to semiconductor independence, and now nearly impossible it will be for the
Chinese government to do it:

Jordan Nel: China, Semiconductors, & the Push for Independence: a€~China is chasing technological 
independence. Broadly, theya€™re doing a
remarkable job at it barring perhaps in the field of semiconductors. And what is the crux of all 
modern tech? Semiconductors^!.. The 14th 5YP is the first
to emphasise complete self-reliance and suggest building a near end-to-end chain locally. It is 
also the first time where China is in a strong enough position
nationally to fund this foray and the first time where it is considered a matter of national 
securitya€!.. Process nodes (chips) come in a range of sizes, for a
range                                                                    of use cases: Large nodes 
(>180nm) are usually analog. Generally, they are used for taking in non-binary input and converting 
it to binary (like how
sensors in EVs a€ceseea€D the road and disseminate that information across the rest of the system). 
Medium nodes (28nma€“180nm) are majority logic
nodesa€! process computation, like for CPUs and GPUs. Small nodes (lOnm to 22nm) are split 80/20 
between memory and logic respectivelya€!. The
minimum for 5G rollout at scale is 5nm nodes, so their production underpins AI advancement, 5G, and 
much of the datacentre progression^!.. Each type

of node is dominated by specific producers, with specific expertise. Because analog chips (the 
large ones) are far easier to make, the competitive
advantages of firms in this domain come from their breadth of products, reach of marketing 
channels, and scale-derived cost advantagesa€!. The only way
China can become technologically independent isa€! China needs foundries. But foundries need 
equipment, processes, a large talent pool, clients, and an
incredible amount of know-how. While money goes a long way to creating these, there are some things 
money cana€™t buy. Each equipment
manufacturer   has built up expertise developing that particular equipment (and maintenance) stack 
over decades of cycles and consolidation. For real
independence, China needs to be self-sufficient not just in producing foundries, but also producing 
the equipment that foundries rely on. Otherwise, the
chokepoint  just moves further up the chaina€!

LINK: <https://lillianli.substack.eom/p/china-semiconductors-and-the-push>

7) Out of my lane, but I cannot let this pass by without noting it:

John Scalzi: An Actual Party of Death, Now : a€~Had any other Republican been president when COVID 
hit, that person would likely have been
reasonably sensiblea€L But Trump was (and is) a smugly ignorant poltroon, so of course the rest of 
the GOP, craven and spineless as it is, fell into line.
The  result is that now ita€™ s murdering its own constituency, and dragging this out for the rest 
of usa€!. The majority of the people hospitalized and
dying are the unvaccinated, and the people who are willfully unvaccinated are the people who have 
been lied to by the GOP and their media outlets about
vaccines and masks and a€oepersonal freedoma€D and so on. When GOP politicians in Florida or Texas 
(or Ohio!) block a local masking or vaccination
policy, the people most at risk for that policy (aside from, you know, children and those who 
actually have a legit medical reason not to be vaccinated) are
Republicans and conservatives^!. The GOP messaging machine has for decades done a fine job at 
making poor and middle-class white people vote
against    their own economic interests through the clever use of aspirational messaging and veiled 
racism, but the fact it is now actively working to kill off
its basea€!. Now, Ia€™ m aware that the GOP is simultaneously trying to blame Joe Biden for trying 
to contain the pandemic, and trying to blame him for
when its constituents die, and some of the most committed constituents are with their dying breaths 
denying that what they have is actually CO VID at
alla€!. Ia€™ m going to leave you with this: An article on the CNN site, about a conservative 
county in Missouri, where the vaccination rate is 27% and if
you wear a mask, youa€™ re branded as a Democrat. Are people dying there? Oh, yes, they are, and 
still people are hesitant to get a simple, free and
effective vaccine because now ita€™ s been made political, and because theya€™re told, in so many 
ways, not to. Herea€™ s a quote from the piece:
a€oea€™                                                                     I had both shots of the 
vaccine, and people just acted like, a€oeOh, it doesna€™ t help,a€Da€™ Cheryl Wetton said. a€~It 
bothers me

sometimes that people act like Covid is a big joke. I always want to say, a€~Well, why dona€™ t you 
just come right up here to the cemetery, and Ia€™ 11
show you my husbanda€™ s grave? And I can show you ita€™ s no joke.a€™ Wetton actually did say that 
to a guy in town, she later confirmed. a€~He
just got real quiet.a€™" Theya€™ re killing their own people because of politics. Not anyone else. 
Not any more. And theya€™ 11 keep doing it. For as
long as it takes. Because this is how they think they will wina€!

LINK: <https://whatever.scalzi.com/2021/09/10/an-actual-party-of-death-now/>


8) Out of my lane. But I remember Jim Stock telling me in February 2020 that unless everyone greed 
afterthe fct that our Covi response had been overkill, we would not have done
enough. The Biden administration did not hear this message. And so last March, I presume, they 
decided then that these measures would be overkill. Better late than never:

Heidi Przybyla: a€™ The Full Biden Plan Here: 1. Requiring All Employers with 100+ Employees to 
Ensure their Workers are Vaccinated or Tested
Weekly 2. Requiring Vaccinations for all Federal Workers and for Millions of Contractors. 3. 
Requiring vax for over 17 Million Health Care Workers at
Medicare and Medicaid Participating Hospitals and Other Health Care Settings 4. Calling on Large 
Entertainment Venues to Require Proof of Vaccination
or Testing for Entry 5. Requiring Employers to Provide Paid Time Off to Get Vaccinated 6. Requiring 
Staff in Head Start Programs, DOD Schools, and
Bureau of Indian Education-Operated Schools to be Vaccinated 7. Calling on All States to Adopt 
Vaccine Requirements for All School Employees 8.

Providing Additional Funding to School Districts for Safe School Reopening, Including Backfilling 
Salaries and other funding withheld by states for
implementing CO VID Safety Measures 9. Using the Dpt of Educationa€™ s Full Legal Authority to 
increase access to in-person instruction 10. Getting
Students  and Staff Tested Regularly 11. Making At-Home Tests More Affordable Sending Free Rapid, 
At-Home Tests to Food Banks and Community
Health Centers Expanding Free, Pharmacy Testing 12. Bigger push on monoclonal antibodies, more 
support for small businesses affecteda€!. These are the
primary takeaway sa€!

LINK: <https://twitter. com/heidinbc/status/1436050623439548424?s=21>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

