Subscribe now

FOCUS: Grey Area Podcast wiA% Host Sean tiling:

The free-market century is over NOV 21 a<... 53:19

Sean filing talks with economic historian Brad DeLong about his new book Slouching Towards Utopia. 
In it, DeLong claims that the "long twentieth century" was the most consequential period in human 
history, during which the institutions of rapid technological growth and globalization were 
created, setting humanity on a path towards improving life, defeating scarcity, and enabling real 
freedom. But... this ran into some problems. Sean and Brad talk about the
power of markets, how the New Deal led to something approaching real social democracy, and why the 
Great Recession of 2008 and its aftermath signified the end of this momentous era.

References:


• Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century by J. Bradford DeLong 
(Basic; 2022)

• The Road to Serfdom by Friedrich von Hayek (1944)

• The Great Transformation by Karl Polanyi (1944)

• Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy by Joseph Schumpeter (1942)

• "A Short History of Enclosure in Britain" by Simon Fairlie (This Land Magazine; 2009)

• "China's Great Leap Forward" by Clayton D. Brown (Association for Asian Studies; 2012)

• What Is Property? by Pierre-Joseph Proudhon (1840)

• The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order by Gary Gerstle (Oxford University Press; 2022)

• Apple's "1984" ad (YouTube)

• The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money by John Maynard Keynes (1936)

• "The spectacular ongoing implosion of crypto's biggest star, explained" by Emily Stewart (Vox; 
Nov. 18)

•  "Did Greenspan Add to Subprime Woes? Gramlich Says Ex-Colleague Blocked Crackdown" by Greg Ip 
(Wall Street Journal; June 9,2007)

•  "Families across the country are tightening their belts and making tough decisions. The federal 
government should do the same," from President Obama's 2010 State of the Union Address (Jan. 
27,2010)

• "The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte" by Karl Marx (1852)

• Why We're Polarized by Ezra Klein (Simon & Schuster; 2020)

•  The Paradox of Democracy: Free Speech, Open Media, and Perilous Persuasion by Zac Gershberg and 
Sean Illing (U. Chicago; 2022)

<https://overcast ,fm/+QLhUY ods>

Excerpts:

Friedrich von Hayeka€! [the] geniusa€l saw more clearly than anybody else thata€! if you can get a 
decentralized system up and running in which you solve the problems of information and 
incentivizationa€! then you can turn humanity into an incredibly effective anthology intelligence^! 
provided that market prices are in accord with social valuesa€! provided that the income 
distribution accords with, you know, utility and deserta€!

Friedrich von Hayeka€! technology is doing wonderful thingsa€! [but] that is all we can ask fora€!. 
the marketa€! [to] make us richa€!. Accept that the market giveth, the market taketh away, and say, 
blessed be the name of the market. To which Karl Polanyi respondsa€! try to impose a system in 
which the market rules everything, in which the only form of social power comes from your wealth, 
in which the only rights that are recognized are property rights,
and people will explode in revolution and resistancea€!. Peoplea€! think they have other rights and 
demand that those be recognizeda€!

Schumpeterian creative destruction [means] the forces-of-productiona€! technological hardware 
underneath human societya€! [is] radically transformed every generation^!. We have toa€! rewrite 
the sociological, political, economic, organizational softwarea€! run[ning] on top of this new 
forces-of-production hardwarea€!. Frantically rewrit[ing] ita€! caught between the Hayekian 
imperative that we need the market economya€! [and] the Polanyiana€!
[imperative] that people will reacta€!. They may react well a€“ FDR and the New Deal. They may 
react very badly a€“ Benito Mussolini and fascism. But they will reacta€!. That interplay is most 
of the political economy story of humanity since 1870a€!

Right wing classical liberalism in exilea€! get back to the pre-Great Depression Systema€!. People 
who [see the New Deal Order as]a€! much too bureaucratica€! prone to rent-seekinga€!. Much of the 
1960s counterculture^!. The assembly-line office culture that was necessary for the prosperity of 
social democracy [seen as] positively inhumana€!. Steve Jobs's 1984 Super Bowl Macintosh launch 
commerciala€!. How good the market can bea€! at
crowdsourcinga€! summon[ing] the ingenuity of everyone who wants to be prosperous and get richa€!. 
Plus the idea that taxes had been too high on the rich, so they spent their time buying political 
influence and figuring out how to evade taxes rather than being good entrepreneurial job creators. 
And [the idea] that subsidies had been too great for the non-richa€! people feather-bedding their 
way through society and not contributingS!. The New Deal order was
distributing   a lot of good things to people as entitlements simply because they were citizensS!. 
Social democracy producesS! people who are very fearful and angry about how others are being the 
moochers and the takers. AndS! neoliberals wantS! to say that success in the market is a sign of 
your moral virtuea€!

We've already had several revolutions in forms of effective communication, both for scientific and 
other forms of knowledge, and for political organization a€“ in our lifetimesa€!. And that has 
powerful, powerful, powerful implications for how we organize ourselves, and the economy is very 
much a part of organizing ourselvesa€!. The experience of all past generations weighs like an Alp 
upon the brains of the living as Karl Marx wrote in his 18th Brumaire of
Louis Bonaparte, trying to understand how the hell it could be that someone who he regarded as as 
much of a clown as we regard Donald Trump wound up as Emperor of France in 1851 simply because he 
had a famous uncle, in large parta€!

Our modern media shifts us from a public sphere of compromise a€” one in which everyone agrees we 
have a pretty comfortable common home here, but the Left says we need to build an addition, and the 
Right says we have to fix the holes in the roof a€” to one in which people trolling each other on 
Twitter forever. Who are your enemies? Who do you identify your enemies as the first step everyone 
takes in gaining an audience, so that you cannot even be
heard without starting out, as we cannot compromise with these people, whoever the 'these peoplea€™ 
area€!

You have managed to get magnificent things out of all of your guests so far in all of this new 
series that you've starteda€!. If we do get down to a world in which podcast hosts are no longer a 
mass, but instead a very small elite group, you are certain to be among thema€!
Share

One Image:

"Winning Swing" Voters Who Supported Democrats in Key
Races Were Moderates Who Disapproved of Biden

"Winning swing" voters were largely moderate (63%) with a slight Democratic lean (+3D). They held 
low approval ratings for Biden
overall (net -30) and on the economy (net -41), but were deeply unfavorable toward Republican 
figures and groups including MAGA
Republicans (net -43 favorable) and Donald Trump (net -30 favorable)

Winning Swing Voters: 2022 voters who voted for winning Democratic candidates in key Senate, 
Governor, and House races but hold some historic non-Democratic


oenavior, including seir-reporxea non-biaen voters in zuzu ana mixea past voting oenavior including 
tor Kepuoiicans.


Party identification

Democrats                      Independents                   Republicans

Net Democrat

+3


Ideology

Biden overall approval

Biden economic approval

Favs toward MAGA Republicans

Favs toward Trump

Favorable

18                21

Favorable
35

Moderate

I       I     

63

Conservative

20

Disapprove

Disapprove

70

Unfavorable

61

Unfavorable

65

Net Lib

-3

Net Approval

-30

Net Approval

-41

Net Favorable

-43

Net Favorable

-30


Nationwide survey of 5,013 self-reported 2022 voters conducted November 1-November 14, 2022. Vote 
shares in House, Senate, and Governors’ races are adjusted to
reflect the estimates of the national popular vote as of November 14, 2022.

For more info, visit navigatorrcsarch.org.

navigator.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  David Frum: d~I wrote today about the GOP plan to make the next Congress all Hunter Biden, all 
the time... and why the plan is doomed to flopd!

•  Ian Millhiser: d~My concern is that the Hunter Biden investigations uncover some 
stupid-but-exceedingly-minor mistake by Joe Biden d” perhaps he used a personal email account to 
conduct work business d” that gets turned into a giant scandal by irresponsible and incompetent 
journalists...

•  Sean Illing d~The delusion here is still thinking the other side is playing the 20th century 
liberal democratic game in which bad faith actors "flop" if they fail to make a convincing case. 
Flooding the zone with shit succeeds merely by creating spectacle and dictating coveraged!

•  Jeremy Wallace: The end of GDPism in China as we know it (?): d~Untangl[ing]d! from the land, 
finance, and real estate triangled! the over-investment, over-indebtedness, overly-speculative 
natured!. Increasingly, the questions of Chin ad™ s climate politics and policy are intimately 
connected to these questions about growth and ending the construction-based political economy of 
local governments. More on this in the weeks, months, and
years to corned!

•  Kay Halloran: How To Summon The Devil, And What To Do When He Shows Up: d~The sorcererd™ s 
summoning ceremony first debuted on the early modern stage as the morbid set piece at the center of 
Christopher Marlo wed™ s Tragical History of the Life and Death of Dr. Faustusa€\

•  Daniel Seligson & Anne E. C. McCants: Polygamy, the Commodification of Women, & 
Underdevelopment: d~A suite of social conventionsdiage gaps at marriage, bride price, 
sequestration, and discrimination and violenced! are overrepresented in polygamous societiesd!. 
Polygamy produces a chronic scarcity of marriageable femalesd! [with] demonstrably significant 
consequences for social, institutional, and economic developmental

• Corey Robin: Empathy & the Economy : d~The left is still preoccupied with the decades-old debate 
over which is more important: recognition of our identities or material redistribution. Adam Smith 
ended that argument before it begand!
Leave a comment

AJs:

Jonathan Bernstein: Joe Manchin Charted a Better Course for House GOP: d~The party would benefit 
more from seeking bipartisan agreements than from allowing extremists like Matt Gaetz and Marjorie 
Taylor Greene to wield influenced!. Two dozen House Republicansd! likely to face difficult 
re-election battles in 2024d! reaching across the aisle to work with Democrats. Extremists, for all 
their bluster, have no such optiond!

Dan Pfeiffer: Stuff You Should Consume - Nov 22,2022: a€~a€ceDemocrats on Offense: Messages That 
WinaCDby Data For Progress: a€oeThe most effective Democratic messages featured lowering costs; 
creating new jobs; spurring domestic manufacturing; taking on Big Pharma; protecting Social 
Security; highlighting the economic benefits of clean energy production; and defending abortion 
rights by emphasizing bodily autonomy, personal privacy, and
government interference. The most effective Democratic policies featured protecting and expanding 
Social Security; reforming prescription drug pricing; increasing the minimum wage to $15 an hour; 
improving infrastructure; raising taxes on individuals making more than $1 million a year; and 
requiring a background check for every gun purchased!

Alan Crawford: Brexit Is Back to Haunt the UKd™ s Conservatives: d~For years now, discussion of the 
negative impact of the UKd™ s decision to leave the European Union has been taboo. Governing 
Conservatives, most notably Brexit booster-in-chief Boris Johnson, insisted it was time to move on, 
and that the benefits of doetaking back controldD were only just around the corner waiting to be 
plucked and savored. That kind of wishful thinking has
evaporated along with the UKd™ s economic fortunesd!. A weekend report that senior figures in Prime 
Minister Rishi Sunakd™ s government are seeking a closer trade relationship with the EU sparked an 
angry reaction from Brexit hardliners who oppose any dilution of the UKd™ s regulatory freedoms. 
That prompted Sunak to deny any such plansd!


Subscribe now
Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 50% off a group subscription
Give a gift subscription

