Subscribe now

First:

J. Bradford DeLong: The Great Labor Market Shakeup'. a€~The COVIDa€“19 pandemic has restructured 
entire industries and changed the way workers think about their jobs, especially in low-paid 
occupations and sectors. But a full recovery in employment is still possible: policymakers and 
employers need only offer workers the support they are demandinga€!. There is a standard list of 
explanations for this so-called Great
Resignation^ I fear of COVIDa€‘T9a€! disrupted childcarea€! workersa€! flush with casha€! the past 
two years have prompted more people to stop and smell the rosesa€!. Re-knitting the division of 
labor to restore employment after a massive disruption is always a long and painful processa€!. It 
would not be good policy for the current recovery to be bound by this low speed limit. A rapid 
recovery requires that US employers provide
low-wage workers with the better bargains that, by quitting en masse, they obviously are 
demandinga€! a rapid removal of the main supply-side barriers to labor participation: a lack of 
childcare and the virus itself. And it requires a high-pressure economy, so that it is obvious to 
workers on the sidelines that there are good opportunities out therea€!. Both workers and 
entrepreneurs need a great deal more support right now than American
business as usual can provide. Europe provides a promising example. The US needs more of thema€!

LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/great-resignation-us-lack-of-support-for-workers-by-j-
bradford-delong-2021-12?>
Share

Forthcoming September 6,2022 from Basic:

Slouching Towards Utopia: A History of the Long Twentieth Century. Paragraph 2: In between [1870 
and 2010], things were marvelous and terrible, but by the standards of all of the rest of human 
history much more marvelous than terrible. The one-hundred and forty years 1870-2010 of the long 
twentieth century were, I strongly believe, the most consequential years of all humanitya€™ s 
centuries. And it was the first century in which the
most important historical thread was what anyone would call the economic one, for it was the 
century that saw us end our near-universal dire material poverty.

Share Brad DeLong1 s Grasping Reality

One Picture:

Marc Van Ranst 0

@vanranstmarc

In Gauteng (Zuid-Afrika) gaat de omicron-golf wel heel
steil omhoog.

Translate Tweet


12000

Waves of COVID-19 cases in Gauteng

i----------------------------------------------------------------- 1------------


11000

CD

(/)

Today!

Dr Ridhwaan Suliman
twitter: @rid1 tweets

rrt 10000


Wave, davs

11:38 AM • Dec 4, 2021 • Twitter for iPhone


Very Briefly Noted:

• Erik Loomis: Dole. a€~Leta€™ s be very clear up front here. Bob Dole was not a nice man. He was 
never a nice man. Just because he was the last World War II veteran to win the nomination to the 
presidency at the same time that Boomers were dealing with their parental issues through the 
ahistorical and frankly absurd a€oeGreatest GenerationaCD nostalgia does not mean he was a nice man 
in 1996a€!
chttps: //w ww.lawyersgunsmoneyblog .com/2021/12/dole>

• Chad Jones (2018): New ideas About New Ideas: Paul Romer, Nobel 
Laureafe<https://voxeu.org/article/new-ideas-about-new-ideas-paul-romer-nobel-laureate>

•  Maureen Tkacik: Built to Lie: a€~A new book about the Boeing 737 MAX disaster exposes the 
companya€™ s allergy to the trutha€! 
<https://prospect.org/culture/books/built-to-lie-boeing-737-max-disaster-robison/>

•  Eric Topol: a€™ Todaya€™ s data from South Africa^\. This will bend Prof Van Ransta€™ s curve 
from yesterday a bit. Data are not indicative that Omicron is more mild. Until we see it in people 
> age 60, large N, no prior Covid or vaccination (or > 6 months, waned), we wona€™ t knowa€! <

Eric Topol @EricTopol

Today's data from South Africa, >11,000 new cases (>16,000 past 2 days) with relatively small 
number of new hospital admissions (13), slight decrease in ICU patients

sugan naidoo @sugan2503

SA CO VID UPDATE 5 DECEMBER a€g Changes from yesterday highlighted a€0 7 day average of new cases 
https://t.co/xOtGhlOOI9
11:05 PMF™ Dec 5,2021

1,006Likes304Retweets

•  Muse Cevik: a€™ Therea€™ s a lot we dona€™ t vet understand about Omicron. including its imoact 
on immunitv and what it means for vaccines. New data will be emerging over the next few wks. which 
could be misinteroreted w/o context. What we might expect & how to interoreta€!


Muge Cevik @mugecevik

dY! Therea€™ s a lot we dona€™ t yet understand about Omicron, including its impact on immunity and 
what it means for vaccines. New data will be emerging over the next few wks, which could be 
misinterpreted w/o context. What we might expect & how to interpret the emerging data? dY§#(l/n)
7:02 PM r™ Dec 3,2021

5,095Likes 1,852Retweets

Paragraphs:

Alice Evans: Ten Thousand Years of Patriarchy. a€~What explains the Great Gender Divergence? It 
happened primarily in the 20th century, but it has much deeper roots. To answer the question, we 
need to go back ten thousand yearsa€!. Three kinds of agricultural societies emerged in the world: 
patrilineal, bilateral and matrilineal. In Eurasia, patrilineal communities transmitted land and 
herds to sonsa€! tight restrictions on womena€™ s
sexuality and mobilitya€!. Horticultural societies in Southern Africa and Southeast Asia tended to 
be matrilineala€! less concern for paternity, [so] women moved freelya€l. Native Americans were 
mostly bilateral and recognised the importance of womena€™ s contributions^!. The Middle East and 
South Asia grew even more endogamous (through cousin marriage and caste). Since rumours of female 
promiscuity would dishonour the
entire lineage, women were increasingly cloistered, especially in socially diverse towns. Meanwhile 
in medieval Europe emerged several latent advantages: nuclear families and participatory 
assembliesa€!. Patriarchal dominance was not geographically determined, but was also a product of 
cultural evolution, as reflected in folklore, religion, gender stereotypes, and institutions. 
Folklore (an insight into traditional cultures) of the Middle
East, South Asia, the Mediterranean and Scandinavia tends to valorise male dominance and female 
submission. Patriarchy was cemented in Eurasia by the emergence over 2000 years ago of religions 
with Big Gods meting out supernatural punishment. Tight policing of womena€™ s sexuality was 
sanctified. Disobedience was punished by God or karma with famines, floods and torment after 
deatha€!. The 20th century. Technological
change freed women from domestic drudgery while industrialisation increased demand for their 
labour. Thriving firms ran out of skilled men and recruited women en masse. Women, in turn, gained 
status, autonomy and solidarity through broader friendships. But this progress towards gender 
equality was contingent on strong growth, weak systems of kinship and democratisation. If 
prevailing wages are too low to compensate for the loss of
honour, female seclusion persists (as in much of India, Iran and Egypt). These effects are 
compounded by political trajectories. Only in democracies (so excluding Russia and China) can women 
collectively mobilise for representation and protection from male violencea€!. While female 
seclusion persists in poor, patrilineal countries; gender revolutions have occured in countries 
undergoing rapid economic growth, democratisation, secular
enlightenment, and feminist activism. For the first time in human history, women entered the labour 
market en masse, organised politically and collectively eroded patriarchal dominancea€!

LINK: <https://www.draliceevans.com/post/ten-thousand-vears-of-patriarchv-l>

Jemima Kelly: Crypto: Definitely Not a Pyramid Scheme: a€~Ah, le cryptoa€!. 2021a€™ sa€! been a 
decent year for the brodom. Bitcoina€™ s up about two-thirds since the start of January. Lol-coin 
Doge? Around 2,900 per cent. Yeah. (Though ita€™ s down about 82 per cent from its 
Dogefather-fuelled May highs.)a€! The FT refuses to employ anyone who will pump this stuff a€” 
outrageously a€” we are more than happy, as we have
done (a lot) before, to simply direct our readers to the bros themselves to give you the spiel. 
Because leta€™ s face it, they can sell this digital fairy dust better than any journalist, whose 
very choice of profession actually proves that they are NGMI. We quote: a€oeNow we have the goal to 
get to a dollar, we have everybody kind of encouraging everyone else to buy more Dogecoin. Because 
now ita€™ s like, alright if I get it, then I have it
at  a certain price, if you get it, you have it at a certain price, and then if we get more people 
to buy it, the value goes up, right? Soon as the value goes up, I make more money, you make more 
money, they make more money. Oh, wow! So leta€™ s get more people to buy it, and then the valuation 
goes up, and then we all make more moneya€!. Wea€™re all in this together. Wea€™re all a part of a 
team. And wea€™re all trying to get it to
a certain goala€!a€D Thata€™ s why crypto is better and will ultimately beat fiat, you see. Because 
everyone will just keep making more and more money forever, and we will all just one day live in a 
meta-paradise where we are sold decentralised digital matter by the centralised fat cats who got 
into the schemes before us saltfaces, and all will be good and righteous. Long live le cryptoa€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/025ea33f-7351-4d86-alca-b6c268f5b042>

Maia Szalavitz: Opioids Feel Like Love. Thata€™s Why Theya€™ re Deadly in Tough Times: a€~I had 
told myself that Ia€™ d never try heroin because it sounded too perfect. Ita€™ s like a€oewarm, 
buttery love,a€D a friend told me. When I did yield to temptationa€”in a fit of rage over a 
boyfrienda€™ s infidelity in the mida€“1980sa€”thata€™ s what I experienced. It wasna€™ t euphoria 
that hooked me. It was relief from my
dread and anxiety, and a soothing sense that I was safe, nurtured and unconditionally loved. 
Science now shows that this comparison is more than metaphor. Opioids mimic the neurotransmitters 
that are responsible for making social connection comfortinga€’’tying parent to child, lover to 
beloveda€!. a€oeWhen people experience an opioid high, they feel warmth, safety and love,a€D said 
Steven Chang, an associate professor of
neuroscience at Yale. Thata€™ s because opioid systems have evolved in part to fuel the good 
feelings people get from spending time with friends and family, he explaineda€!. Understanding the 
social nature of opioids and addiction should help policymakers better care for those who suffer 
from ita€!. None need jail simply for trying to feel OK. To paraphrase the writer Johann Hari, the 
opposite of addiction isna€™t abstinence. Ita€™ s
lovea€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes .com/2021/12/06/opinion/us-opioid-crisis 
.html?referringSource=articleShare>

Noah Smith: The Omicron Situation, Week 2: a€~There is going to be a big Omicron wave in the U.S. 
soona€!. Omicron has substantial resistance to existing immunitya€!. Omicron is less deadly in 
South Africa so fara€!. Some have speculated that this is because Omicron is less deadly than other 
variants, and this theory is still going arounda€!. On the more pessimistic end of the spectrum, 
Omicron cases in Gauteng might be milder
because theya€™re skewing much younger so fara€!. But experts seem to be converging on a third 
explanation for Gautenga€™ s low death rate: Most people in Gauteng simply had some pre-existing 
immunity, either from vaccination or from prior infection, and that this is making their illnesses 
more mild. This is supported by early evidence in the U.S., where people whoa€™ ve caught Omicron 
so far have mild cases and were fully
vaccinateda€I. Vaccination might not stop you from catching Omicron, but ita€™ 11 probably reduce 
your risk of dying by quite a lota€!

LINK:

Noahpinion

The Omicron situation, Week 2

Ia€™ m not going to do one of these every week, but since the situation is still evolving fast, I 
thought last weeka€™ s post about the Omicron variant deserved a follow-up. The reason is that we 
now have more evidence about the virus than we did just a week ago; South African public health and 
medical authorities have been providing us with a wealth of epidea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 51 likes A- 24 comments A- Noah Smith

Chad Orzel: Journalism: Still A Problem: a€~I find that a€oeDemocracy Dies in Darknessa€D at the 
top of every Washington Post story faintly irritating, and grind my teeth a little whenever someone 
launches into a panegyric about journalisma€™ s essential role in producing an informed citizenry. 
Ita€™ s not completely wrong, mind, but when the choice needs to be made between accurately 
informing people and telling a colorful story,
the story wins, every time. Most of the time, thata€™ s pretty inconsequential because most news 
doesna€™t actually matter, but when it matters, it really matters, and ita€™ s making us all 
crazya€!


LINK:

Counting Atoms
Journalism: Still A Problem

A real quick note today, because Ia€™ ve got a lot on my plate, but Kevin Drum has provided a 
perfect excuse to get back on my bullshit with yesterdaya€™ s post complaining about reporting on 
inflation. He quotes a story about a poll saying that 45% of households feel theya€™ ve been 
negatively affected by inflation, then uses the chart above to show that averaga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- 2 comments A- Chad Orzel

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

Two Notes:

First, with respect to my this montha€™ s Project Syndicate piece (up at the top of this 
newsletter) 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/great-resignation-us-lack-of-support-for-workers-by-j-
bradford-delong-2021-12?>, I continue to fail to grasp the reasons for the positions that many of 
my friendsa€”most notably Larry Summers and Jason Furmana€”are taking. The Federal Reserve has 
spent 40 years building up its
credibility. That means that it has enormous short-run freedom of policy action. Thus it should use 
that credibility to prioritize returning the economy to full employment and greasing the structural 
changes that the COVID plague is causing; and it should only after those tasks are accomplished 
turn its focus to controlling inflation.

So far Lael Brainarda€™ s arguments to this effect have been convincing to Jay Powell and company. 
But he is, basically, a Republican Worthy and a managera€”a very good one, but one without a strong 
grasp of the substantive macroeconomics. Just as the splitting of the Republican Party under Trump 
gave Powell the freedom to consider Lael Brainarda€™ s arguments and find them convincing, so the 
splitting of the Democratic
Partya€™ s position now gives Powell the freedom to return to his Republican Worthy orientation, 
and I am afraid that he will do so too soon.

And so are some other people whom I trust to be good Fed-watchers.

Second, I am pleased to receive this in email, from a guy who knows Alan Greenspan well: a€oel 
think Brad did a good job capturing Alana€D:


Were Alan Greenspan Ever to Let His Hair Down...; & BRIEFLY NOTED: For 2021-11-28 Su

First: If Alan Greenspan Were Ever to Let Down What Hair He Has: Bob Reich complains that when he 
was in the Clinton administration he never asked Alan Greenspan the questions and never got the 
answers he wanted to. Now when I was a not very senior Treasury Department official during the 
Clinton administration, I did get to ask Alan Greenspan the questiona€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 15 comments A- Brad DeLong
Thata€™ s all for today!


Were Alan Greenspan Ever to Let His Hair Down...; & BRIEFLY NOTED: For 2021-11-28 Su

First: If Alan Greenspan Were Ever to Let Down What Hair He Has: Bob Reich complains that when he 
was in the Clinton administration he never asked Alan Greenspan the questions and never got the 
answers he wanted to. Now when I was a not very senior Treasury Department official during the 
Clinton administration, I did get to ask Alan Greenspan the questiona€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 15 comments A- Brad DeLong
Thata€™ s all for today!

