Five Paragraphs:

1) I do not understand Renaissancea€™ s Medallion Fund. I do not know anybody who understands 
Renaissancea€™ s Medallion Fund. If anybody has figured out how to come close to replicating 
whatever renaissance is
medallion fund has done, they are not talking and are not on my radar screen. The fact that I have 
no clue as to what is going on here leaves me massively dissatisfied. I do not think I understand 
Bridge water. But I do think I
have  a vague idea as to how they do what they do and why it might work as well as it does. I have 
no such insight into Renaissance Medallion:

Bradford Cornell: Medallion Fund: The Ultimate Counterexample?: a€™ Over the period from the start 
of trading in 1988 to 2018, $100 invested in Medallion would have grown to $398.7 million,
representing a compound return of 63.3%. Returns of this magnitude over such an extended period far 
outstrip anything reported in the academic literature. Furthermore, during the entire 31-year
period, Medallion never had a negative return despite the dot.com crash and the financial crisis. 
Despite this remarkable performance, the funda€™ s market beta and factor loadings were all 
negative,


Five Paragraphs:

1) I do not understand Renaissancea€™ s Medallion Fund. I do not know anybody who understands 
Renaissancea€™ s Medallion Fund. If anybody has figured out how to come close to replicating 
whatever renaissance is
medallion fund has done, they are not talking and are not on my radar screen. The fact that I have 
no clue as to what is going on here leaves me massively dissatisfied. I do not think I understand 
Bridge water. But I do think I
have  a vague idea as to how they do what they do and why it might work as well as it does. I have 
no such insight into Renaissance Medallion:

Bradford Cornell: Medallion Fund: The Ultimate Counterexample?: a€™ Over the period from the start 
of trading in 1988 to 2018, $100 invested in Medallion would have grown to $398.7 million,
representing a compound return of 63.3%. Returns of this magnitude over such an extended period far 
outstrip anything reported in the academic literature. Furthermore, during the entire 31-year
period, Medallion never had a negative return despite the dot.com crash and the financial crisis. 
Despite this remarkable performance, the funda€™ s market beta and factor loadings were all 
negative,
so that Medalliona€™ s performance cannot be interpreted as a premium for risk bearing. To date, 
there is no adequate rational market explanation for this performance^!

LINK: chttps://papers .ssrn.com/so!3/papers .cfm?abstract_id=3504766>

2) At its origin, civilization as we have known it seems to have been quite a cruel and a brutal 
thing. Our technologies were, for a long long time, much more effective as technologies of 
extraction and domination then as
technologies to boost productivity. Actually, perhaps that is wrong: our technologies were fine at 
boosting productivity but Malthusa€™ s Devil ensure that the benefits flowed to increasing human 
numbers rather than raising
human prosperity. That's for a long, long time domination and extraction was nearly the only road 
to individual prosperity:

Patrick Wyman: Uruk & the Emergence of Civilization: a€~The a€oeUruk Phenomenon.a€D This was a 
multifaceted expansion outward from southern Mesopotamiaa€! some combination of
colonization movement, proto-imperial takeover, ideological ferment, and mercantile enterprise^!. 
The most ubiquitous item of Uruk culture is actually a humble, misshapena€! beveled-rim bowla€!
mass-produced by the thousandsa€! but in crude molds. The most likely explanation is that they were 
used to dole out grain rationsa€! molds to bake that grain into daily breada€! speaks powerfully
to     the nature of Uruk societya€! a deeply unequal and centralized way of organizing the world, 
with superiors and inferiorsa€!. Those at the bottom were dependent on their betters, who controlled
their labor and doled out their food supply, perhaps in those ugly little bowlsa€!. In the early 
written texts, the most common non-numerical sign is the symbol for a€oefemale slave of foreign
origin.a€D a€oeCaptive malea€D isna€™t far behinda€! LINK:

<https://patrickwvman.substack.eom/p/uruk-and-the-emergence-of-civilization>

3) Liars gonna lie. But there may be a way to use their desire to retain a shred of their 
self-respect in order to uncover somewhat of the truth. Note, however, that this does not work with 
the Trumps and with their ilk at all:

Zeynep Tufekci: Critical Thinking isna€™ t Just a Process: a€~Friends who had grown up in 
authoritarian or poor countries had a much easier time adjustinga€!. When Trump got sick with
COVIDa€! one detail stood out: he had been given dexamethasonea€!. The doctorsa€! a€oeQ: Was 
Trumpa€™ s oxygen level ever below 90?a€D a€oeCONLEY: We dona€™t have any recordings
here   of thata€D a€oeQ: But was it ever below 90, here or at the White House?a€D CONLEY: No, it 
was below 94 percent. It wasna€™ t down in the low 80s or anythinga€!. They dona€™ t have
recording below 90s a€ceherea€D so via Kremlinology, a sadly appropriate method now, we can 
probably infer that it was probably mid-to-high 80s Friday night which sparked giving him oxygen
and transport to Walter Reeda€!.

Metaepistemology may be a fancy term, but ita€™ s actually a mundane skilla€!. Most deliberate 
misinformation from authoritiesa€’’especially in places that are mid-range in terms of institutional
trust and strict licensinga€’’comes from omissiona€!. I concluded that the most likely explanation 
wasa€! that, indeed, the President had faced severe illness. Yesterday, we finally got actual
reportinga€! a€oeTrumpa€! was found to have lung infiltratesa€! a sign of an acute case of the 
diseasea€!. Trumpa€™ s blood oxygen level alone was cause for extreme concern, dipping into the
80sa€!a€D There is often talk of teaching people a€oecritical thinkinga€Da€! not just formulas to 
be taught but knowledge and experience to be acquired and tested and re-examineda€!. It may be a
privilege to live in a society that does not always need official statements to be interrogated as 
such. But if the past few years have shown anything, that privilege is not something to be taken for
granteda€!

LINK: <https://zeynep.substack.eom/p/critical-thinking-isnt-iust-a-process>

4) At this point, I think you have to presume that Facebook is guilty when charged by insiders:

Hannah Murphy: Facebook Reported Revenue It a€~Should Have Never Madea€™, Manager Claimed: 
a€~Lawsuit cites product executivea€™ s qualms over figures provided to advertisers.
Facebook says that the a€~allegations are without merit and we will vigorously defend ourselvesa€™ 
. A Facebook employee warned that the company reported revenues it a€oeshould have never
madea€D                                                                                        by 
overstating how many users advertisers could reach, according to internal emails revealed in a 
newly unsealed court filing. The worlda€™ s largest social media company has since 2018
been fighting a class-action lawsuit claiming that its executives knew its a€oepotential reach 
metrica€D, used to inform advertisers of their potential audience size, was inflated but failed to 
correct

it. According to sections of a filing in the lawsuit that were unredacted on Wednesday, a Facebook 
product manager in charge of potential reach proposed changing the definition of the metric in
mida€“2018 to render it more accurate. However, internal emails show that his suggestion was 
rebuffed by Facebook executives overseeing metrics on the grounds that the a€oerevenue impacta€D
for   the company would be a€cesignificanta€D, the filing said. The product manager responded by 
saying a€oeita€™ s revenue we should have never made given the fact ita€™ s based on wrong
dataa€D, the complaint saida€!

LINK: https://www.ft.com/content/cl44b3e0-a502-440b-8565-53a4ce5470a5

5) Only 23,000 years? That does not seem to me very longa€’’especially when you consider that 
co-movement implies only a form of weak symbiosis and perhaps semi-domestication, not full 
domestication:

Angela R. Perri & al.: Dog Domestication & the Dual Dispersal of People & Dogs into the Americas: 
a€~Over the last 10,000 y, the genetic signatures of ancient dog remains have been linked with
known human dispersals in regions such as the Arctic and the remote Pacific. It is suspected, 
however, that this relationship has a much deeper antiquitya€!. By comparing population genetic 
results
of humans and dogs from Siberia, Beringia, and North America, we show that there is a close 
correlation in the movement and divergences of their respective lineagesa€!. It suggests that dogs 
were
domesticated in Siberia by a" 1423,000 y ago, possibly while both people and wolves were isolated 
during the harsh climate of the Last Glacial Maximum. Dogs then accompanied the first people into
the Americas and traveled with them as humans rapidly dispersed into the continent beginning a" 
1415,000 y agoa€!

LINK: <https://www.pnas .org/content/118/6/e2010083118>
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Hoisted from the Archives

2010: Is This an April Foola€™ s Joke?: Charles Lane of the Washington Post:

Some in the antislavery movement were as extreme, in their way, as the Southern 
a€oefire-eaters.a€na€! In 1851, a Boston crowd broke into a federal courthouse to free 
a€ceShadrach,a€D a black
man being held there by U.S. marshals enforcing the Fugitive Slave Lawa€!. I am not suggesting a 
moral equivalency between the anti-slavery and pro-slavery forces. But I am suggesting an
attitudinal equivalencya€!

First of all, Shadrach Minkins has a namea€’’which does not deserve to be put into scare quotes. He 
was a human being. Charlesa€’’excuse me, a€™Charlesa€™a€”sees an a€~attitudinal equivalencya€™ 
between
abolitionists who a€~arrested Minkins from his court officers, carried him off and temporarily hid 
him in a Beacon Hill attica€! Boston black leaders Lewis Hayden, John J. Smith and others helped 
Minkins escape from
Massachusetts, and he eventually found his way to Canada on the Underground Railroada€!a€™ and 
Jefferson Davis and his ilk who raised armies that killed 400,000 Americans.

I am sorry: those who kill tens of thousands have a different a€~attitudea€™ than those who set 
people free without killing anybody.
Worst Washington Post writer alive.

LINK: 
https://delong.typepad.com/sdi/2010/03/is-this-an-april-fools-joke—the-tea-party-and-a-history-of-go
ing-to-extremes.html
Leave a comment


iiiipa.//uciuux-iypcpdu.coiivau|/z<uiu/uj/i&-mid-tiu-tipiii-iuuid-|UAC                  
mc-i.cci-pcm.y-cuiu-ci-iH&miy-ui-^uiu^-iu-CAUcmcd.Hum

Leave a comment

