Subscribe now

FIRST: A Semi-Fictitious Dialogue on a Better Elevator Pitch for a€oeSlouching Towards 
Utopia'a€oea€!

Sokrates: Getting back to you. It would be really helpful for you, in selling your Slouching 
Towards Utopia <https://bit.lv/3pP3Krk> book, to have a few simple Terry Gross-level paragraphs 
that are provocative, and that at their end turn to the news of the day. You have to fight your 
tendency to complicate the already complicated. Repeat your elevator pitch over and over...

BD: a€oeEver since the invention of agriculture, humanity has faced the problems of production, 
distribution, and utilization. Production was an overwhelming problem with for a very long time 
simply because of Thomas Robert Malthus. Women had social power only if they had surviving 
sons...a€D

Platon: No Malthus...

BD: a€oelf people 150 years ago could have seen our vast volume of production now, they would say; 
a€~You must be living in a utopia, having solved the problem of productiona€™ . For the problems of 
distribution and utilization are second-order and easy...a€D

Kephalos: Try: a€oeHumanitya€™ s biggest problem was making enough. Now we know how to make 
enough...a€D

BD: a€oeBefore 1870, humanity simply could not make enough, so if you were going to have enough you 
had to find a way to take from others some of the less-than-enough that they had. Today, however, 
of the three problems of production, distribution, and utilization...a€D

Platon: No a€oeutilizationa€n.

BD: a€oeToday, after the Long 20th Century we humans can make enough, but the problems of 
distribution...a€D

Sokrates: You need a better word than a€cedistributiona€D...

BD: Am I allowed to say a€cesharinga€D or is that too left-wing?
Thrasymakhos: Too left-wing. a€oeGetting people what they need...a€D
BD: a€oeMaking, sharing, and living...a€D

Sokrates: a€oeThe problems of making people productive, getting them their fair share, and then 
using their wealth to live well...a€D

BD: Too long already...

Phryne: Maybe the right metaphor is the old one of the economic pie...

BD: a€oeFirst the people could not make a big enough pie. Then the people could not slice the pie. 
Then the people could not eat the pie. Someone who has a lot of wealth but is spending all of their 
time with their eyeballs glued to Facebook being sold fake diabetes cures and crypto grfiter-assets 
because they are terrified that Black people are going to come and paint slogans on their front 
lawna€Da€”I am sorry. I can't help myself. I'm on the point of total rage
and psychological collapse. This is not the world I, forty years ago, expected I would live in...

Sokrates: You are close. Baking, slicing, and tasting. What is a€cetastinga€D? What's the core 
problem in terms of tasting? What what is it that people are are failing to do or at least they 
need, that the system is not allowing?

BD: Well, it's to live well, and most of living well is to be happy, healthy and expecting your 
children will live a better life than you. You know. Hektor's prayer in The Iliad'. a€oeMay the 
Trojans say that my son is a better man than his father.a€D

Platon: No Hektor...

BD: a€oeHealth, safety, security, and happiness...a€D

Thrasymakhos: a€oeThe problem of slicing the slices...a€D

BD: a€oeAnd if we solved the problem of slicing, we would then have the problem of actually tasting 
the pie as you eat ita€”that you not only have this slice of big pie but it is making you healthy, 
safe, secure, and happya€!a€D

Sokrates Something like that. That is the first. The second is: What happened? Why are we having so 
much trouble? And then: What do we do about it?

BD: Am I allowed to double-down on post-WWII social democracy? Keynesian full employment, plus 
low-interest rates to diminish the social power of wealth; Pigovian taxes and bounties for 
anti-pollution and positive industrial policy, and so forth; and Beveridgean public provision and 
redistribution?

Platon: No a€ceBeveridgea€U!

BD: No a€oeBeveridge, Pigou, and Keynes as the Holy Trinity of social democracya€D?

Platon: No. Does not pass that Terry Gross test.

BD: How about I simply lift the standard line about a€oegrowing together after World War Twoa€U? 
a€oeThe generation after World War Two as close as we got. But somehow, in the late 1970s and early 
1980s, that system failed its sustainability tests. It failed both because it was misrepresented by 
bad actors who claimed falsely they had better solutions, and because it was, in some sense, not 
satisfyinga€Ua€”all you have to do is find one welfare queen in
Chicago, and after that AFDC is not a worthy program that supports mothers doing a hard job but 
rather a gift to moochers...

Dionysios: Yes. There is the underlying racism. And purposelessness from a modern economy that does 
not structure the meaning of people's lives. All of that created opportunities for cynical 
political exploitation...

BD: So there needs to be an elevator pitch that Terry Gross and her listeners will understand. And 
the listener is riding in their car, distracted, wondering if their Tesla Autopilot is about to 
kill them, needs to understand it too...

Sokrates: Yes. Ia€™ m interested in William Beveridge. But who else is?

BD: I could have a nice talk for 10 minutes with Annie Lowrey about William Beveridge, and how UBI 
is, in many ways, the fulfillment of Beveridgea€™ s hopesa€’’giving people not specific benefits, 
but instead generalized social power, which is money. The problems that social democracy faced in 
the 1970s are repeated by UBI as people say, again: this will give the money to people who don't 
deserve it. There are always people for whom a€oesocial
justicea€D means: those people should have no social power at all; they should have to beg in the 
streets; they should often be hungry, and definitely be emaciated.

Sokrates: Annie Lowrey wrote a whole book about UBI. She loves UBI. Nobody else will understand, or 
be interested in UBI or in William Beveridge.

& what I have come up with:

Before 1870 humanity had thought the big problem was that limited technology and natural resources 
relative to population kept there from being enough. We simply could not bake a large-enough pie. 
Half of the big story of the twentieth century is of overcoming that constraints’’the pie can now 
be bakeda€”but, somehow, that did not bring us to utopia. Slicing and tasting the pie proved much 
harder problems than earlier ages had
thought: today, having enough remains out-of-reach for most of humanity; and those of us with 
enough have a hard time properly tasting it. Look around: many (most?) of us do not look healthy, 
safe, secure, or happy.

Friedrich von Hayek saw clearly that the market economy, when coupled with industrial research 
labs, modern corporations, and globalization, was the key to unlocking the cage keeping humanity 
desperately poor. He thus preached the gospel: Seethe market giveth, the market taketh away: 
blessed be the name of the market.SD But, as Karl Polanyi saw, humans needed more rights than just 
property rights. The markets™ s treating
those whom society saw as equals unequally, or those whom it saw as unequals equally, brought 
social explosion after explosion, blocking the road to utopia.

Not Soeblessed be the name of the marketSD but Seethe market was made for man, not man for the 
marketSD was required But how? During the post-WWII North-Atlantic shotgun marriage of Friedrich 
von Hayek to Karl Polanyi blessed by John Maynard KeynesS”what we called Soesocial democracySDS”was 
humanity able to even slouch towards utopia. But that marriage failed its own sustainability test: 
it ran into the
buzzsaw of the neoliberal challenge in the 1980s. And the neoliberal order has been stubbornly and 
persistently resistant to erosion in spite of its own many, many failed promises.

Slicing and tasting the pie ought to be problems as solvable as baking the pie turned out to be. 
But not so. The second half of the big story of the twentieth century is that very painful one. And 
is slicing and tasting even possible?

As Richard Easterlin wrote a generation ago, humanitya€™ s is a a€oehollow victorya€D: a€oeln the 
end, the triumph of economic growth is not a triumph of humanity over material wants; rather, it is 
a triumph of material wants over humanitya€!a€D

And as John Maynard Keynes wrote a century ago: a€oeWe lack, more than usual, a coherent scheme of 
progress, a tangible ideal. All the political parties alike have their origins in past ideas and 
not in new ideas.... It is not necessary to debate the subtleties of what justifies a man in 
promoting his gospel by force; for no one has a gospel. The next move is with the head, and fists 
must wait...a€D

Share

One Video:


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

Citation: Hilscher, Jens, Alon Raviv, and Ricardo Reis (2022) "How Likely is an Inflation Disaster" 
CEPR discussion paper 17244t April, bibtex


US probability of 5y5y high-inflation disaster

- Inflation > 4% on average ----- inflation > 5% over 5 years

Main estimates high inflation - US

Probabilities of a high inflation disaster in the United States:

- "inflation >4% on average" is inflation in five years for five years (e.g. from
2027 to 2032) above 4%. This is a larger than 10 log-point deviation from the


zu icu

- ’Inflation >5% on average” is inflation in five years for five years (e.g. from
2027 to 2032) above 5%. This is a larger than 15 log-point deviation from the
2% target.

These probabilities are perceived by market participants, as reflected in the
cost of insurance against these events by buying options.

Source: Hilscher, Raviv and Reis (2022)

Very Briefly Noted:

• Delphine Strauss: Note to Central Banks: Keep It Simple, Stupid I Financial Times 
<https://www.ft.com/content/b58afd5b-e74c-4497-bcla-d78f83670eaa>

• Odd Lots Newsletter: Recession Risks Turn Real 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-05-20/odd-lots-newsletter-recession-risks-turn-real
?cmpid=BBD052022 oddlots>

• Bloomberg: Apple (AAPL) Shows Headset to Board in Sign Ita€™ s Reached Advanced Stage 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-19/apple-shows-headset-to-board-in-sign-it-s-reache
d-advanced-stage?sref=Yg3sQEZ2&cmpid=socialflow-twitter-business>

• Bryce Elder: Barclays to Tether: The Test Is Yet to Come 
<https://www.ft.com/content/a9a0bf66-9232-4980-8ac5-e6d6b8flcb75>

• Daniel Davies: Rules for Contrarians: 1. Dona€™ t Whine. That Is All: a€™ You dona€™ t get to 
complain that people have a€cemisinterpreteda€O your piece by taking you to be saying exactly what 
you carefully constructed the argument to look like you were sayinga€!. Contrarians ought to have 
thick skins, because their entire raison da€™ etre is the giving of intellectual offence to others. 
So dona€™ t whine, for heavena€™ s sake. Own your
bullshita€! <https://crookedtimber.org/2009/10/22/rules-for-contrarians-1 -dont-whine-that-is-all/>

• George Steer: The Switch Back from Goods to Services That Wasna€™ t 
<https://www.ft.com/content/b8b0bc 12-b93c-42cb-a87e-9ecdfb20314c>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Ian Leslie: Seven Varieties of Stupidity: a€~Once a clever person has adopted a mistaken belief 
it is very hard to talk them out of ita€!. They are so skilled at bending reality to fit the model 
of it they have constructeda€! with high verbal fluencya€L The right words just magically appear, 
perfectly turned, glistening like trutha€! <

Why Arguments Are
Tearing Us Apart and

How They Can Bring


Us Together

Ian Leslie


                 The Ruffian

Seven Varieties of Stupidity

a€oeThere are so many kinds of stupidity, and cleverness is one of the worst.a€D Thomas Mann. Many 
words have been expended on the nature of intelligence, while the topic of stupidity is 
comparatively neglected - even though it is all around us, screwing us up. Thata€™ s probably 
because we assume stupidity is just a lack of intelligence. I think therea€™ s more to it than 
that. It conies in many different forms; what follows is by no means
comprehensivea€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 2 likes A- Ian Leslie
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

SUBJECT: Trying to Think About Cryptoa€!

It looks as though Noah Smith and I are going to try to record a podcast about "crypto" next week. 
I am going to push it to be about "web3a€n, which I think is potentially interesting, even though 
it seems to me to be tilting at windmills.
Or, rather, to the extent that web3 is different from crypto, it is tilting at windmills. To the 
extent that web3 is crypto, I think the only question is whether it is 99%, 99.9%, or 99.99% grift 
and delusion.

Step back. Consider crypto: The ultimate source of value here is the seigniorage to be gained in 
the future from taking a position in crypto now. So the question is: how does investing in crypto 
now boost your ability to issue or sell an asset in the future that will then be either a means of 
settlement or a safe store of value, or both.
This question is a little bit complicated. You have to notice that there are two possible buckets 
here:

• The first is for "normal" transactions.

• The second is for a combination of tax evasion, money laundering, and ransomewarea€’’hiding your 
money from the tax and from the criminal justice system.

There is a big problem from hoping to profit from this second bucket. You are, by design, dealing 
with criminals and cheats (along with people who have a legitimate reason to try to shield their 
wealth from their political adversaries and kleptocrats).
So to value the crypto assets on offer today, you need to answer the following questions:

1. How big are these two seigniorage buckets?

2. At what rate should the future seigniorage be discounted back to the present?

3. What share of that seigniorage will go to this generation of private cryptoa€.” that is, not go 
to governments or central banks, or to subsequent generations of crypto?


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

SUBJECT: Trying to Think About Cryptoa€!

It looks as though Noah Smith and I are going to try to record a podcast about "crypto" next week. 
I am going to push it to be about "web3a€D, which I think is potentially interesting, even though 
it seems to me to be tilting at windmills.
Or, rather, to the extent that web3 is different from crypto, it is tilting at windmills. To the 
extent that web3 is crypto, I think the only question is whether it is 99%, 99.9%, or 99.99% grift 
and delusion.

Step back. Consider crypto: The ultimate source of value here is the seigniorage to be gained in 
the future from taking a position in crypto now. So the question is: how does investing in crypto 
now boost your ability to issue or sell an asset in the future that will then be either a means of 
settlement or a safe store of value, or both.
This question is a little bit complicated. You have to notice that there are two possible buckets 
here:

• The first is for "normal" transactions.

•  The second is for a combination of tax evasion, money laundering, and ransomewarea€’’hiding your 
money from the tax and from the criminal justice system.

There is a big problem from hoping to profit from this second bucket. You are, by design, dealing 
with criminals and cheats (along with people who have a legitimate reason to try to shield their 
wealth from their political adversaries and kleptocrats).
So to value the crypto assets on offer today, you need to answer the following questions:

1. How big are these two seigniorage buckets?

2. At what rate should the future seigniorage be discounted back to the present?

3. What share of that seigniorage will go to this generation of private crypto^^ihat is, not go to 
governments or central banks, or to subsequent generations of crypto?
The crypto bull case is always a€oe9% of GDP is finance! And all finance will be crypto someday 
!a€D

My view is that the answer to (3) is: zero. There will be a better way to launder the profits from 
crimes and better ways to try to shield wealth from tax collectors and technocrats in the future, 
yes. But owning BTC today gives you no property rights over any of those future better ways.
And when I read a bull-crypto case, after a paragraph I am already thinking a€oeword salada€D:

al6z crypto: State of Crypto 2022: a€~What is web3?:The first era of the modern interneta€’’roughly 
1990a€“2005a€”was about open protocols that were decentralized and community-governed. Most of the 
value accrued to the edges of the network: users and builders. The second era of the 
interneta€’’roughly 2005a€“2020a€”was about siloed, centralized services. Most of the value accrued 
to a handful of large tech companies. We
are now beginning the third era of the interneta€”what many call web3a€”which combines the 
decentralized, community-governed ethos of the first era with the advanced, modern functionality of 
the second era. This will unlock a new wave of creativity and entrepreneurshipa€!. Layer 1 
Blockchainsa€!. Layer 2 Scaling: A layer 2 is a separate blockchain that extends the base layer and 
inherits its security guaranteesa€!. DeFi: A huge
part of the world is underserved by existing financial institutionsa€!. Stablecoins: There are 
three primary categories of stablecoins, though the lines between them are blurry: Fiat Backed, 
Crypto Backed, Algorithmica€!. NFTs: Wea€™ ve seen several categories of NFTs emerge, but ita€™ s 
still very early daysa€!. Web3 Gaminga€!. DAOsa€!. DAOs enable a new, bottom-up way for groups to 
make decisionsa€!

LINK: <https://a 16zcrypto.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/05/state-of-crypto-2022 a 16z-crypto .pdf>
Subscribe now

