Subscribe now

Review of DeLong's "Slouching Towards Utopia”

Posted by Dietrich Vollrath on October 11,2022 A- 21 mins read

Brad Delong recently published his long-gestating economic history of the long 20th century, 
Slouching Towards Utopia. If you are reading this blog, you are almost certainly
aware of that, and I would guess the probability that youa€™ ve read it (or are reading it) are 
around 50/50. It has garnered well-deserved high praise from a variety of people. To
avoid just repeating what everyone else is saying, let me simply say that it is a necessary book to 
read if you are at all interested in the subject of economic growth. It is informative
and thought-provoking. If you are one of those 50% who have not read it, go do so now.

One of the things DeLong has been asking online is what he got a€oebig time wronga€D. While I 
dona€™ t think there is anything that is big time wrong, I do think there is a
feature of the 1870-2010 period that does not get sufficient attention. I doubt it is because 
DeLong doesna€™ t appreciate the relevance, but at some point in a 500-odd page book,
choices must be made. Somewhere in the multiverse is a reality where DeLong has bludgeoned his 
editor to death and produced a 1500 page tome that includes a few chapters on
what Ia€™ 11 expand on below. One way to consider this post is something a supplement for the STU 
volume that manifested itself in this particular strand of the multiverse.

DeLong makes clear that it wasna€™ t until around 1870 that productivity growth finally grew large 
enough to outpace the increased population growth that had always previously
occurred in response to higher living standards. Productivity growth outpacing the population 
growth response made possible historically unprecendented growth in living standards
after 1870. DeLong attributes that increased pace of productivity growth to some combination of the 
research lab, the corporation, and globalization.

Ia€™ m sure we can quibble about the precise natures of timing or the importance of those three 
factors in productivity growth. But what Ia€™ m more interested in is that very
relevant and ultimately very necessary change in how population growth responded to living 
standards that occurred around the same time.

What happened around 1870 was not just that productivity growth was able to outpace population 
growth, but that population growth started to fall in response to increase in
productivity. This was a fundamental flip in the typical Malthusian relationship that had held up 
until (roughly) that point in time. Prior to this inflection point, productivity growth
had increased before, but every time had induced a response of higher population growth rates, 
eroding any gains in per-person living standards. After this inflection point, when
productivity growth increased it induced lower population growth rates, accelerating the gains in 
per-person living standards. Without this flip in the population response, the
productivity growth associated with the research lab, corporations, and globalization would not 
have generated the sustained growth in living standards that form a core part of
STU.

Ita€™ s not that DeLong ignores the population response. Throughout the book he points to the 
demonstrable decline in fertility rates, using the vivid description that prior to 1870
the typical woman might spend 20 years of her adult life either pregnant or breastfeeding, while by 
the mid-20th century it might be only four years. What Ia€™ m nitpicking here
is that this decline in fertility deserves equal billing with the research lab, corporation, and 
globalization. Without the flip to an a€ceanti-Malthusiana€D negative relationship of
fertility and productivity, you dona€™ t even slouch towards utopia, you stagnate.

Consider that with material needs taken care of, human populations are capable of a shocking rate 
of growth. A common example to trot out here is the Hutterites. Between 1880
and 1950 - so exactly during the period when productivity growth had accelerated demonstrably - 
their population increased at a rate of over 4 percent per year. Each woman had
approximately 10 children, and given that they did not marry until their early 20s, its is 
conceivable that they could reach a growth rate of 4.5 percent or more, with each woman
having                                                                             12 to 14 kids.

The point here is not that this is an ideal to aspire to. The point is that it was entirely 
possible for human populations to respond to the productivity growth inherent in the research
lab, corporations, and globalization by doing what they had done throughout history. It was 
plausible to respond to increased abundance by having more kids - a lot more kids.

DeLonga€™ s rough index of productivity growth is that it grew by about 2.1 percent per year from 
1870 to 2010. One does not need to imagine that everyone was a Hutterite to
think that human populations could sustain 2.1 percent growth or more over long periods of time, 
thus offsetting the productivity growth in a most Malthusian way.

It was not enough that productivity growth accelerated around 1870. It was an acceleration in 
productivity combined with a decline in population growth that put us on a slow
trudge towards utopia. The decline in population growth was entirely a-historical at that point. 
Without this anti-Malthusian response the research lab, corporation, and globalization
cannot provide sustained growth. But it is also the case that without the research lab, 
corporation, and globalization the anti-Malthusian response would not have occurred. My case
is  not that the demographic response is primary or more important, but that it is a necessary 
complement to those productivity boosters.

Making kids cost more

My preferred structure to think about the population response to productivity is that it follows 
the following rough formula
Pop growth=ParameterA—IncomePrice per child

This is really an expression for fertility, and I could add something explicit accounting for 
mortality rates, but this ultimately gets the right intuition. The price per child is a measure
of the material costs to parents of getting a child a€oeup to speeda€D with life. Basic food, 
clothing, and shelter, yes. Along with enough cultural and technical knowledge to care
for themselves (and often for the parent in old age). In other words, the price of a child is the 
price of getting them to be a functioning adult.

In a Malthusian setting, in general what we get is that productivity growth increased income, but 
did not have a significant effect on the price per child. Hence an increase in income
increased population growth, and ultimately any productivity growth was eaten away (literally, to 
some extent) by congestion and crowding and diminishing returns to resources. At
that point ncomes fell back to the point that population growth was just keeping pace with 
productivity growth. When productivity growth is positive then this allows population
growth to be net positive (births just outpacing deaths), implying that income is stagnant but 
above some biological subsistence level, and that the size of the population goes up
every year.

Holding the price per child constant, the faster is productivity growth in this Malthusian setting, 
the higher is that stagnant income level. This gives a way of understanding how
living standards could creep up over time even as everyone remained tied down by the Malthusian 
logic. Before 1870, J.S. Mill and others were all underwhelmed by the living
standards that rapid (relative to history at that point) technological change had wrought. Each was 
convinced that the Malthusian logic held and perhaps doomed the common man
to stagnant living standards even as science and technology remade the world.

After 1870, though, we get something new. Productivity growth did increase in speed, raising 
incomes even faster than before. This, by itself, would not change the overall logic. It
would have allowed a somewhat higher - but ultimately still stagnant - level of income per person. 
Humans could have procreated fast enough to make this happen.

The key change is that productivity growth, starting around 1870, reached down and profoundly 
raised the price of bringing a child to adulthood. I have in mind a few forces here.

1. Technological change led to demand for education. To riff on DeLonga€™ s characterization, 
around 1870 we had innovated away from using our human backs (with
new energy sources) and fingers (with machines) to do things, and were innovating ways to replace 
some of our cognitive skills. Working with those new technologies
required more abstract skills, which in turn led to more demand for education. More education per 
child raises the price child. Alternatively, you could argue (as we in
higher education often do) that education enables you to deal more easily with rapid technological 
changes. The acceleration of productivity growth in 1870 would have
raised the return to education in that sense, raising the cost of a child.

2. Urbanization. People had been moving to cities for centuries, of course, but corporations, 
globalization, and research labs accelerated that move. Urban areas are often
argued to have higher child-rearing costs. That may be direct costs (relative price of food or 
shelter/space may be high compared to rural areas) or indirect costs (they
may not have as much use as household workers compared to rural areas). Either way, by changing the 
location of economic activity it raised the cost of children.

3. Health and nutrition improved. Child mortality changed in a fundamental way, and for any given 
number of desired adult children, you could have fewer pregnancies,
good                                                                          for moms. But beyond 
that, it meant that investments in those children - education, skills, migration - were likely to 
pay off. That raised the desired investment per
child, raising the price of each child.

4. Beckerian time costs. Kids take time. As incomes levels increased due to productivity growth, 
this increases the opportunity cost of time for parents, perhaps limiting
their willingness to have kids. More practically, it probably works to increase marriage age as 
people acquire more resources/skills/experience prior to starting a family.


1 nere snouia oe like IUUU citations attacnea to tnese points, out tafem trying to nmsn mis on 
today so my apologies to an me people wnose work 1 uianafet explicitly cite

(except, I guess, Gary Becker).

Regardless, I think a crucial aspect of the story from 1870 forward is not just the acceleration of 
productivity growth, but the fundamental effect of this productivity growth on the
price of kids. This generated the anti-Malthusian response which was necessary to the sustained 
increase in living standards behind STU.

Leta€™s really have some fun

In the book, DeLong sets up Hayek and Polanyi (at some point forced into an awkward reconciliation 
by Keynes) as the intellectual poles of the story. Hayek and Polanyi, and to a
great extent Keynes, were writing and thinking about economic growth well after this flip to an 
anti-Malthusian population response has occurred. While they all would certainly
recognize Malthusa€™ argument and understand the logic, what I think is notable is that they all 
generally took the anti-Malthusian population response of their contemporary
period as a given.

Moreover, I think that their positions are in some sense dependent on the anti-Malthusian 
population response. Take Hayek: the market giveth, the market taketh away, blessed be
the market. This became a viable theory only when the market had in fact delivered a series of 
demonstrably good outcomes. Hayek could look backwards and point at definitive
improvements in living standards and attribute them (often, but not always, correctly) to markets. 
With the anti-Malthusian response, the productivity gains after 1870 does not just
allow                                                                               for higher 
living standards, but noticeably higher living standards.

There were markets in existence well before 1870, and well before the Industrial Revolution. There 
is a whole other post I have some intention of writing about the a-historical
nature of claims that people existed in some kind of pre-market or non-market economy prior to like 
1800 (Ia€™ m looking at you, Karl Polanyi). Regardless, prior to about 1870 it
would be hard to make the Hayekian claim about markets because they were not delivering the massive 
growth in the pie that let you elide distributional questions associated with
pie-slicing. Markets at that point were just another way of slicing a pie that appeared to be 
somewhat constant in size.

Hayek could even make the case (Beware, completely untested hypothesis follows) that the market was 
the reason for the flip to anti-Malthusian population responses. Once markets
put a more explicit price on children (education costs, etc..) that was when people flipped their 
behavior, ridded themselves of the Malthusian response, and delivered the boost to
growth in living standards observed after 1870. Filtering family decisions through the market was 
exactly how we were able to slouch much closer to utopia. Without making the
costs                                                                                 of children 
explicit through markets, wea€™ d be stuck with continued Malthusian stagnation.

Okay, thata€™ s Hayek. What about Polanyi?

I read Polanyi as being about identity. We are very protective of our identities, and those 
identities often coalesce around occupations (farmer, doctor, weaver, etc.) and place (the
family farm, a block or neighborhood, a region). In many cases the pieces of those identities 
overlap; they didna€™ t call them the Pittsburgh Steelers by accident.

The danger that markets pose is that they want to treat people and places as interchangable and 
substitutable. The a€oelabor marketa€D wants to treat each individual as an
identity-less lump of labor effort. The a€oeland marketa€D wants to treat each place as an 
identity-less location. The market will find the most efficient allocation of that identity­
less  labor across a bunch of identity-less places.

Those people and locations will, according to Polanyi, refuse at some point to be treated in such a 
manner and will protect those identities. Steelworkers in Pittsburgh defined
themselves to a great degree by those two characteristics, and their families and children defined 
themselves by those characteristics even if they were not (a) steelworkers or (b)
living   in Pittsburgh. It is important to people that those identities are maintained even if the 
market is demanding that steel work be done in Mumbai. Those steelworkers will act in
ways - organizing politically to put up trade barriers, for example - to save those identities.

What does population growth have to do with this? (Beware, completely untested hypothesis follows) 
When population growth remains high it is (more) plausible to maintain
identities in the face of market changes. I dona€™ t need allmy children to farm our ancestral land 
so long as some of my children farm the ancestral land. I dona€™ t need all my
children to become steelworkers so long as some of my children carry on the family trade. When 
productivity goes up, the Malthusian response generates more kids, allowing some
to remain in place and in roles that theya€™ d traditionally be expected to occupy. It also allows 
some set of kids to move off to new locations and try new jobs. With the
Malthusian population response it is plausible to generate a slow transition of occupations and 
locations. Places decline and occupations disappear, but they decline and disappear
over generations, not years. Steelworkers get to retire as steelworkers in the homes they raised 
their families in in Pittsburgh. With a generational transition, old identities can be
retained while new identities are built in new jobs and new places.

When we flip over to the anti-Malthusian response, however, the disruptions caused to identities by 
productivity growth translate into smaller families. Both my kids move off the
farm, or both are unable to get jobs as steelworkers. Even worse, the steelworker may have move to 
Atlanta (seriously, the Falcons?) to find a new job as a€!. very much not a
steelworker. The anti-Malthusian response causes living standards to rise rapidly, but also causes 
the disruptions of that to happen in years, not generations.

As Polanyi speculated, threatened identities will try to defend themselves. This might be through 
unions or tariffs or some other attempt to slow down and moderate the effects of
the pure market; all gumming up the market. In the worst cases that defense ends up turning into 
things like anti-immigrant attitudes, racism, or as Polanyi suggests, fascism. These
are all things dominated by the concept of maintaining some kind of identity. Those ugly versions 
of identity defense often explicitly deal with questions of fertility and population
growth, by the way. They get hung up on things like race replacement or racial purity and almost 
invariably promote large families as some kind of ideal. Population growth is the
visible confirmation your identity is thriving.

Both poles of the ideological spectrum that STU uses to interpret the long 20th century are, in 
this framing, ideologies that exist because of the anti-Malthusian population resposne.
Or maybe exist is a strong word. Some sort of Hayek and some sort of Polanyi were probably bound to 
occur. But without the anti-Malthusian population response, there would
have been less for them to argue about. The flip to family size declining with prosperity generated 
conditions where their ideas were more salient, to the point that DeLong could
usefully and capably view much of the long 20th century through their eyes.

Take this whole section for what it is, pure speculation. You should go read Slouching Toward 
Utopia and learn something about how the economy evolved since 1870. While you
are doing that, keep in the back of your head the population responses required to generate the 
economic growth observed.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

