Subscribe now

Ezra Klein Show Page

Ezra Klein: I have a lot to say about this book [Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>]. It is 
ambitious, and it is strange, and it will leave you with lots of interesting thoughts and stories 
you didna€™t know you wanted to know. And it covers way more than any one podcast conversation 
could hope to tapa€!

Brad DeLons: [The post-WWII economy] was a mass-production economy, rather than todaya€™ s global 
value-chain economy. An awful lot of people were on assembly lines and elsewhere doing routine and 
similar jobs which made them extremely easy to organizea€’’believing they needed one common 
voicea€!. They were very much aware of their numerical strength in the countrya€!. That extremely 
strong labor-side voice is somethinga€! absenta€!.


The New York Times used to have several dedicated labor reporters. Then they had only one, I think 
Steven Greenhouse. [Now zero]d!

Brad DeLong: Inflation is when people show up wanting to buy things, expecting to buy things, and 
find that the economy has tricked themd”you are unable to buy what you wanted to buy at the prices 
you expected to buy them atd!. John Maynard Keynesd! observ[ed]d! back in 1919 that inflation is a 
betrayal of social trust at an extraordinary level. When you have a depression, maybe one in 20 
people loses their jobd!. They have a really lousy time.
Maybe other people are [so] scared that they dond™ t dare quit. Butd! a depression affects only a 
fewd!. Inflationd! everyone feels: wait a minute, this is not how the system is supposed to work, I 
had my budget, I had my expectationsd! everyone is cheating med! charging for things more than they 
are worthd!

Brad DeLong: The willingness of people to raise their prices or to demand higher wages very much 
depends on what they expect other people to be doing at the same timed!. If there is a general 
expectation that inflation is going to be 7 percent next year, lots of people ared! thinking, my 
wages should go upd! I shouldd! raise my prices by about 7 percentd! and that fact will do an awful 
lot to determined! the rate of inflationd!. This is one of these
economic equilibria, in which there is a little bit of the fundamentals but thered™ s a lot ofd! 
things are what people expect things to bed!

Brad DeLong: An inflationd! people who have substantial amounts of immediate market powerd! able to 
extract huge amounts of wealth from everybody elsea€!makes it very clear that the race is not to 
the swift, thatd! luck, time, and chance rule everything around usd! that the distribution of 
income and wealthd! is d! randomd! how lucky you are and how unscrupulous you ared!. Not thed! 
thing on which you can build a society with enough trust
to actually run a productive, modern economy d!

Brad DeLong: Right now we have two kinds of inflation .d! One is an underlyingd! jump up of 
inflation from 2 percent to 5 percent, as a result of reopening the economy after the plagued!. The 
other is the Vladimir Putin oil-and-grain Europe is likely to freeze this winter and Nigeria and 
Egypt may starve.

The firstd!. We need to get people back to workd! in a very different configuration than we had 
back in 2019dL If you want to get people backd! into the right jobs for the future, youd! have to 
offerd! [expanding] sectors higher wagesd!. Plus the bottlenecksd!. Friedrich von Hayek would say 
and did sayd! a market systemd! crowdsource[s] solutions tod! bottlenecks and supply-chain 
difficultiesd!offer[ing] people money if they figure [it] outd!.
Friedrich von Hayek would say thatdicoming out of a plague, if you want tod! not repeat the lost 
decade of the 2010s, youd™ re going to have some inflationd!

Brad DeLong: To some degree, [Arthur] Burns acted badly in 1972. To some degree, Burns went as far 
as he could in terms of pressuring the Nixon administration to do something in order to fight 
inflation. Paul Volcker reports conversationsd! [in which] Burns would rant about how more had to 
be done. To some degree, Burns thought he would not be allowed to [fight inflation], that if he 
were to raise interest ratesd! Congress would come and would take
the Fedd™ s powers away, that he could only preserve [the Fedd™ s] independence by not [exercising] 
itd!

Brad DeLong: [Sources of the Neoliberal Turn: As of 1979] the social-democratic governments are 
clearly, clearly incompetentd!. Theyd™ ve deliveredd! stagflationd!. Second behind that [is] the 
idea that inflation is the result of a society that is permissive, that social democracyd! hand[s] 
out more ticketsd! than there ared! seats on the roller coasterd!. It simply cannot say nod! to 
[its] organized interest groups, big labor, those parts of big
businessd! in bed with it, welfare-rights organizations, minorities and so forthd”[those] that 
think they have a claimd!. And so in order to have stable prices,d! [and] a functioning society, we 
need to get back to the unpermissive view that you get only what you pay for and that you pay for 
only what you can earnd!. Paul Krugman is, I think, pretty certain that it was the inflation that 
actually pushed the system off the cliff, that it would have hung on
without it, and you would not have had the neoliberal turn. Id™ m less sured!

Brad DeLong: The [neoliberal] idea is that taxes [need to] be lower on the rich so that the job 
creators will be incentivized to do their proper entrepreneurial thing and create jobs, rather than 
spend money on lawyers in order to figure out how to evade taxes. [The idea is] that the 
social-democratic New Deal order had created a world in which the returns to working hard were too 
lowd!. Conversely, [the idea] is that the non-rich have it much too easy, that you
can find a union job and then featherbed your way through, the union will represent you if they try 
to fire you, the boss has virtually no control over anything, and if you do get fired, well, then 
unemployment insurance is there for a while. And thered™ s all this social welfare stuff that 
supports you.

In its most racist versions, itd™ s this is why all these Black people are having kids out of 
wedlock. Itd™ s because that then they get the A.F.D.C. payments which allow them to live and 
party, never mind that they have a one-year-oldd!. Maybe [this]d! was regrettable, [but] people 
really needed to be incentivized to work hard, which required the rich be richer and the poor be 
poorerd! alas, just the way things are in this fallen, sublunary sphere, where we
cannot say doefrom each according to his ability, to each according to his needdD and still have a 
functioning societyd!.

[Or maybe] income inequality is actually a feature rather than a bugd!. Itd™ s very importantd! 
society recognized! effort and achievementd!. The productive and successful deserve very real 
rewards. And moneyd! and the social power over other people that money brings is a very important 
part of thatd!

Brad DeLong: The plan for the neoliberal era was [this]:d! Make income inequalityd! greaterd! [to] 
incentivize both thed! job creators andd! the workersd! [to] properly punish the slackers and the 
moochersd!. You take aim at the social-insurance state which has been vastly and completely 
corrupted by rent-seeking interest groupsd!. The war on rent-seeking is a very important thing that 
neoliberals can do but that nobody else is willing to do,
especially not Social Democrats. That did not work out, I think, the way that neoliberals hoped.

[in the neoliberal view in the late 1970s] social democracy had become vastly 
over-bureaucratizedd!. Bureaucratsd! write rules and regulationsd! [that] turn everyone into a 
software d~botd! following a rule book that has only one third of the cases properly coveredd!. You 
really needd! entrepreneurship and enterprised!. to push power out to the peopled! The apex of this 
is the 1984 Apple Computer Macintosh launch commerciald! how a
Macintosh will enable you to move into the neoliberal erad!. Rather than being simply a mindless 
cog working for a large, bureaucratic organizationd! use your Macintosh computer to bed! an 
independent knowledge workerd!.

There also was a very strong sense [among neoliberals in the late 1970s] thatd! people had to 
buckle down and workd!. You shouldnd™t have people in Australia claiming unemployment insurance and 
then going on month-long surfing vacations. You wouldnd™td! getd! doepermissivenessdn. You 
wouldnd™t get the decline of the nuclear family. Mothers wouldnd™ t think that they had the option 
to leave husbandsd!. [They] wouldd! return to
their proper place in the patriarchal household.

[Neoliberals in the late 1970s thought] a very, very, very large tangle of Gordian knota€! [could 
be cut if you] accept[ed] that the market economy was a very powerful thing, and that the market 
economy did what it did for reasonsd!. The right attitude toward it: the market giveth, the market 
taketh away, blessed be the name of the market.

Brad DeLong: Come 2007, it becomes very plain that the neoliberal policymakers had forgotten 
everything the New Deal knew about financial regulation. And then it becomes clear in 2010 that the 
neoliberal order had forgotten everything the New Deal new about how, in a depression, youd! want 
to get everyone back to workd!. That was a big shock to the view that the neoliberal politicians 
and technocrats actually knew what they were doingd!

Brad DeLong: Look, you couldnd™ t run a gunpowder empire in 1650 like you ran a feudal rA©gime in 
1000. And you couldnd™ t run a steam-power society in 1870 like you ran a gunpowder empire in 1650. 
Similarly, the mass-production economy that supported the New Deal Order was a very different 
animal than the semi-globalized economy or the global value-chain economy of the Neoliberal Order.
And we are now moving intod! an info-biotech economyd!. The forces-of-production foundations are 
very different. So any kind of political or political-social bargain built on top of themd! [that] 
recreate[s] oned! builtd! on an earlier set of forces-of-production foundationsd! is highly 
unlikely to work at all.

Brad DeLong: You look at the long-run bond-market inflation expectation gauges that I prefer to 
look at, and they are all blinking that the bond market expects inflation to be lower than the 
Fedd™ s target in five years rather than aboved!. What real people are counting on happening is 
much more attuned to whatd™ s happening to the gasoline prices that they see at the pumpd!. But 
[still] the analogiesd! [to] the late 1970s are still, I think, weaker than
analogies withd!1947d! [or] 1951, when wed! had an inflation waved!. Id™ d say the odds are still 
60 percent that wed™ re repeating those and only 40 percent that itd™ s something somewhat or more 
analogous to the 1970s. Of course, Vladimir Putin and company and the House of Saud could change 
that. We still have an economy that, in large part because we failed to get Democratic Senator 
[number] fifty on board for Al Gored™ s B .T.U. Tax in
1993, hasd! wasted a generation with respect to the transition away from carbon energy. And the 
consequences are not just global warming, butd! also this large, political-economy vulnerability to 
a bunch of people who are pretty bad actors and yet who have control over the critical energy 
resources.

Ezra Klein: If Brad today could go back to the Brad of the early Clinton administrationd! What 
would your dialogue with your earlier self be? What should have been seen in the early d~90s that 
wasnd™t?

Brad DeLong: I would say:d! Al Gore is going to lose the presidential election five votes to four 
in 2000, [so] whatever fiscal space you create by reducing the deficit now will be used to fund 
high-income tax cuts in the 2000sd!. Move government accounting away from its currentd! frameworkd! 
[to] an explicit public-investment account and public-operations accountd! [be] fiscally 
responsible for the public operations account, andd! use the public­
investment account to make [the] investments in America to keep America great. I would also tell 
them:d! we ared! moving into a world in whichd! income inequality is going to be higherd! [and 
there] will be a nearly infinite flood of savings looking for outletsd! which means the cost of 
borrowing to invest in the future will be uniquely, historically, generationally, low for the next 
30 years. And so the time to wheel the American economy away from
consumption and to investment in technology and infrastructure is nowd!. We should be doing not 
what Bob Reich and company want us to be doing in terms of public support for economic growth, but 
we should be doing two, three, four, five times as much.

Ezra Klein: We talked earlier about the info-biotech possibilities. You talked about domination and 
communication. What do you think the moral, economic narrative is that would work in this era? What 
do you think, when people begin trying to tell a story, they need to be paying attention to, 
recognizing that itd™ s more than an economic policy?

Brad DeLong: Paul Seabrightd™ s book: The Company of Strangers. You drop any one of us in the 
wilderness and we died!. We d! have to be part of a society with a sophisticated division of 
labord!. We haved! ad! propensity to engage in gift-exchange relationshipsd!. You dond™ t want to 
be a moocher, but you also dond™ t want to always be the person doing the workd!. This complicated 
dance of favors and obligations in which, ideally,
everyone feels obligatedd! even though everyone is getting enormous amounts from the relationship. 
And we invent coins. And, all of a sudden, you can have this gift-exchange relationship not just 
with your neighbors, your friends, and your kin, butd! with everyone everywhered!.

[We need] to realize how very lucky we are and how we all are cousins and how we all are involved 
in this reciprocal exchange of favors for each otherd!. [We need] to take that very seriously.

Adam Smith, in The Wealth of Nations, has a passage where hed™ s arguing against mercantilists who 
say a low-wage economy is going to be a strong economy becaused! your goldd! [buys] lots of work on 
d! and project[s lots of] military powerd!. He says: wait a minute. The society is made up of 
people. If most of the people are starving, is that a good society? And then he does this 
gift-exchange, intellectual judo move, saying: doeit is but equity,
besides, that those who feed, clothe, and care for the rest of society should themselves, be well 
fed, well clothed, and well cared fordUd!

To take seriously that the market economy is a gift-exchange networkd! [among] cousinsd!. We have 
enormous amounts in common [with] and we owe [many] things to people far away. There are people in 
Pakistan who wove the carpets that are on the floor of my living roomd!. Every time I walk on them, 
I should think:d! dcel have this wonderful carpetd!. And when the dog barfs on it we go to 
considerable effort to clean it off because it is a thing of
beautyd!. Id! have an obligation todithe guy in Pakistand! who tied these knotsdUd! Whatever I 
should do, I should take care that he is somewhere close to the front of my mind.

Brad DeLong: I dond™ t know if [these three books] have influenced me, butd! I wish they had 
influenced med! [in] the last months writing my book:]d!

Gary Gerstle published his The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order, which is a book I really 
wished that I would have had [to hand] while writing the Neoliberal Turn chapter, because it would 
have made it better and stronger and would have made me smarterd!.

Jacob Soil of U.S .Cd!, the only person I know whose title is university professor of accounting 
and philosophyd! a fairly unique title, has a book called Free Market going through the idea of the 
free market from Cicero to Friedmand! Itd™ s a truly excellent,d! wonderful book that I wish I had 
had at my side while I was writing my ownd!. He said that reading mine made him [realize]d! he had 
writtend! [his] book the way he did because he didnd™ t
want to be known as that crazy leftist who likes Karl Polanyi, but [now] felt guilty [seeing how] 
Id™ ve used Polanyi successfullyd!.

The third [book is]d! closely-relatedd!. [This is] social-network-academic nepotismd!. I had a 
student in the 2000s, Glory Liu, who now has one of the jobs at Social Studies in Harvard that I 
was looking at back in 1981 when I was thinking of who would I like to bed!. She has a book on Adam 
Smitha€™ s America, on the reception of Adam Smith in America and how someone who is largely a 
David Humean moral philosopher came to be weaponized as
the person who believes the market is a god in America in the 1800s and 1900sd!. I think [it] is 
very, very much worth reading. And itd™ s forthcoming from Princeton University Press in Novemberd!


Brad DeLong: The plan for the neoliberal era was [this]:a€! Make income inequalitya€! greatera€! 
[to] incentivize both thea€! job creators anda€! the workersa€! [to] properly punish the slackers 
and the moochersa€!. You take aim at the social-insurance state which has been vastly and 
completely corrupted by rent-seeking interest groupsa€L The war on rent-seeking is a very important 
thing that neoliberals can do but that nobody else is willing to do,
especially not Social Democrats. That did not work out, I think, the way that neoliberals hoped.

[in the neoliberal view in the late 1970s] social democracy had become vastly 
over-bureaucratizeda€!. Bureaucratsa€! write rules and regulationsa€! [that] turn everyone into a 
software a€~bota€! following a rule book that has only one third of the cases properly covereda€!. 
You really needa€! entrepreneurship and enterprisea€!. to push power out to the peoplea€! The apex 
of this is the 1984 Apple Computer Macintosh launch commercial^! how a
Macintosh will enable you to move into the neoliberal eraa€!. Rather than being simply a mindless 
cog working for a large, bureaucratic organizationa€! use your Macintosh computer to bea€! an 
independent knowledge workera€!.

There also was a very strong sense [among neoliberals in the late 1970s] thata€! people had to 
buckle down and worka€!. You shouldna€™t have people in Australia claiming unemployment insurance 
and then going on month-long surfing vacations. You wouldna€™ta€! geta€! a€oepermissivenessa€n. You 
wouldna€™t get the decline of the nuclear family. Mothers wouldna€™ t think that they had the 
option to leave husbandsa€!. [They] woulda€! return to
their proper place in the patriarchal household.

[Neoliberals in the late 1970s thought] a very, very, very large tangle of Gordian knota€! [could 
be cut if you] accept[ed] that the market economy was a very powerful thing, and that the market 
economy did what it did for reasonsa€!. The right attitude toward it: the market giveth, the market 
taketh away, blessed be the name of the market.

Brad DeLong: Come 2007, it becomes very plain that the neoliberal policymakers had forgotten 
everything the New Deal knew about financial regulation. And then it becomes clear in 2010 that the 
neoliberal order had forgotten everything the New Deal new about how, in a depression, youa€! want 
to get everyone back to worka€!. That was a big shock to the view that the neoliberal politicians 
and technocrats actually knew what they were doinga€!

Brad DeLong: Look, you couldna€™ t run a gunpowder empire in 1650 like you ran a feudal rA©gime in 
1000. And you couldna€™ t run a steam-power society in 1870 like you ran a gunpowder empire in 
1650. Similarly, the mass-production economy that supported the New Deal Order was a very different 
animal than the semi-globalized economy or the global value-chain economy of the Neoliberal Order.
And we are now moving intoa€! an info-biotech economya€!. The forces-of-production foundations are 
very different. So any kind of political or political-social bargain built on top of thema€! [that] 
recreate[s] onea€! builta€! on an earlier set of forces-of-production foundationsa€! is highly 
unlikely to work at all.

Brad DeLong: You look at the long-run bond-market inflation expectation gauges that I prefer to 
look at, and they are all blinking that the bond market expects inflation to be lower than the 
Feda€™ s target in five years rather than abovea€!. What real people are counting on happening is 
much more attuned to whata€™ s happening to the gasoline prices that they see at the pumpa€!. But 
[still] the analogiesa€! [to] the late 1970s are still, I think, weaker than
analogies witha€!1947a€! [or] 1951, when wea€! had an inflation wavea€!. Ia€™ d say the odds are 
still 60 percent that wea€™ re repeating those and only 40 percent that ita€™ s something somewhat 
or more analogous to the 1970s. Of course, Vladimir Putin and company and the House of Saud could 
change that. We still have an economy that, in large part because we failed to get Democratic 
Senator [number] fifty on board for Al Gorea€™ s B .T.U. Tax in
1993, hasa€! wasted a generation with respect to the transition away from carbon energy. And the 
consequences are not just global warming, buta€! also this large, political-economy vulnerability 
to a bunch of people who are pretty bad actors and yet who have control over the critical energy 
resources.

Ezra Klein: If Brad today could go back to the Brad of the early Clinton administration^! What 
would your dialogue with your earlier self be? What should have been seen in the early a€~90s that 
wasna€™t?

Brad DeLong: I would say:a€! Al Gore is going to lose the presidential election five votes to four 
in 2000, [so] whatever fiscal space you create by reducing the deficit now will be used to fund 
high-income tax cuts in the 2000sa€!. Move government accounting away from its currenta€! 
frameworka€! [to] an explicit public-investment account and public-operations accounta€! [be] 
fiscally responsible for the public operations account, anda€! use the public­
investment account to make [the] investments in America to keep America great. I would also tell 
them:a€! we area€! moving into a world in whicha€! income inequality is going to be highera€! [and 
there] will be a nearly infinite flood of savings looking for outletsa€! which means the cost of 
borrowing to invest in the future will be uniquely, historically, generationally, low for the next 
30 years. And so the time to wheel the American economy away from
consumption and to investment in technology and infrastructure is nowa€!. We should be doing not 
what Bob Reich and company want us to be doing in terms of public support for economic growth, but 
we should be doing two, three, four, five times as much.

Ezra Klein: We talked earlier about the info-biotech possibilities. You talked about domination and 
communication. What do you think the moral, economic narrative is that would work in this era? What 
do you think, when people begin trying to tell a story, they need to be paying attention to, 
recognizing that ita€™ s morethan aneconomicpolicy?

Brad DeLong: Paul Seabrighta€™ s book: The Company of Strangers. You drop any one of us in the 
wilderness and we diea€!. We a€! have to be part of a society with a sophisticated division of 
labora€!. We havea€! aa€! propensity to engage in gift-exchange relationships^!. You dona€™ t want 
to be a moocher, but you also dona€™ t want to  always be the person doing the worka€!. This 
complicated dance of favors and obligations in which, ideally,
everyone feels obligateda€! even though everyone is getting enormous amounts from the relationship. 
And we invent coins. And, all of a sudden, you can have this gift-exchange relationship not just 
with your neighbors, your friends, and your kin, buta€! with everyone everywherea€!.

[We need] to realize how very lucky we are and how we all are cousins and how we all are involved 
in this reciprocal exchange of favors for each othera€!. [We need] to take that very seriously.

Adam Smith, in The Wealth of Nations, has a passage where hea€™ s arguing against mercantilists who 
say a low-wage economy is going to be a strong economy becausea€! your golda€! [buys] lots of work 
on a€! and project[s lots of] military powera€!. He says: wait a minute. The society is made up of 
people. If most of the people are starving, is that a good society? And then he does this 
gift-exchange, intellectual judo move, saying: a€oeit is but equity,
besides, that those who feed, clothe, and care for the rest of society should themselves, be well 
fed, well clothed, and well cared for.a€Da€!

To take seriously that the market economy is a gift-exchange networka€! [among] cousinsa€!. We have 
enormous amounts in common [with] and we owe [many] things to people far away. There are people in 
Pakistan who wove the carpets that are on the floor of my living rooma€!. Every time I walk on 
them, I should think:a€! a€oel have this wonderful carpeta€!. And when the dog barfs on it we go to 
considerable effort to clean it off because it is a thing of
beautya€!. Ia€! have an obligation toa€!the guy in Pakistana€! who tied these knots.a€Ua€! Whatever 
I should do, I should take care that he is somewhere close to the front of my mind.

Brad DeLong: I dona€™ t know if [these three books] have influenced me, buta€! I wish they had 
influenced mea€! [in] the last months writing my book:]a€!

Gary Gerstle published his The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order, which is a book I really 
wished that I would have had [to hand] while writing the Neoliberal Turn chapter, because it would 
have made it better and stronger and would have made me smartera€!.

Jacob Soil of U.S.Ca€!. the only person I know whose title is university professor of accounting 
and philosophya€! a fairly unique title, has a book called Free Market going through the idea of 
the free market from Cicero to Friedmana€! Ita€™ s a truly excellent,a€! wonderful book that I wish 
I had had at my side while I was writing my owna€!. He said that reading mine made him [realize]a€! 
he had writtena€! [his] book the way he did because he didna€™ t
want to be known as that crazy leftist who likes Karl Polanyi, but [now] felt guilty [seeing how] 
Ia€™ ve used Polanyi successfullya€!.

The third [book is]a€! closely-relateda€!. [This is] social-network-academic nepotisma€!. I had a 
student in the 2000s, Glory Liu, who now has one of the jobs at Social Studies in Harvard that I 
was looking at back in 1981 when I was thinking of who would I like to bea€!. She has a book on 
Adam Smitha€™ s America, on the reception of Adam Smith in America and how someone who is largely a 
David Humean moral philosopher came to be weaponized as
the person who believes the market is a god in America in the 1800s and 1900sa€!. I think [it] is 
very, very much worth reading. And ita€™ s forthcoming from Princeton University Press in 
Novembera€!

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

