Sir Arthur Lyon Fremantle


Subscribe now

James Fremantle: The Fremantle Diary: A Journal of the Confederacy. a€~At noon [on July 3] all 
Longstreeta€™ s dispositions were made. His troops for attack were deployed into line, and lying 
down in the woods; his batteries were ready to open. The general then dismounted and went to sleep 
for a short time. The Austrian officer and I now rode off to get, if
possible, into some commanding position from whence we could see the whole thing without being 
exposed to the tremendous fire which was about to commenceaC!. Just before we reached the entrance 
to the town, the cannonade opened with a fury which surpassed even that of yesterdaya€!.

Finding that, to see the actual fighting, it was absolutely necessary to go into the thick of the 
thing, I determined to make my way to General Longstreet. It was then about 2:30a€!. I soon began 
to meet many wounded men returning from the front. Many of them asked in piteous tones the way to a 
doctor or an ambulance. The further I got, the greater became the
number of the wounded. At last I came to a perfect stream of them flocking through the woods in 
numbers as great as the crowd in Oxford Street in the middle of the day. Some were walking alone on 
crutches composed of two rifles, others were supported by men less badly wounded than themselves, 
and others were carried on stretchers by the ambulance corps; but
in                                                                                                  
                                                                     no case did I see a sound man 
helping the wounded to the rear, unless he carried the red badge of the ambulance corps. They were 
still under a heavy fire; the shells were continually bringing down great limbs of trees, and 
carrying further destruction amongst this melancholy procession. I saw all this in much less time 
than it takes to write it, and although
astonished to meet such vast numbers of wounded, I had not seen enough to give me any idea of the 
real extent of the mischief.

When I got close up to General Longstreet, I saw one of his regiments advancing through the woods 
in good order; so, thinking I was just in time to see the attack, I remarked to the General that 
a€oel wouldna€™ t have missed this for any thing. a€D Longstreet was seated at the top of a snake 
fence at the edge of the wood, and looking perfectly calm and imperturbed.
He replied, laughing, aCceThe devil you wouldna€™ t! I would like to have missed it very much; 
wea€™ ve attacked and been repulsed: look there !a€C

For the first time I then had a view of the open space between the two positions, and saw it 
covered with Confederates slowly and sulkily returning towards us in small broken parties, under a 
heavy fire of artillery. But the fire where we were was not so bad as further to the rear: for 
although the air seemed alive with shell, yet the greater number burst behind us.

The General told me that Picketta€™ s division had succeeded in carrying the enemya€™ s position 
and capturing his guns, but after remaining there twenty minutes, it had been forced to retire, on 
the retreat of Heth and Pettigrew on its left. No person could have been more calm or 
self-possessed than General Longstreet under these trying circumstances, aggravated
as they now were by the movements of the enemy, who began to show a strong disposition to advance. 
I could now thoroughly appreciate the term bulldog, which I had heard applied to him by the 
soldiers. Difficulties seem to make no other impression upon him than to make him a little more 
savagea€!. The General was making the best arrangements in his power to
resist the threatened advance, by advancing some artillery, rallying the stragglers, &c. I remember 
seeing a General (Pettigrew, I think it was) come up to him, and report that a€oehe was unable to 
bring his men up again.a€D Longstreet turned upon him and replied with some sarcasm: a€ceVery well; 
never mind, then, General; just let them remain where they are: the
enemya€™ s going to advance, and will spare you the trouble.a€D He asked for something to drink. I 
gave him some rum out of my silver flask, which I begged he would keep in remembrance of the 
occasion; he smiled, and, to my great satisfaction, accepted the memoriala€!.

If Longstreeta€™ s conduct was admirable, that of General Lee was perfectly sublime. He was engaged 
in rallying and in encouraging the broken troops, and was riding about a little in front of the 
wood, quite alonea€”the whole of his staff being engaged in a similar manner further to the rear. 
His face, which is always placid and cheerful, did not show signs of the
slightest disappointment, care, or annoyance; and he was addressing to every soldier he met a few 
words of encouragement, such as, a€oeAll this will come right in the end; wea€™ 11 talk it over 
afterwards; but, in the meantime, all good men must rally. We want all good and true men just 
now,a€D &c. He spoke to all the wounded men that passed him, and the
slightly wounded he exhorted a€oeto bind up [their] hurts and take up a musketa€D in this 
emergency. Very few failed to answer his appeal, and I saw many badly wounded men take off their 
hats and cheer him. He said to me, a€oeThis has been a sad day for us, Colonela€”a sad day; but we 
cana€™t expect always to gain victories ,a€Da€ I

I saw General Willcox (an officer who wears a short round jacket and a battered straw hat) come up 
to him, and explain, almost crying, the state of his brigade. General Lee immediately shook hands 
with him and said cheerfully, a€oeNever mind, General, all this has been MY faulta€”it is I that 
have lost this fight, and you must help me out of it in the best way you
can.a€D In this manner I saw General Lee encourage and reanimate his somewhat dispirited troops, 
and magnanimously take upon his own shoulders the whole weight of the repulse. It was impossible to 
look at him or to listen to him without feeling the strongest admirationa€!.

The men, as they were rallied in the wood, were brought up in detachments, and lay down quietly and 
coolly in the positions assigned to them. We heard that Generals Garnett and Armistead were killed, 
and General Kemper mortally wounded; also, that Picketta€™ s division had only one field officer 
unhurt. Nearly all this slaughter took place in an open space about
one mile square, and within one houra€!.

I was immediately surrounded by a sergeant and about half-a-dozen gunners, who seemed in excellent 
spirits and full of confidence, in spite of their exposed situation. The sergeant expressed his 
ardent hope that the Yankees might have spirit enough to advance and receive the dose he had in 
readiness for them. They spoke in admiration of the advance of Picketta€™ s
division, and of the manner in which Pickett himself had led it. When they observed General Lee 
they said, a€oeWea€™ ve not lost confidence in the old man: this daya€™ s work wona€™ t do him no 
harm. a€~Uncle Roberta€™ will get us into Washington yet; you bet he will!a€n &ca€!.

4th July (Saturday)a€”a€!I walked up to the front about eight oa€™ clock, and on our way we met 
General Longstreet, who was in a high state of amusement and good humor. A flag of truce had just 
come over from the enemy, and its bearer announced among other things that a€oeGeneral Longstreet 
was wounded, and a prisoner, but would be taken care of.a€D
General Longstreet sent back word that he was extremely grateful, but that, being neither wounded 
nor a prisoner, he was quite able to take care of himself. The iron endurance of General Longstreet 
is most extraordinary. He seems to require neither food nor sleep. Most of his staff now fall fast 
asleep directly they get off their horses, they are so exhausted from the
last three daysa€™ worka€!.

At 10 AM. Lawley returned from headquarters, bringing the news that the army is to commence moving 
in the direction of Virginia this evening. This step is imperative from want of ammunition. But it 
was hoped that the enemy might attack during the day, especially as this is the Fourth of July, and 
it was calculated that there was still ammunition for one daya€™ s
fighting. The ordnance train had already commenced moving back towards Cashtown, and Ewella€™ s 
immense train of plunder had been proceeding towards Hagerstown by the Fairfield road ever since an 
early hour this morningaC!.

At 2 P.M. we walked to General Longstreeta€™ s campa€!. General Longstreet talked to me for a long 
time about the battle. He said the mistake they had made was in not concentrating the army more, 
and in failing to make the attack yesterday with 30,000 men instead of 15,000. The advance had been 
in three lines, and the troops of Hilla€™ s corps who gave way
were young soldiers, who had never been under fire before. He thought the enemy would have attacked 
had the guns been withdrawn. Had they done so at that particular moment immediately after the 
repulse, it would have been awkward; but in that case he had given orders for the advance of 
Hooda€™ s division and Ma€™ Lawsa€™ s on the right. I think, after all,
that General Meade was right not to advancea€”his men would never have stood the tremendous fire of 
artillery they would have been exposed to.

Rather over 7000 Yankees were captured during the three days [of the battle]; 3500 took the parole; 
the remainder were now being marched to Richmond, escorted by the remains of Picketta€™ s division. 
It is impossible to avoid seeing that the cause of this check to the Confederates lies in the utter 
contempt felt for the enemy by all ranks. Wagons, horses, mules, and
cattle captured in Pennsylvania, the solid advantages of this campaign, have been passing slowly 
along this road (Fairfield) all day. Those taken by Ewell are particularly admired. So interminable 
was this train that it soon became evident that we should not be able to start till late at night.

As soon as it became dark we all lay round a big fire, and I heard reports coming in from the 
different generals that the enemy was retiring, and had been doing so all day long. Ma€™ Laws 
reported nothing in his front but cavalry vedettes. But this, of course, could make no difference 
to General Leea€™ s plan: ammunition he must havea€”he had failed to capture it
from the enemy (according to precedent); and as his communications with Virginia were intercepted, 
he was compelled to fall back towards Winchester, and draw his supplies from thence. General Milroy 
had kindly left an ample stock at that town when he made his precipitate exit some weeks ago. The 
army was also incumbered with an enormous wagon train, the
spoils of Pennsylvania, which it is highly desirable to get safely over the Potomaca€!.

9th July (Thursdayj^'^.'^'&SYR.g beyond the Confederate Linesa€!. At length they allowed me to 
proceed, on the understanding that my buggy driver should hand me over to General Kellya€!. The 
hills near Hancock were white with Yankee tents, and there were, I believe, from 8000 to 10,000 
Federals there. I did not think much of the appearance of the Northern
troops. They are certainly dressed in proper uniform, but their clothes are badly fitted, and they 
are often round-shouldered, dirty, and slovenly in appearance; in fact, bad imitations of soldiers. 
Now, the Confederate has no ambition to imitate the regular soldier at all. He looks the genuine 
Rebel; but in spite of his bare feet, his ragged clothes, his old rug, and
toothbrush stuck like a rose in his buttonhole, he has a sort of devil-may-care, reckless, 
self-confident look, which is decidedly takinga€!.

11th July (Saturday)a€”I hope I may never for my sins be again condemned to travel for thirty hours 
in an American stagea€!. My fellow travelers were of course violent Unionists, anda€! had all got 
into their heads that their Potomac army, not having been thoroughly thrashed, as it always has 
been hitherto, had achieved a tremendous victory; and that its new chief,
General Meade, who in reality was driven into a strong position, which he had sense enough to stick 
to, is a wonderful strategist. They all hope that the remnants of Leea€™ s army will not be allowed 
to ESCAPE over the Potomac; whereas, when I left the army two days ago, no man in it had a thought 
of escaping over the Potomac, and certainly General Meade was
not  in a position to attempt to prevent the passage, if crossing had become necessarya€!.

14th July (Tuesday)a€ ”a€!I heard everyone talking of the total demoralization of the Rebels as a 
certain fact, and all seemed to anticipate their approaching destruction. All this sounded very 
absurd to me, who had left Leea€™ s army four days previously as full of fight as evera€”much 
stronger in numbers, and ten times more efficient in every military point of
view, than it was when it crossed the Potomac to invade Maryland a year ago. In its own opinion, 
Leea€™ s army has not lost any of its prestige at the battle of Gettysburg, in which it most 
gallantly stormed strong intrenchments defended by the whole army of the Potomac, which never 
ventured outside its works, or approached in force within half a mile of the
Confederate artillerya€!. I was filled with astonishment to hear the people speaking in this 
confident manner, when one of their most prosperous states had been so recently laid under 
contribution as far as Harrisburg; and Washington, their capital itself, having just been saved by 
a fortunate turn of luck. Four-fifths of the Pennsylvanian spoil had safely crossed the
Potomac before I left Hagerstowna€!.

PostscriptaS.”is the opinion of the Confederates that they can keep their armies recruited up to 
their present strength for several years; and, if the worst comes to the worst, they can always 
fall back upon their Negroes as the last resorta€!. With respect to the supply of arms, cannon, 
powder, and military stores, the Confederates are under no alarm whatever.

Augusta furnishes more than sufficient gunpowder; Atlanta, copper caps, &c. The Tredegar Works at 
Richmond, and other foundries, cast more cannon than is wanted; and the Federal generals have 
always hitherto proved themselves the most indefatigable purveyors of artillery to the Confederate 
government. Even in those actions which they claim as drawn battles or
as victories, such as Corinth, Murfreesboro, and Gettysburg, they have never failed to make over 
cannon to the Southerners without exacting any in returna€!.

My Northern friendsa€! spoke much and earnestly about the determination of the North to crush out 
the Rebellion at any sacrifice. But they did not show any disposition to fight themselves in this 
cause, although many of them would have made most eligible recruits; and if they had been 
Southerners, their female relations would have made them enter the army
whether their inclinations led them that way or nota€!.

The mass of respectable Northerners, though they may be willing to pay, do not very naturally feel 
themselves called upon to give their blood in a war of aggression, ambition, and conquest. For this 
war is essentially a war of conquesta€!. The more I think of all that I have seen in the 
Confederate States of the devotion of the whole population, the more I feel inclined
to say with General Polka€”a€oeHow can you subdue such a nation as this!a€D Even supposing that 
their extermination were a feasible plan, as some Northerners have suggested, I never can believe 
that in the nineteenth century the civilized world will be condemned to witness the destruction of 
such a gallant racea€!

LINK: <https://archive.org/details/fremantlediarybe0000frem>
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment


Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


