Subscribe now

President Bill Clinton was impressed by then-Federal Reserve Chair and Republican Alan Greenspan's 
willingness to offset Clinton's deficit-reducing fiscal contraction with
monetary expansion in order to keep recovery and growth from stalling in the 1990s. Greenspan did 
so over the partisan objections of Republicans denouncing him for making
monetary policy too loose. And so Democratic Bill Clinton reappointed Republican Alan Greenspan to 
Chair the Federal Reserve. But Greenspana€™ s nurturing of the very
beneficial 1990s dot-com boom was about the last time he was nonpartisan and brave and wise. In the 
2000s Greenspan chose to be a Republican partisan first and to keep private
his beliefs that the Bush-Frist-Hastert tax cuts were bad policy. And he strongly rejected the 
pleas of Fed Governor Ned Gramlich that housing, and derivatives, and housing
derivatives needed much closer scrutiny and regulation. a€oeNed, I just cannot get in the way and 
tell lenders who want to lend that they cannot lend to home buyers who want to
borrowa€D, he might have said. But that is what his predecessor William Chesney Martin famously 
said the key job of the Fed Chair is: to take away the punchbowl before the
party   gets too loud, even though the party-goers are protesting.

President Barack Obama was impressed by then-Federal Reserve Chair and Republican Ben Bernankea€™ s 
willingness to work on a bipartisan basis to press the perceived limits
of monetary policy in order to try to curb the Great Recession and strengthen recovery. And so 
Democrat Barack Obama reappointed Republican Ben Bernanke to Chair the Federal
Reserve. Bernanke did hold the line and continue his quantitative-easing policies in spite of 
outraged cries from Republican economists and non-economists who had convinced
themselves that an America that had elected Barack Obama needed to be punished by higher 
unemployment produced by rapid normalization of monetary policy rather than see
monetary expansion produce a degree of prosperity that they dismissed as only a sham. The problem, 
however, was that the degree of prosperity was small. The U.S employment-
to-population ratio had peaked at 63.4% in December 2006. It was 58.3% in December 2009. Three 
years later, in December 2012, it was only 58.7%. When Bernanke stepped
down      in January 2014 it was no higher. Bernanke was bitterly disappointed at the anemic 
recovery. In the late 1990s Bernanke was vociferous that the Bank of Japan had the power
to and should do whatever it takes to restore the economy to full employment. But things looked 
different to him when he became a central banker. Not until after his retirement did
the employment-to-population ratio begin rising at the rate of about 1%-point per year that would 
return the economy to within shouting distance of full employment in the third
year                                                                                of the term of 
President Trump.

Now it appears that Democratic President Joe Biden is about to reappoint Republican Fed Chair Jay 
Powell. For the life of me I cannot understand why. Jay Powell is profoundly
out of sympathy with the Democratic near-consensus perspective on financial regulation. Jay Powell 
does not have strong technocratic views on monetary policy that are in accord
with the current Democratic near-consensus perspective on macroeconomic management. Jay Powell has 
spent the past four years following interest-rate and quantitative-easing
policies that are in accord with the current Democratic near-consensus. But that is because of two 
factors: First, and most important, the Republican Party has been split down the
middle and thus neutralized by the bitter conflict between the hard-money knee-jerk instincts of 
Republican worthies and the soft-money knee-jerk instincts of real-estate developer
Donald Trump, for whom money can never be too cheap. Second, Governor Lael Brainard has been 
extremely persuasive in arguing, I think rightly, that the current neutral rate of
interest is still below zero, and that the supply shock-driven inflation caused by the economic 
impact of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic should be accommodated.

The first of these is going away. Without Trump in office, and without a fear that tight money will 
erode vote margins in the short run, Republican worthies are about to unite
overwhelmingly behind the talking point that monetary policy needs to be substantially tightened 
immediately. Jay Powell is a Republican worthy. He will listen. If you think that
the  standard Republican hard-money perspective is, in fact, good policy right now, that is fine. 
But if not, not.

So what, again, is the argument against Lael Brainarda€”on technocratic substantive-knowledge 
chops, on charisma, on persuasiveness, on monetary policy, on regulatory policy,
on not binding the mouths of the kine that tread the corn and properly valuing the contribution of 
a woman who stayed the course at her post during the Trump administration^’’for
Fed Chair?

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


