Very Briefly Noted:

• Wikipedia: Shadow & Bone (TV Series)<https:Z/en.wikipedia.orgZwikiZShado w_and_Bone_.(TV_ 
series)>

•  Duncan Black: a€™ The kids wona€™ t remember, but the a€oeTorture DiscourseaCO (and of course, 
the torture!) was horrific back then, a lot of people showed themselves to be monsters, and it all 
turned out to be both as horrific and pointless as critics said (SHUT UP STUPID HIPPIE CRITICS)a€! 
<https://twitter.com/Atrios/status/1389199019608522753>

• James Medlock: a€™ a€ceMonopsonya€disna€™ t just, or even primarily, an issue of employer 
concentration; search frictions and job differentiation are also large factorsa€! 
<https://twitter.com/idcmedlock/status/1389011901766504451>

•  Angelica Oung: a€™ Are we about to see the Cultural Revolution 2.0 in China?a€!. Wen Jiabaoa€! 
criticized the Cultural Revolution^! veiled commentarya€! China is going the wrong waya€! using 
whatever political capital he hasa€! to push back against the new Red Guarda€! LINK: 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/thread-oung-cultural-revolution-2.0%3F.pdf>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Yesterdaya€™s Thread-of-Thread 2021-05-07 Fr:

To @causalinf:


Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!1 @ delong

@causalinf My great-grandfather Roland Greene Usher found it bitter every day when he awoke to 
remember that he was but a Professor at Washington University in St. Louis, while his brother 
Abbott Payson Usher was not only at Harvard but had an office **inside** Widener...
2:01 AM a'™ May 7,2021

19Likes2Retweets
To: @snitstwits

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!' @delong

@snitstwits While I strongly defend the need for A34is to be said, I strongly oppose David Brooks's 
placing himself at A34e front of A34e parade. He built a whole f—ing career on "I'm all right, 
Jack! Pull up A34e ladder!!", and made a mighty contribution to breaking America's web of social 
trust
2:40 PM r™ May 7, 2021"

16Likes4Retweets

Bastiat @EverydayBastiat
every reactionary meme be like


12:39 PMT™ May 7,2021

546Likes36Retweets

Stefan Gerlach @HmsGerlach

An excellent piece by Brad @ delong about inflation risks!

Dr. Lisa D. Cook @drlisadcook

Well said, @delong: a€oeThe question is not whether there will be some inflation this year, but 
whether it will represent a€~overheatinga€™ of the economy as a whole. a€! Burning rubber to rejoin 
highway traffic is not the same thing as overheating the engine.a€D https ://t.co/KlYlc2CTPY
3:41 AM r™ May 7, 2021

Bloomberg Economics ©economics

Women dropped out of the U.S, labor force in April for the first time since January, signaling the 
jobs recovery may be more haphazard than expected
trib.alBloomberg - Are you a robot?

2:59 PM r™ May 7,2021

13Likes8Retweets


esquire .comEverybodya€™ s a Sinner, Except for the Guys Who Write the ChecksFor Republicans, 
inherited wealth has no effect on onea€™ s work ethic, but a bit of government largesse will turn 
the hoi polloi into lazy slug-a-beds.
9:04 PM r™ May 7,2021

3 86Likes 120Re tweets

Eric Topol @EricTopol

I've heard enough about herd immunity. Just want to get to <1 case/100,000 people. That's real 
containment. We're at 13.5 today (45,002 new cases)
12:06 AM r™ May 7,2021

2,454Likes417Re tweets

This will go down in history as one of science and medical research's greatest achievements. 
Perhaps the most impressive. I put together a preliminary timeline of some key milestones to show 
how several years of work were compressed into months.

Date                          Milestone

Dec 1       Covid-19 illness documented (unpublicized Nov 17th)
Jan 10       SARS-CoV-2 virus sequenced

Jan 15       NIH designs mRNA vaccine in collaboration with Moderna

Mar 16      Moderna Phase 112 trial begins

May 2       Pfizer/BioNTech Phase 112 trial begins

July 14      Moderna Phase 112 trial published in NEJM

July 27, 28     Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech Phase 3 trial begins
Aug 12       Pfizer/BioNTech Phase 112 published in Nature

October 22.27     Enrollment in both Phase 3 trials comnlete: >74.000 nartioinants


Nov 9

Nov 16

Nov 18

Nov 20

Nov 27

Dec 10

Dec 11

7:39 PM r™ Nov 28,2020

Pfizer/BioNTech announces interim analysis efficacy > 90%
Moderna announces interim analysis efficacy 94.5%
Pfizer/BioNTech announces 95% efficacy as final result

1st EUA submitted by Pfizer/BioNTech

Distribution of vaccine by UAL charter flights throughout US
FDA External review of Pfizer/BioNTech EUA

Phase 1a Vaccination begins for health care professionals*

^Provisional on positive external review

29,011 Likes8,526Retweets


Peter W. Singer @peterwsinger
New Study Estimates More Than
2:51 PM r™ May 7,2021

399Likes330Retweets

,000 People Have Died Of COVID-19 In U.S. https://t.co/FrVnDXBEfq

Ida Bae Wells @nhannahjones

a€oeWhat we know to be true is   slavery & the date the first enslaved Africans arrived & were sold 
on U.S, soil are more than an 'exotic notion.1 If the Civil War is a significant part of history, 
shld not the basis for it also be viewed as significant?"



salon .comMitch McConnell rebuked by alma mater over 1619 Project commentsSenate GOP leader taking 
heat over impromptu history lesson at the University of Louisville, which he attended
2:34 PM r™ May 7,2021

1,316Likes288Retweets

Matthew Chapman @fawfulfan

Reminder: there is literally no evidence that labor force reductions are being caused by overly 
generous unemployment benefits. This is a fiction being sold by a small group of right wing 
business interests. If that were the case, you would see wages rising. They are not. 
https://t.co/EVlbEVoYlc

►

Nikita @NikitaKitty

South Carolina becomes the second state to cancel federal unemployment benefits 
https://t.co/COGktUvzAl via @ Yahoo
2:08 PM r™ May 7,2021

2,129Likes869Retweets

Walter Shaub @waltshaub

The Justice Department should take strong disciplinary action against the OLC attorneys who lied in 
sworn affidavits to Judge Jackson, and it needs to investigate the matter criminally. That means 
looking into whether Barr conspired with them.
12:04 AM r™ May 7,2021

11,543Likes3,118Retweets

Von Hayek here is so weird, and soa€’’deliberately a€’’wrong on so many levels:

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!' @delong

bradford-delong.comWhy Did Keynes Write a€oeln the Long Run We Are All Deada€D?The appearance of 
a€oeNiall Fergusona€D in my inbox stream as the posts from October 2012 flow across reminds me that 
I have a very serious point here that has not gotten sufficient attention. To some degree this is 
my fault: * Lumping it into April Foolsa€™ Week: [One Last April-Fools Note on Niall Fergua€!


26Likes 11 Retweets

Wednesday's thread-of-thread: 2021-05-05:

Brad DeLong: 'Live long, & prosper!1 @delong

Today's thread-of-thread: 2021 -05■ -05 We: BRIEFLY NOTED: For 2021a€“05a€“05 We: Joe Biden: a€™ I 
think theya€™re going   to write about this point in historya€! about  whether or not democracy can 
function in the 21st century. Not a joke <braddelong .substack.com/pZbriefly-noteaG !> 1/

braddelong.substack.comBRIEFLY NOTED: For 2021-05-05 WeThings that went whizzing by that I want to 
remember... FirstTan Leslie: BidenaO™ s Bet: a€™ Biden... is... hinting at... a€oel think theya€™re 
going to write about this point in historyaO! about whether or not democracy can function in the 
21st century. Not a joke. Whether autocracy is the answea€”these were my a€!
3:07 AM r™ May 6,2021

5Likes2Retweets

Paragraphs:

Friedrich Engels: Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy. a€~The nearer the economists come to 
the present time, the further they depart from honestyaO!. According to the economists, the 
production costs of a commodity consist of three elements: the rent for thea€! landa€! capital with 
its profit, and the wages for the laboura€!. A third factor which the economist does not think 
abouta€“I mean the mental element of invention, of thoughtaG!. What has the economist to do with 
inventiveness? Have not all
inventions fallen into his lap without any effort on his part? Has one of them cost him anything? 
Why then should he bother about them in the calculation of production costs? Land, capital and 
labour are for him the conditions of wealth, and he requires nothing else. Science is no concern of 
his. What does it matter to him that he has received its gifts through Berthollet, Davy, Liebig, 
Watt, Cartwright, etc.a€“gifts which have benefited him and his production immeasurably? He does 
not know how to calculate such things;
the advances of science go beyond his figuresaG!. [Yet] a single achievement of science like James 
WattaG™ s steam-engine has brought in more for the world in the first fifty years of its existence 
than the world has spent on the promotion of science since the beginning of timeaG!

LINK: https://www.marxists .org/archive/marx/works/1844/df-jahrbucher/outlines .htm

Steve H. Hanke: Economy & Inflation: Consumer Price Index Rise a Harbinger. aG~The dramatic growth 
in the U.S. money supply, when broadly measured, that began in March 2020 will do what increases in 
the money supply always do. Money growth will lead in the first instance (laG“9 months) to 
asset-price inflation. Then, a second stage will set in. Over a 6aG“18-month period after a 
monetary injection occurs, economic activity will pick up. Ultimately, the prices of goods and 
services will increase. That usually
takes between 12 and 24 months after the original monetary injection. Given this sequence, itaG™ s 
as clear as the nose on your face that weaG™re going to see moreaG’’perhaps much moreaG’’inflation 
entering the system in the coming monthsaG!. A monetary approach to national income determination 
is what countsaG!. The close relationship between the growth rate of the money supply and nominal 
GDP is unambiguous and overwhelmingaG!. The U.S. golden growth rate for total money (M4)aG! [is] 
6.3 percentaG!.
By the end of 2020, it was growing at 28.9 percent per yearaG!. It should be obvious, even to the 
untrained eye, that the recent March year-over-year CPI inflation rate of 2.6 percent is simply a 
harbinger of what is coming in the future: more inflationaG!

LINK: https://www.nationalreview.com/2021/04/why-more-u-s-inflation-is-right-around-the-corner/

Longer:

Matthew Yglesias: Is Inflation Coming?: aG~Warren Buffett did his annual shareholder meeting this 
past weekend and told the world that aGoewe are seeing substantial inflationaG! We are raising 
prices. People are raising prices to us, and itaG™ s being accepted. aGdaG I ItaG™ s always 
important to look across the entire distribution of goods. One of BuffettaG™ s big companies is 
GEICO, and car insurance rates actually are in the midst of a rare declineaG!. BuffettaG™ s company 
is also a major shareholder of Apple
stock, and the new Apple Silicon chips the company is rolling out represent a significant quality 
improvement and therefore quality-adjusted price decline in Apple products. This is not to say that 
Buffett is wrong. HeaG™ s in other businesses like mobile homes and freight railroads where prices 
clearly are rising.

But Larry Summers cited inflation concerns as an objection to the American Rescue Plan Act and is 
now citing BuffettaG™ s remarks as vindication of those concerns. That seems way too fast to me. 
Buffett also described the economy as aGoered hotaGd I think if youaG™ d gone to Biden in January 
and said aGoeMr. President-Elect, if we do this, the economy will be red hot by summeraGd heaG™ d 
have said, aGoegood plan, letaG™ s do that.aGdaG!

Is inflation so high that the Fed needs to do something different or we should sharply regret 
ARP?aG! Is inflation high enough that concern about inflation should inform fiscal policy going 
forward? Is it time to think about supply-side policyaG! as the primary tool for bolstering 
economic growth in the future? My answers are aGoeno,aGd aGoemaybe,aGd and aGoeyes.aGdaG! Oe of the 
many good things about finally being in an okay situation demand-wise is           that it should 
let ushave a constructive supply-side
politicsaG!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring .com/p/inflation-worries>

Patrick Wyman: American Gentry: a€~The areaa€™ s elitea€! [the] wealthy, largely agricultural 
property-owning class. They mostly owned, and still own, fruit companiesa€!. The other large-scale 
industries in the region, particularly commercial construction, revolve at a fundamental level 
around agriculture: They pave the roads on which fruits and vegetables are transported to 
transshipment points, build the warehouses where the produce is stored, and so ona€!. They have a 
trusted and reasonably well-paid cadre of
managers and specialists in law, finance, and the likea€’’members of the educated 
professional-managerial class that my close classmates and I have joineda€”but the vast majority of 
their employees are lower-wage laborers. The owners are mostly white; the laborers are mostly 
Latino, a significant portion of them undocumented immigrants. Ownership of the real, core assets 
is where the regiona€™ s wealth comes from, and it doesna€™ t extend down the social hierarchya€!.

This kind of elitea€™ s wealth derives not from their salarya€”this is what separates them from 
even extremely prosperous members of the professional-managerial class, like doctors and 
lawyersa€”but from their ownership of assets. Those assets vary depending on where in the country 
wea€™re talking abouta€!. Depending on the political culture and institutions of a locality or 
region, this elite class might wield more or less political power. In some places, they have an 
effective stranglehold over what gets done; in
others, theya€™re important but not all-powerfula€!. Because their wealth is rooted in the 
ownership of physical assets, they tend to be more rooted in their places of origina€!.

Gentry classes are a common feature of a great many social-economic-political regimes throughout 
historya€!. Most of the United Statesa€™ wealthy elitea€! own $2 million houses on golf courses 
outside Orlando and a condo in the Bahamas, not an architecturally designed oceanfront villa in 
Miamia€!


braddelong.substack.comBRIEFLY NOTED: For 2021-05-05 WeThings that went whizzing by that I want to 
remember... First:Ian Leslie: BidenS™ s Bet: S™ Biden... is... hinting at... Seel think theyS™re 
going to write about this point in historyS! about whether or not democracy can function in the 
21st century. Not a joke. Whether autocracy is the answeS”these were my S!
3:07 AM r™ May 6,2021

5Likes2Retweets

Paragraphs:

Friedrich Engels: Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy. S~The nearer the economists come to 
the present time, the further they depart from honestyS!. According to the economists, the 
production costs of a commodity consist of three elements: the rent for theS! landS! capital with 
its profit, and the wages for the labourS!. A third factor which the economist does not think 
abouta€“I mean the mental element of invention, of thoughts!. What has the economist to do with 
inventiveness? Have not all

inventions fallen into his lap without any effort on his part? Has one of them cost him anything? 
Why then should he bother about them in the calculation of production costs? Land, capital and 
labour are for him the conditions of wealth, and he requires nothing else. Science is no concern of 
his. What does it matter to him that he has received its gifts through Berthollet, Davy, Liebig, 
Watt, Cartwright, etc S “gifts which have benefited him and his production immeasurably? He does 
not know how to calculate such things;
the advances of science go beyond his figuresS!. [Yet] a single achievement of science like James 
WattS™ s steam-engine has brought in more for the world in the first fifty years of its existence 
than the world has spent on the promotion of science since the beginning of timeS!

LINK: https ://www.marxists .org/archive/marx/works/1844/df- j ahrbucher/outlines .htm

Steve H. Hanke: Economy & Inflation: Consumer Price Index Rise a Harbinger. S'The dramatic growth 
in the U.S. money supply, when broadly measured, that began in March 2020 will do what increases in 
the money supply always do. Money growth will lead in the first instance (1S“9 months) to 
asset-price inflation. Then, a second stage will set in. Over a 6S“18-month period after a monetary 
injection occurs, economic activity will pick up. Ultimately, the prices of goods and services will 
increase. That usually
takes between 12 and 24 months after the original monetary injection. Given this sequence, itS™ s 
as clear as the nose on your face that weS™re going to see moreS’’perhaps much moreS’’inflation 
entering the system in the coming monthsS!. A monetary approach to national income determination is 
what countsS!. The close relationship between the growth rate of the money supply and nominal GDP 
is unambiguous and overwhelmingS!. The U.S. golden growth rate for total money (M4)S! [is] 6.3 
percents!.

By the end of 2020, it was growing at 28.9 percent per yearS!. It should be obvious, even to the 
untrained eye, that the recent March year-over-year CPI inflation rate of 2.6 percent is simply a 
harbinger of what is coming in the future: more inflations!
LINK: https://www.nationalreview.com/2021/04/whv-more-u-s-inflation-is-right-around-the-corner/

Longer:

Matthew Yglesias: Is Inflation Coming?: S'Warren Buffett did his annual shareholder meeting this 
past weekend and told the world that See we are seeing substantial inflationSiWe are raising 
prices. People are raising prices to us, and itS™ s being accepted.SdSI ItS™ s always important to 
look across the entire distribution of goods. One of Buffetta€™ s big companies is GEICO, and car 
insurance rates actually are in the midst of a rare declines!. BuffettS™ s company is also a major 
shareholder of Apple
stock, and the new Apple Silicon chips the company is rolling out represent a significant quality 
improvement and therefore quality-adjusted price decline in Apple products. This is not to say that 
Buffett is wrong. HeS™ s in other businesses like mobile homes and freight railroads where prices 
clearly are rising.

But Larry Summers cited inflation concerns as an objection to the American Rescue Plan Act and is 
now citing BuffettS™ s remarks as vindication of those concerns. That seems way too fast to me. 
Buffett also described the economy as Scered hotSD I think if youS™ d gone to Biden in January and 
said SceMr. President-Elect, if we do this, the economy will be red hot by summerSD heS™ d have 
said, Soegood plan, letS™ s do that.SDS!

Is inflation so high that the Fed needs to do something different or we should sharply regret 
ARP?S! Is inflation high enough that concern about inflation should inform fiscal policy going 
forward? Is it time to think about supply-side policya€! as the primary tool for bolstering 
economic growth in the future? My answers are a€oeno,a€D a€oemaybe,a€D and a€ceyes.a€Da€! Oe of the 
many good things about finally being in an okay situation demand-wise is that it should let us have 
a constructive supply-side
politicsa€!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring.eom/p/inflation-worries>

Patrick Wyman: American Gentry: a€~The areaa€™ s elitea€! [the] wealthy, largely agricultural 
property-owning class. They mostly owned, and still own, fruit companiesa€!. The other large-scale 
industries in the region, particularly commercial construction, revolve at a fundamental level 
around agriculture: They pave the roads on which fruits and vegetables are transported to 
transshipment points, build the warehouses where the produce is stored, and so ona€!. They have a 
trusted and reasonably well-paid cadre of
managers and specialists in law, finance, and the likea€’’members of the educated 
professional-managerial class that my close classmates and I have joineda€”but the vast majority of 
their employees are lower-wage laborers. The owners are mostly white; the laborers are mostly 
Latino, a significant portion of them undocumented immigrants. Ownership of the real, core assets 
is where the regiona€™ s wealth comes from, and it doesna€™ t extend down the social hierarchya€!.

This kind of elitea€™ s wealth derives not from their salarya€”this is what separates them from 
even extremely prosperous members of the professional-managerial class, like doctors and 
lawyersa€”but from their ownership of assets. Those assets vary depending on where in the country 
wea€™re talking abouta€!. Depending on the political culture and institutions of a locality or 
region, this elite class might wield more or less political power. In some places, they have an 
effective stranglehold over what gets done; in
others, theya€™re important but not all-powerfula€!. Because their wealth is rooted in the 
ownership of physical assets, they tend to be more rooted in their places of origina€!.

Gentry classes are a common feature of a great many social-economic-political regimes throughout 
historya€!. Most of the United Statesa€™ wealthy elitea€! own $2 million houses on golf courses 
outside Orlando and a condo in the Bahamas, not an architecturally designed oceanfront villa in 
Miamia€!
LINK: <https://patrickwvman.substack.eom/p/american-gentrv>

Ian King & al.: Chip Shortage 2021: Semiconductors Are Hard to Make & Thata€™ s Part of the 
Problem: a€~Shortages of semiconductors are battering automakers and tech giants, raising alarm 
bells from Washington to Brussels to Beijing. The crunch has raised a fundamental question for 
policymakers, customers and investors: Why cana€™ t we just make more chips?a€!. The simple version 
is that making chips is incredibly difficulta€”and getting tougher. a€oelta€™ s not rocket 
sciencea€”ita€™ s much more
difficult,a€D goes one of the industrya€™ s inside jokes.

The more complicated answer is that it takes years to build semiconductor fabrication facilities 
and billions of dollarsa€”and even then the economics are so brutal that you can lose out if your 
manufacturing expertise is a fraction behind the competition. Former Intel Corp, boss Craig Barrett 
called his companya€™ s microprocessors the most complicated devices ever made by mana€!.

Manufacturing a chip typically takes more than three months and involves giant factories, dust-free 
rooms, multi-million-dollar machines, molten tin and lasers. The end goal is to transform wafers of 
silicona€”an element extracted from plain sanda€”into a network of billions of tiny switches called 
transistors that form the basis of the circuitry that will eventually give a phone, computer, car, 
washing machine or satellite crucial capabilitiesa€!. Intela€™ s first microprocessora€”the 
4004a€”was released in 1971 and
contained only 2,300 transistors with a node size of 10 microns, or 10 millionths of a metera€!. 
Intela€™ s undisputed leadershipa€l ended between 2015 and 2020 when rivals Taiwan Semiconductor 
Manufacturing Co. and Samsunga€! started building chips witha€! dimensions down to 5 nanometers, or 
5 billionths of a metera€!.

Chips consist of as many as 100 layers of materials. These are deposited, then partially removed, 
to form complex three-dimensional structures that connect all the tiny transistors. Some of these 
layers are just one atom thin. Machines made by Applied Materials Inc., Lam Research Corp, and 
Tokyo Electron Ltd. juggle a host of variables, such as temperature, pressure, and electrical       
     and magnetic fields, to make this happen. One of the most difficult parts  of the process 
islithography, which is handled by machines made by
ASML Holding NV. The companya€™ s gear uses light to burn patterns into materials deposited on the 
silicon. These patterns eventually become transistors. This is all happening at such a small scale, 
the current way to make it work is to use extreme ultraviolet lighta€!.

Chip plants run 24 hours a day, seven days a week. They do that for one reason: cost. Building an 
entry-level factory that produces 50,000 wafers per month costs about $15 billion. Most of this is 
spent on specialized equipmenta€”a market that exceeded $60 billion in sales for the first time in 
2020. Three companiesa€’’Intel, Samsung and TSMCa€’’account for most of this investment. Their 
factories are more           advanced and cost over $20 billion each.This year, TSMC will  spend as 
much as $28 billion on new plants and
equipment. Compare that to the U.S. governments™ s attempt to pass a bill supporting domestic chip 
production. This legislation would offer just $50 billion over five years. Once you spend all that 
money building giant facilities, they become obsolete in five years or less. To avoid losing money, 
chipmakers must generate $3 billion in profit from each plants!

LINK: <https://www.bloomberg .com/graphics/2021 
-chip-production-why-hard-to-make-semiconductors/?sref=vuYGislZ>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisS! weblog-like newsletters! here:

Subscribe now

ThereS™ s a free email list. ThereS™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

