Rudyard Kipling (1897): Recessional’.

God of our fathers, known of old,
Lord of our far-flung battle-line,
Beneath whose awful Hand we hold
Dominion over palm and pinea€”
Lord              God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forgeta€”lest we forget!

The tumult and the shouting dies;
The Captains and the Kings depart:
Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,
An humble and a contrite heart.

Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forgeta€”lest we forget!

Far-called, our navies melt away;
On dune and headland sinks the fire:
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday

Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!
Judge of the Nations, spare us yet,
Lest we forgeta€”lest we forget!

If, drunk with sight of power, we loose
Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe,
Such boastings as the Gentiles use,

Or lesser breeds without the Lawa€”
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forgeta€”lest we forget!

For heathen heart that puts her trust
In reeking tube and iron shard,

All valiant dust that builds on dust,
And guarding, calls not Thee to guard,
For frantic boast and foolish worda€”
Thy mercy on Thy People, Lord!


All valiant dust that builds on dust,
And guarding, calls not Thee to guard,
For frantic boast and foolish worda€”
Thy mercy on Thy People, Lord!

LINK: <https://w w w.poetryfoundation .org/poems/46780/recessional>

Mary Hammer: Notes on the Text'.

Title: Recessional counter to a€~processionala€™a€! when clergy and choir are to leavea€!

Lest we forget: Deuteronomy 6,12: a€~Then beware lest thou forget the Lord which brought thee forth 
out of the land of Egypt.a€™

The tumulta€!: Job 39,25: a€~the thunder of the captains and the shoutinga€™. This suggests the 
noisy scenes of the recently completed Jubilee celebrations.

Thine ancient sacrificed!: Psalm 51,17: a€~The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and 
contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despised™

Our pomp of yesterday: Psalm 90,4: a€~for a thousand years in thy sight are but as yesterdaya€™ .

Nineveh: city on the east bank of the Tigris near modern Mosul the capital of the Assyrian empire: 
this fell in 612 BCE and Nineveh, whose vast ruins are still extant, was razed to the ground. Nahum 
3,7: a€~Nineveh is laid waste; who will bemoan her?a€™.

Tyre: Phoenician capital, with colonies around the Mediterranean, notably Carthage. Rich from trade 
and famous for its purple dye, a strategically placed coastal site, it was taken and destroyed by 
Alexander in 332 BCE.

Such boastings as the Gentiles usea€I: Romans 2,14: a€~For when the Gentiles, which have not the 
law, do by nature the things contained in the law, these, having not the law, are a law unto 
themselvesa€™ a€!. Russiaa€! and Germany, which by 1897 had begun to take an interest in the Far 
East and was Britaina€™ s rival in the scramble for Africaa€!

UPDATE: guarding, calls not Theea€!: As is pointed out in comments, George Orwell thinks this is an 
echo of Psalm 127: a€oeexcept the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh but in vaina€D 
<https://www.orwellfoundation.com/the-orwell-foundation/orwell/essays-and-other-works/rudyard-kiplin
g/>
LINK: <http://www.kiplingsociety.co,uk/rg recess 1 ,htm>

