Plus there is the essential reading:

• N. David Mermin: Whata€™s Wrong with These Elements 
of<https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/3d27/ad8dlcee3al2b35b4e424b9c36ec424ecc6e.pdf>

• N. David Mermin: Is the Moon There When Nobody Looks?: Reality & the Quantum Theory 
<https://phvsics.csuchico.edu/kagan/435B/problems/Mermin.pdf>

• N. David Mermin (1990): Quantum Mysteries Revisited 
<http://www.physics.smu.edu/scalise/P5382fal5/Merminl990a.pdf>

• Daniel M. Greenberger, Michael A. Horne, & Anton Zeilinger: Going Beyond Bella€™ s Theorem 
<https://arxiv.org/pdf/0712.0921 ,pdf>

• Wojciech H. Zurek: Decoherence & the Transition from Quantum to Classicala€”Revisited 
<https://arxiv.org/pdf/quant-ph/0306072.pdf>
You know, i used to think that I woulda€”somedaya€”understand electron spin.

I used to think that I woulda€’’someday a€’’understand why Stern-Gerlach magnets arranged along the 
x-axis would knock an electron that was in the <af‘l state in the z-basis into the z-basis <af“l . 
And I used to think I woulda€’’someday a€’’understand why if we rotated the magnets into the 
y-direction the little square-root-of-minus-one ia€™ s would start appearing in the matha€!
Now I know that it is hopeless.

And, similarly, it is hopeless to ask why the triple measurement If (lx)If (2y)If (3z) applied to 
the three electrons 1,2, and 3 that are in Colemana€™ s entangled (<af‘af‘at‘1 - <at“at“at“l) state 
always produce the answer +1.

It is the Pauli matrices that are the underlying realitya€”or, at least, are our only 
through-a-glass-darkly shadowy and illusory simulacrum of understanding. They are not the things 
that can be explained in terms of more fundamental principles. They are, rather, our feeble 
monkey-brain grasp of what the fundamental data are.

All of which is to say that Sydney Colemana€™ s Quantum Mechanics in Your Face lecturea€”the title 
of which, I am told in good authority, is incomprehensible to Britishers, save that they suspect 
and fear that it is in some way obscenea€”is the best thing on the interpretation of quantum 
mechanics I have seen.

And if it does not convince you to be a root-and-branch Everettian many-worldera€’’well, then I 
think that, back in The Day, there would have been nothing to convince you to be a non-Ptolemaic 
Copernican either. The Copernican points would have whizzed by: In the Copernican model there is no 
unmotivated sharp division between the behavior of the inferior and the superior planets as there 
is in the Ptolemaic model? You would have shrugged. The peculiar
coincidence in the Ptolemaic model that all of the planets have at least one epicycle that is the 
same as the main cycle of the sun, which lacks an epicycle? You would have stared blank-eyed.

If Coleman doesna€™t convince you now. Copernicus would not have convinced you thena€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• Arun Venkatesan: The Iconic Watches That Inspired Apple Watch Faces 
<https://www.arun.is/blog/apple-watch-faces/>


• Econ 135:4.3.3., 4.4.3., & 4.5.3. Zoom Session: Globalization, Convergence, & Underdevelopment:: 
Slides 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2021/03/econ-135-433-443-453-zoom-session-globalization-convergence
-underdevelopment-slides.html>

Six Paragraphs:

Steve M.: Wea€™ re Living in a Post-Trump World, & Republicans Are Still Awful: a€~If youa€™ ve 
been waiting for the moment when Republicans will start acting abashed, or begin examining their 
own behavior over the past several years, or acknowledge that their critics have a point abouta€! 
well, anything, youa€™re going to have a long wait, because that moment will never come. It might 
come if Democrats beat Republicans mercilessly in several
consecutive election cyclesa€”but Democrats trounced Republicans in 2006 and 2008 and the GOP only 
got worse. Trumpism hasna€™ t supplanted old-school Republicanism. Trumpism has simply been added 
to all the other toxic strains of Republicanism. And wea€™re getting them all again, full 
strengtha€!

LINK: <https://nomoremister.blogspot.eom/2021/03/were-living-in-post-trump-world-and.html>

David Atkins: Could Democrats Finally Be Taking on the Filibuster?: a€~Most crucial at this 
inflection point in history, the Republican Party has set itself in fierce opposition to democracy 
itself. All across America, Republicans are pushing state-based legislation that would dramatically 
suppress voting rights and limit the ability of marginalized communities to have a voice in 
government. Republicans know they cannot persuade majorities with their current
platform, so they plan instead to legally cheat their way into permanent minority power, 
reinstituting a new era of Jim Crow and apartheid at the ballot box. Given the current 
hyperconservative composition of the Supreme Court, The only way to stop it is by a federal act of 
Congress. But Congressional action will not take place as long as the filibuster remains standing 
in its current form. Everything, then, comes back to the filibustera€!. Even Joe Manchin, the
most famous holdout in favor of the filibuster in the Senate Democratic caucus, seems open to a 
talking filibuster reforma€!. My Washington Monthly colleague Bill Sher has been taking a contrary 
stand on this, hoping for compromise legislation between reasonable legislators in both parties and 
a de-escalation of partisan tensions. But ita€™ s deeply unlikely that the authoritarian white 
supremacist fever on the right will be broken without destroying the
possibility of their taking power through minority rule. Mitt Romney is not going to win the battle 
for the soul of the GOPa€“at least, not until the GOP is forced to acknowledge that their only path 
to legitimate power lies in persuading actual majorities of votersa€!

LINK: 
<https://washingtonmonthly.eom/2021/03/13/could-democrats-finally-be-taking-on-the-filibuster/>

David Atkins: How Facebook Is Killing Journalism and Democracy I Washington Monthly: a€~Ita€™ s 
high time the federal government do something about It: At the heart of much of this bedlam are the 
deliberate actions of social media companies in general, which have broadly destroyed the revenue 
model for journalisma€ “often through deliberate liesa€“and created engagement algorithms that 
incentivize hateful polarization and outright disinformation.
And no social media has been more guilty of both than Facebook. Two big stories dropped this week 
highlighting Facebooka€™ s ongoing role in sabotaging both journalism and democracy in the pursuit 
of profit. The first is a devastating story by Karen Hao at the MIT Technology Review on how 
Facebooka€™ s artificial intelligence unit learned how to efficiently drive engagement on the 
platform by recommending increasingly inciteful and extremist content
and groups. Then, when the teams involved in creating this monster began to realize what they had 
unleashed and took steps to curtail it, the company (largely at the direction of Mark Zuckerberg 
himself) refused to do anything significant about ita€ “choosing instead to deflect the problem 
toward issues of bias rather than polarization and disinformationa€!. Worse, Facebooka€™ s efforts 
at controlling bias were manipulated by Trump and the conservative
mediaa€™ s endless factory treadmill of self-pitying victimhood into specially privileging the very 
conservative disinformation that was the biggest offender for asymmetric polarizationa€!. Facebook 
is not, of course, the only social media organization that has contributed to this. Youtube (now a 
subsidiary of Googlea€™ s parent company Alphabet) in particular is famous for leading users down a 
primrose path to radicalization, guiding the unsuspecting down
a  pipeline from videos on anything from Star Wars to fitness to economics, straight to Jordan 
Peterson, Prager University or Ben Shapiro in just minutes. But Facebooka€™ s algorithms have been 
particularly aggressive, and its consequences especially devastatinga€!. As if that were not bad 
enough, Facebook has also been responsible for lying to journalists about what would provide more 
of the paltry revenue they were still allowed to keep. Most striking was
the a€oepivot to videoa€D era, in which Facebook allegedly dramatically overstated the potential 
for revenue from video contenta€!

LINK: 
<https://washingtonmonthly.com/2021/Q3/13/facebook-is-killing-journalism-and-democracy-we-should-do-
something-about-it/>

David Atkins: Facebooka€™ s Vaccine Disinformation Study Shows the Problem with Facebook: 
a€~Facebook cana€™t do anything about the fact that there are large pockets of angry, low-trust 
conspiracy theorists online. But Facebook could do something about the fact that those pockets have 
disproportionate impact on a larger universe, because Facebook tailors its engagement algorithms to 
promote the most controversial voices. It is no surprise at all that
a small number of obnoxious people on Facebook are impacting the opinions of much larger groups on 
Facebooka€!

LINK: 
<https://washingtonmonthlv.com/2Q21/Q3/14/facebooks-vaccine-misinformation-studv-shows-the-problem-w
ith-facebook/>

Financial Times Editorial Board: The Unhappy Consequences of Lulaa€™ s Return: a€~Latin Americaa€™ 
s most famous politician has made a triumphant return to centre stage after a supreme court judge 
unexpectedly quashed his convictions for corruption. No matter that the ruling favouring former 
Brazilian president Luiz InAjcio Lula da Silva was based on a mere technicality; his supporters 
hailed the decision as a vindication of their long-held belief
that Lula was the victim of a politically motivated vendetta. The consequences of the ruling, 
assuming that it is upheld by the full court, are immense. At a stroke, it redraws the electoral 
map for next yeara€™ s presidential election by allowing Lula to run again. Hard-right President 
Jair Bolsonaro had been in a strong position to win re-election against a divided opposition; now 
he is likely to face a strong challenge from the left. Bolsonaro has a woeful record
in power, which has included repeatedly praising dictatorship, allowing Amazon deforestation to 
surge to 12-year highs and dangerously mismanaging the pandemic, while disappointing investor hopes 
for big economic reforms. That might invite the conclusion that a ruling allowing Lulaa€™ s return 
can only be good for Brazil. Yet the judgea€™ s decision has unhappy consequences. It strikes a 
heavy blow against the credibility of Latin Americaa€™ s biggest
and most successful corruption investigation. It raises disturbing questions about Brazila€™ s 
justice system. And it increases the chances that the countrya€™ s notoriously venal politicians 
can get back to business as usuala€!. In their zeal to bring the powerful to book, prosecutors made 
serious mistakes. Leaked messages between a judge trying the cases, Sergio Moro, and prosecutors 
discussing what evidence to use against Lula suggested corners were being
cut to secure convictions. Moroa€™ s subsequent decision to accept a cabinet post in Bolsonaroa€™ s 
government only fuelled accusations of political biasa€!. Brazil now faces the ominous prospect of 
impunity for the corrupt: the a€oeLava Jatoa€D investigation was quietly wound up last month after 
seven years. Almost as unappealing is the promise of a polarised election next year between 
candidates of the hard right and the old-fashioned lefta€! LINK:

<https://www.ft.com/content/90556eda-a658-4849-be51 -fff7cOa99a23>

Noah Smith: Checking in on the Global South: a€~To some, the idea of a Global South means that 
history is destinya€’’that the dead hand of colonialism, or the living hand of neocolonialism, is 
holding down the developing world. To others, ita€™ s an expression of the idea that poor countries 
just dona€™ t have what it takes to get rich. Either way, ita€™ s a form of implicit defeatisma€”a 
belief that historical and/or cultural forces are stronger than economic
forces. Southeast Asia hasna€™ t yet broken these ideas on the wheel of hard data, but it might not 
take much longer to do so. Bangladesha€™ s similar performance, meanwhile, suggests that South Asia 
might not be far behinda€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/checking-in-on-the-global-south>

Kieran Healy: Americad€™s Ur-Choropleths: a€~Maps of the U.S. for whatever variable in effect show 
population density more than anything elsea€!. The other big variablea€! is Percent Black. Between 
the two of them, population density and percent black will do a lot to obliterate many a 
suggestively-patterned map of the United Statesa€! LINK: 
<https://kieranhealv.org/blog/archives/2015/06/12/americas-ur-choropleths/>

US Population Density, 2014


Population per
square mile

0-10

10-100

100-1.000

1.000-10.000

>10,000

US Population, Percent Black


Percent of
Population, 2013


L._

    I- i        I.               M • — -


