Share

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Dennis C. Mueller: A Review of: a€oelnvention, Growth, & Welfare: A Theoretical Treatment of 
Technological ChangedC^By William D. Nordhaus, MIT Press, 1969 168 pp. $10.00

<https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00137917008902671>

•  Quinn Slobodian: How Germany Created the Neoliberal Order: a€~We All Live in Germanya€™ s World: 
How the German government accelerated the 20th centurya€™ s economic march toward
neoliberalisma€! <https://foreignpolicv.com/2021/03/26/germany-neoliberal-order/>

•  Adam Tooze: Technocracy Is Failing in the United States and Italy. Can Janet Yellen & Mario 
Draghi Save It?: a€~The U.S. treasury secretary and the Italian prime minister have spent decades 
shaping this
economy. But can they control what comes next?a€! 
<https://foreignpolicv.com/2021/04/01/ianet-vellen-mario-draghi-italv-united-states-technocrats-capi
talist-democracy/>

•  Jamison Foser: a€™ Okay but trying to stop black people from voting is bad: Nate Cohn: a€oeThe 
Georgia election lawa€™ s restrictions on voting are unlikely to discernibly affect turnout or the 
resulta€!a€D
a€oeStructural racism is no big deal because black people can just work harder to overcome ita€D is 
not the novel or compelling argument the New York Times seems to think it is. It is racist and 
tireda€!

<https://t.co/pta4UaD7Ms>

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Paragraphs:

I say it is time for a 100% tax on all revenues received as dividends from or from the sale of 
stock of corporations that held initial public offerings on May 18,2012:

Sarah Frier & Sarah Kopit: Does Covid Vaccine Cause Infertility? Facebook Still Letting Fake News 
Go Viral: a€~At the heart of Facebooka€™ s misinformation problems is the design of
Facebook itselfa€!. Facebooka€™ s algorithm recommended groups to its users based on what people 
with similar interests tended to also likea€!. And so sers found communities, some of which
propelled them deeper into misinformation rabbit holesa€!. At the same time, Facebook and Instagram 
also highlighted what it called a€cemeaningfula€D conversations^’’posts that generated lots
of comments very quickly. The change, meant to highlight pregnancy, engagement announcements, and 
other big life events, also boosted controversial, surprising, or scary contenta€! anti-vaccine
posts. Well-meaning people trying to debunk vaccine misinformation in the comments have instead 
helped it go viral by signaling to Facebooka€™ s algorithm that it should push the posts into more
peoplea€™ s feedsa€!. Behind these claims, often, is a profit motive. The big names in the 
anti-vaccine movement, Bigtree and Kennedy among them, make money off speaking engagements, online
webinars, or the sale of supplementsa€!.

Talk to doctors whoa€™ ve spent the last year in the Covid wards, and they a€™ 11 say they a€™ re 
spending more and more time talking their patients out of something wildly untrue they read on
Facebooka€!. At first Danielle Belardo thoughta€! sharing science-based information would do the 
tricka€!. She already had a healthy Instagram following from posting about plant-based nutrition.
At the beginning of the pandemic, she decided to use her platform to debunk false viral Covida€“19 
claimsa€!. Belardoa€! no longer engages directly with Ues, because that only calls further
attention to them by the logic of Facebook and Instagrama€!. Efforts like Belardoa€™ s and 
Marinoa€™ s have yet to reach Williams. The algorithms show people more of what they want to see.
a€oeTo be completely honest with you, I havena€™ t seen doctors recommending the shot,a€D Williams 
says. And even if she did, she says she wouldna€™ t believe them.


wi  uummcHid  vciy  quiu-Kiy.  111c  cuangc,  iiicaiii  iw  mgmigm  picgucuicy,  engagement  
(uuiuuuuciucuu,  cuiu  uuici  uig  me  events,  aisu  uuustcu  euiiuvvciaku,  suipiistug,  ut  
seaiy  uuuicuuiei  anu-vaeeuic

posts. Well-meaning people trying to debunk vaccine misinformation in the comments have instead 
helped it go viral by signaling to Facebooka€™ s algorithm that it should push the posts into more
peoplea€™ s feedsa€!. Behind these claims, often, is a profit motive. The big names in the 
anti-vaccine movement, Bigtree and Kennedy among them, make money off speaking engagements, online
webinars, or the sale of supplementsa€!.

Talk to doctors whoa€™ ve spent the last year in the Covid wards, and they a€™ 11 say they a€™ re 
spending more and more time talking their patients out of something wildly untrue they read on
Facebooka€!. At first Danielle Belardo thoughta€! sharing science-based information would do the 
tricka€!. She already had a healthy Instagram following from posting about plant-based nutrition.
At the beginning of the pandemic, she decided to use her platform to debunk false viral Covida€“19 
claimsa€!. Belardoa€! no longer engages directly with Ues, because that only calls further
attention to them by the logic of Facebook and Instagrama€!. Efforts like Belardoa€™ s and 
Marinoa€™ s have yet to reach Williams. The algorithms show people more of what they want to see.
a€oeTo be completely honest with you, I havena€™ t seen doctors recommending the shot,a€D Williams 
says. And even if she did, she says she wouldna€™ t believe them.

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2021-04-01/covid-vaccine-and-fertility-facebook-s-platform-
is-letting-fake-news-go-viral>

Duncan Black: Theya€™ re Bad People, Brent’. a€~Who is the audience for things like, a€oeGail 
Collins and Bret Stephens shoot the sa€”.a€D Not even picking on them, specifically, though Bret is 
a disgusting clown even
by the low standards of the cosnrevative movement, but genuinely confused that in the year of our 
Gritty, 2021, therea€™ s still a market for this genre of thingsa€!. I think wea€™ re long past the 
era when a€cewea€D
pretended that well-meaning people on Both Sides want basically the same things, they just disagree 
about how to get there. It isna€™ t an argument about the glorious impact on the economy of low tax 
rates, or how Social
Security Privatization will be BETTER for your retirement. Ita€™ s about stealing all the money 
from poor people and giving it to rich people, or maybe not doing that. And thata€™ s before we get 
to the explicit bigotrya€!

LINK: <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2021/04/theyre-bad-people-brent.html>

Four Seasons Total Landscaping mistermix: Not Everything Needs a d€~Well, Actuallyd€™: a€~Not 
Everything Needs a a€~Pardon my commitment to a€cedataa€O and a€cesciencea€D if I dona€™ t think 
that two
studies of questionable applicability tell me much of anything about the effects of the Georgia 
law. This is, in general, my gripe about data journalism: therea€™ s just not enough good data to 
draw evidence-based
conclusions,  so it devolves into speculative punditry with a patina of scientific 
respectabilitya€!. Second, some things are beyond the need to do a sketchy a€oewell actuallya€D 
analysis piece, and a fundamental right like
voting   is a great example of one of those things. a€oeWell, actually, we found two studies of 
people who had their little toes amputated and they walk just finea€D is not a justification for a 
program of toe amputation. Voting
is  a right, full stop, and peoplea€™ s right to do it should not be unreasonably infringed. Six 
hour lines with no water is an unreasonable infringement. We dona€™ t need to go further than that, 
and we certainly dona€™ t
need a privileged white dude who grew up in a Seattle suburb and moved to DC after private college 
to push out a a€oewell, actuallya€D piece about a Jim Crow revivala€! LINK: <https://www.balloon-
juice.com/2021/04/05/not-everything-needs-a-well-actually/>

Economist: China Is Betting That the West Is in Irreversible Decline’. a€~CIts gaze fixed on the 
prize of becoming rich and strong, China has spent the past 40 years as a risk-averse bully. Quick 
to inflict pain on smaller
powers, it has been more cautious around any country capable of punching back. Recently, however, 
Chinaa€™ s risk calculations have seemed to changea€L ChinaaC™ s foreign ministry declares that 
horrors such as the
Atlantic slave trade, colonialism and the Holocaust, as well as the deaths of so many Americans and 
Europeans from covida€“19, should make Western governments ashamed to question ChinaaC™ s record on 
human rights.
Most recently Chinese diplomats and propagandists have denounced as a€oelies and disinformationa€D 
reports that coerced labour is used to pick or process cotton in Xinjiang. They have praised fellow 
citizens for
boycotting foreign brands that decline to use cotton from that region. Still others have sought to 
prove their zeal by hurling Maoist-era abuse. A Chinese consul-general tweeted that Canadaa€™ s 
prime minister was a€oea
running                                                                                             
       dog of the USa€Da€!. Chinese leaders, if their own words and writings are any guide, think 
that assertiveness is rationala€!. China is increasingly sure that America is in long-term, 
irreversible declinea€!.

Chinaa€™ s rulers are majoritarians. Their hold on power involves convincing most citizens that 
prosperity, security and national strength require iron-fisted, one-party rulea€!. Chinaa€™ s 
rulers are duly preparing for a
protracted struggle. The risks are clear, both for China and the West. LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/china/2021/04/Q3/china-is-betting-that-the-west-is-in-irreversible-declin
e>

Ariel Ortiz-Bobea, Toby R. Ault, Carlos M. Carrillo, Robert G. Chambers & David B. Lobell: 
Anthropogenic Climate Change Has Slowed Global Agricultural Productivity Growth’. a€~Agricultural 
research has
fostered productivity growth, but the historical influence of anthropogenic climate change (ACC) on 
that growth has not been quantified. We develop a robust econometric model of weather effects on 
global agricultural total
factor productivity (TFP) and combine this model with counterfactual climate scenarios to evaluate 
impacts of past climate trends on TFP. Our baseline model indicates that ACC has reduced global 
agricultural TFP by about
21% since 1961, a slowdown that is equivalent to losing the last 7 years of productivity growth. 
The effect is substantially more severe (a reduction of ~26a€“34%) in warmer regions such as Africa 
and Latin America and
the Caribbean. We also find that global agriculture has grown more vulnerable to ongoing climate 
changea€!

LINK: <https://www.nature,com/articles/s41558-021 -01QQQ-1>

Heather Cox Richardson: March 31,2021’. a€~President Joe Bidena€! unveiled a new $2 trillion 
infrastructure proposal titled The American Jobs Plan. The statement introducing the plan notes 
that the United States
currently ranks 13th in the world for the quality of our infrastructure, and that our public 
domestic investment as a share of the economy has fallen more than 40% since the 1960s. It calls 
attention to the fact that our roads
and  bridges are crumbling and that our electrical grid keeps failing. Too few people have access 
to affordable housing or to the Internet, while our infrastructure for caregivinga€”a vital part of 
our livesa€”is fragile, it says. It
promises to unify and mobilize the country to address climate change and the rise of an autocratic 
Chinaa€L To pay for the investment in the country, Biden is proposing an accompanying tax plan, the 
Made in America Tax
Plan,  to raise taxes on corporationsa€!

LINK: <https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.eom/p/march-31 -2021>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

