Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) Greatly looking forward to listening in two weeks to the most thoughtful and incisive analyst of 
US supply chains and worker productivity and compensation patterns: Sue
Helper, now working for the Biden-Harris administration:

Equitable Growth: Webinar: Transforming U.S. Supply Chains to Create Good Jobs'. a€~When: May 
3,2021 1:30PM - 2:30PM. Where: This event is virtual and not held in
person, The Washington Center for Equitable Growth, 15th Street Northwest, Washington, DC, USA. One 
reason U.S. workersa€™ wages are stagnating is that large firms
shifteda€!  to buying goods and services from a complex weba€!. Firms outsource so they can offload 
production onto firms with weak bargaining power and thus little ability to
compete except by aggressively holding down wages. This a€celow-roada€D modela€! the erosion of 
U.S. workersa€™ standard of living. A different kinda€! possiblea€!. High­
road outsourcing^ I requires overcoming both market and network failuresa€!. Susan Helpera€! 
building high-road supply networksa€! greater collaboration between management
and workersa€! policy proposals that directly addressa€! reasons that outsourcing increases wage 
inequalitya€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/event/webinar-transforming-u-s-supply-chains-to-create-good-jobs/>

2) The amount of potential talent we area€”stilla€”failing to make use of is horrifyingly large:

Lisa Cook: Addressing Gender & Racial Disparities in the U.S. Labor Market to Boost Wages & Power 
Innovation: a€~Women and African Americans continue to participate at
each stage of the innovation process at lower rates than their counterparts. Ia€! propose four 
policies to close these race and gender innovation dividesa€!. (1) Improve
mentoringa€!. (2) Facilitate early education exposure to invention opportunities. (3) Engage in 
blind patent reviewsa€!. (4) Address the climate in high-tech workplacesa€! where
invention and innovation happena€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/addressing-gender-and-racial-disparities-in-the-u-s-labor-market-to-boo
st-wages-and-power-innovation/>

3) Here we have a very useful and very informative deep dive into how racial discrimination spreads 
its effects into places in the economy that I had thought were relatively
immune to it:

Shaun Harrison: How Inequities in U.S. Taxation Can Perpetuate Systemic Racism: a€~In his in 1901 
study, a€oeThe Negro Landholder of Georgia,a€D scholar W.E.B. Du Bois
noted that a€oein most cases there are no tax assessors, but a county tax receiver, who receives 
the sworn statements of property holders as to their estates. This gives rise to
wholesale undervaluation, especially in the case of the richa€!.a€D Property tax systems still 
place a heavier burden on Black and Latinx property ownersa€!. Carlos Fernando
Avenancio-LeA3na€! and Troup Howarda€! homeowners of color end up paying a 10 percent to 13 percent 
higher tax ratea€!. High degrees of residential racial segregation in the
United   Statesa€!. White residentsa€! live in neighborhoods where amenities push market prices 
upa€!. These amenities are not properly taken into account for property tax
assessmentsa€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/how-inequities-in-u-s-taxation-can-perpetuate-svstemic-racism/>

4) From last August: Equitable Growtha€™ s talking points on wealth taxation, and related issues:

Equitable Growth: Taxing Wealth & Investment Income in the United States: a€~The federal income tax 
does a poor job of taxing income derived from wealtha€!. A two-tier tax
systema€! middle-class families pay full freight on their wagesa€!. Lawmakersa€! shoulda€! 
reforma€! adopt either a wealth tax ora€! accrual taxation that would tax all
investment gains on an annual basis regardless of whether assets are solda€! detail [s]a€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/taxing-wealth-and-investment-income-in-the-united-states/>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) It now looks like the long-run effect of the coronavirus plague year will be to move 10% of the 
American workforcea€”10%that would otherwise have spent their days in the
officea€”into telecommuting. The gains in terms of reduced commute-time waste and Increased life 
flexibility will be substantial. They will remain largely uncaptured in our
standard statistics. I cannot yet figure out what the further ramified consequences of this rapid 
rough doubling in the number of telecommuters will be. But they will be very
substantial:

Adam Ozimek: Future Workforce: a€~Companies continue to be remotea€! 41.8 percent of the American 
workforcea€!. Companies say remote work is getting easier, not
hardera€!. Managers believe that 26.7 percent of the workforce will be fully remote in one yeara€!. 
The number of remote workers in the next five years is expected to be nearly
double what it was before COVIDa€“19: By 2025,36.2 million Americansa€!. Increased productivity and 
flexibility continue to be key benefitsa€! reduction of non-essential
meetings, increased schedule flexibility, and no commutea€! have worked better than expecteda€!

LINK: <https://www.upwork.com/press/releases/economist-report-future-workforce>

2) I understand, kinda sorta, why China is such an export powerhouse even though it is still so 
poor. I understand that because one important reason that China is an export
powerhouse is precisely that it is still a relatively poor and thus low-wage country. Productivity 
outrunning wages is the way to become the kind of global manufacturing
powerhouse   that Britain was in the mid-1800s and that the United States was in the mid-1900s. In 
Britaina€™ s case it was that wages lagged behind productivity, in large part
because                                                                                 of the 
inflow of workers from unproductive Irish and north British Agriculture. In Americaa€™ s case it 
was because productivity ran ahead of wages, In part because of
the great commitment to investment during World War II and consequent learning-by-doing. China 
appears more British than American here. But what I do not understand is the
rapid growth of Chinaa€™ s tech sector. Something must be wrong with my vision of what the 
requirements for having a booming global-leader tech sector are:

Barry Naughton: The Rise of Chinad€™ s Industrial Policy: a€~China has rapidly emergeda€! a large 
economya€! a technological powera€! a middle-income countrya€! [with]
the worlda€™ s second most important high-tech sector, as well as the worlda€™ s largest 
manufacturing and internet sectorsa€!. To what extent can Chinaa€™ s undeniable
economic and technological success be reasonably attributed to specific policies, and more 
generally to a Chinese a€cepath,a€D or program of industrial policy ?a€! This volume
makes  a contribution^! by disentangling specific threadsa€!. The objective is not to try to 
evaluate the effectiveness of specific policies, but simply to reliably track what policy
was  in effect during different periods, and where we might expect to see large and important 
impactsa€!

LINK: <https://dusselpeters.com/CECHIMEX/Naughton2021_Industrial_Policy_in China_CECHIMEX.pdf>

3) The United States has demonstrated that it can turn Chinese high-tech companies into 
near-cripples through the sanctions that it can impose and get the rest of the world to
conform to. The US has thus weaponized the economic interdependence between America and China. 
Could China do the same by applying the squeeze to the onshore China­
producing subsidiaries of US companies? Or would the US government simply not care? Here economics 
turns into geopolitics, and I am out of my comfort zone:

Dan Wang: China, the U.S., & Technology: a€~The economic relationship between China and the US is 
massive. Over the last few years, US direct exports of goods and services
to China clocks in at around $200 billion every single year, but thata€™ s really dwarfed by the 
amount of sales that US companies make in China, which the last figure we have
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis in the US is $600 billiona€!

LINK: <https://stratechery.com/2021/an-interview-with-dan-wang-about-china-the-u-s-and-technology/>


4) This is an old but an absolute classic think through of how economies can and should be managed. 
It is essential reading as we try to think through how we are going to try to

control global warming, given that we seem to be in a world in which it looks as though we are not 
going to pursue the economic-technocratic first-best regulatory strategy of
carbon taxes:

Martin Weitzman: Prices vs. Quantities: a€~If tastes happen to be kinked at certain critical 
pointsa€! it doesna€™t pay to a€oefool arounda€D with prices in such situationsa€!.
There is, it seems to me, a rather fundamental reason to believe that quantities are better signals 
for situations demanding a high degree of coordination^!. [For] General Motors
Corporation or the Soviet industrial sector as a whole, the need for balancing the output of any 
intermediate commodity whose production is relatively specialized to this
organization   and which cannot be effortlessly and instantaneously imported from or exported to a 
perfectly competitive outside world puts a kink in the benefit function. If it turns
out   that production of ball bearings of a certain specialized kind (plus reserves) falls short of 
anticipated internal consumption, far more than the value of the unproduced bearings
can be losta€!

LINK: <https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/weitzman/files/prices vs quantities .pdf>

5) This is turning into semiconductor week. Perhaps the most striking thing to happen over the past 
decade is how TSMC and Samsung have managed to move ahead three
generations in terms of shrinking the size and power consumption of the microprocessors they can 
manufacture, while Intel has been unable to fully advance even one. A decade
ago   there were great worries about whether TMSC could produce microprocessors as sophisticated as 
those that Apple was hoping to design and use at an acceptable quality. Now
Apple has made it very clear that it is Intel cannot meet acceptable quality standards by the 
yardstick of TSMC (and Samsung):

Tae Kim: Intela€™ s Plan to Take On TSMC & Win Big in Chips Has Big Risks: a€~Intela€™ s strategic 
pivot to chip making comes at an ideal moment, but that wona€™ t make
its task any easiera€!. $20 billion to build two new factories in Arizonaa€! internal usea€! 
customers ofa€! a€oelntel Foundry Services "a€!. Can it win a large chunk of business
away from market leader Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co.?... With Intel compelled to use TSMC 
for some of its leading products, ita€™ s going to be difficult at least in
the near term for the company to argue that its services are significantly better than its Asian 
rivala€!. There are some tail winds for Intela€! security concerns a€ I future
subsidiesa€! from the Biden administrationa€l. It is easy for Intel to talk a big gamea€! it will 
be much harder to create a viable and profitable onea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-04-07/intel-s-plan-to-take-on-tsmc-and-win-big-in-c
hips-has-big-risks>

6) The rise of financiers and entrepreneurs among our superrich, and the decline of dealmakers and 
inheritors make up one of the most striking aspects of our Second Gilded Age.
However, going forward expect the number of inheritors in our superrich to increase very rapidly:

Paul Graham: How People Get Rich Now: a€~In 1982a€! of the 100 richest people, 60 inheriteda€!. By 
2020 the number of heirs had been cut in half, accounting for only 27 of
the biggest 100 fortunesa€!. How are people making these new fortunes?a€! 3/4 by starting companies 
and 1/4 bya€! managing investment funds. There were no fund managers
among the 100a€! in 1982a€!. In 1982a€! dominant sourcea€! [were] oil and real estate. Of the 40 
new fortunesa€! 24 were due primarily to oil or real estatea€!. Of the 73a€! in
2020,4 were due to real estate and only 2 to oila€!. The oil and real estate magnatesa€! won by 
being really driven and good at making dealsa€!. In 1892, the New York Herald
Tribunea€! millionairesa€! 4047a€!. How many had inherited?a€! 20%a€!

LINK: <http://paulgraham.com/richnow.html>

7) Building communities of engineering practice is a sound goal for industrial-trade policy. 
Protecting rust-belt blue-collar jobs is not:

Adam Posen: Americaa€™ s Self-Defeating Economic Retreat: a€~Populist anger is the result not of 
economic anxiety but of perceived declines in relative status. The U.S.
government has not been pursuing openness and integration over the last two decades. To the 
contrary, it has increasingly insulated the economy from foreign competition, while the
rest                                                                                   of the world 
has continued to open up and integrate. Protecting manufacturing jobs benefits only a small 
percentage of the workforce, while imposing substantial costs on the
rest. Nor will there be any political payoff from trying to do so: after all, even as the United 
States has stepped back from global commerce, anger and extremism have mounteda€!

LINK: <https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/united-states/2Q21-04-20/america-price-nostalgia>

8) History does not repeat, but it does rhyme. And in this particular case, I cannot escape 
thinking that a€oeTucker Carlsona€D rhymes with a€oeBenito Mussolinia€D:

Ed Luce: The Rise & Rise Of Tucker Carlson Conservatism: a€~His reaction to Wednesdaya€™ s verdict 
on Derek Chauvin for killing George Floyd crossed even his own thinly
drawn lines. The jurya€™ s triple guilty verdicta€!. amounted to a€oean attack on civilisationa€D, 
said Carlsona€!. The true cause of Floyda€™ s death, Carlson has repeatedly
said, was a drug overdosea€”not the nine-minute asphyxiation that jurors sawa€!. Carlsona€™ s 
outburst is notable for two reasons. First, he is the most popular conservative TV
anchora€! a nightly audience of 3ma€!. Second, Carlsona€™ s outburst illustrated that US racial 
injustice is not close to having turned the cornera€!. During the trial, police shot
and killed an average of three Americans a day, the majority non-white, including a 13-year-old 
unarmed black boy. Unlike Floyda€™ s death, these were not recorded on the
mobile phones of passers-by. That footage meant Chauvina€™ s case was almost unique. Even then, 
Carlson wants viewers to believe that Chauvin was the real victima€!. For
some people believing is seeing, rather than the other way rounda€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/cc2a46cf-4392-44db-b911-f883e2f46539>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

