Subscribe now

<https://www.the-tls.co.uk/articles/slouching-towards-utopia-j-bradford-delong-book-review-paul-seab
right/>

EconomicsIZtoofc Review

Trouble in paradise

Why is economic progress so little cause for celebration?

By Paul Seabright
September 23, 2022
Read this issue

The Los Angeles Electrical Age Exposition, 19361A© Bettmann/Getty Images

IN THIS REVIEWSLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA An economic history of the twentieth century
624pp. Basic. A£30 (US $35) J. Bradford DeLong

J. Bradford (a€ceBrada€D) DeLong, a macroa€ “economist and economic historian (and deputy assistant 
secretary at the US Treasury under President Bill Clinton), has written a
history of the a€celonga€D twentieth century, which he situates between 1870 and 2010. It is 
explicitly and instructively contrasted with Eric Hobsbawma€™ s history of the
a€ceshorta€D twentieth century, from the outbreak of the First World War to the fall of the Soviet 
Union. Hobsbawm the Marxist was interested in the big ideas that dominated the
twentieth century, notably socialism, communism and fascism. Paradoxically, it takes DeLong, who is 
no Marxist, to counter that the story of the underlying economics of the
twentieth century is even more interesting than that of the ideological superstructure.

DeLong claims that it is a€oearound 1870 [that] we got a€! full globalization, the industrial 
research laboratory, and the modern corporation. These were the keys. These unlocked
the gate that had previously kept humanity in dire povertya€D. What he estimates to be the annual 
growth in the global a€oestock of useful ideas about manipulating nature and
organizing humans a€! shot up from about 0.45 percent per year before 1870 to 2.1 percent per year 
afterward, truly a watershed boundary-crossing differencea€D. (The
authora€™     s measure of this a€oestock of ideasa€D is proportional to income per capita, but 
also increases with total population, though less than proportionately. This reflects the
fact  that more people bring more ideas, but that there is also population congestion of scarce 
resources. The measure is contestable, but under most reasonable alternative measures

the conclusion would be similar.) The result was that almost nobody in 2010 was living in a world 
that would have been recognizable to the inhabitants of the world into which their
grandparents were born.

The changes have been spectacular: a€oetoday, less than 9 percent of humanity lives at or below the 
roughly $2-a-day living standard we think of as a€~extreme povertya€™ ,
down from approximately 70 percent in 1870a€D. Furthermore,

there are more than enough calories produced in the world, so it is not necessary for anybody to be 
hungry. There is more than enough shelter on the globe,
so it is not necessary for anyone to be wet. And there is more than enough clothing in our 
warehouses, so it is not necessary for anybody to be cold.

Yet the narrative DeLong develops is anything but triumphalist:

Suppose we could go back in time to 1870, and tell people then how rich, relative to them, humanity 
would have become by 2010. They would almost
surely have thought that the world of 2010 would be a paradise, a utopia a€! But not so. It has now 
been 150 years. We did not run to the traila€™ s end
and reach utopia a€! what went wrong?

DeLonga€™ s choice of 2010 as the end date for his history is shaped by the financial crisis of 
2008 and the ensuing recession, which produced, among other consequences, the
election of Donald Trump and a pervasive current sense that the economic and political systems of 
the world are in potentially terminal crisis.

DeLong sees two main reasons for this. First, a€oematerial prosperity is unevenly distributed 
around the globe to a gross, even criminal extenta€D. Second, a€oematerial wealth
does not make people happy in a world where politicians and others prosper mightily from finding 
new ways to make and keep people unhappya€d. He adds that we should seek
justice rather than mere productivity and abundance, though he leaves his definition of 
a€cejusticea€D tantalizingly unclear. He summarizes morosely: a€oeThe history of the long
twentieth century cannot be told as a triumphal gallop, or a march, or even a walk of progress 
along the road that brings us closer to utopia. It is, rather, a slouch. At besta€D.

It is invigorating to read a diagnosis of the failings of modern capitalism that does justice to 
the innovation and productive energy that capitalist institutions have made possible.
DeLong is surely right that our ancestors of five or six generations back would have been 
astonished to see the material abundance that surrounds us. He does not say, but would
surely agree, that they would have been no less astonished by our inability to be satisfied with 
the world we have made. After all, we are not only materially better off, on average,
to   a spectacular degree, but we lead longer and healthier lives, and are at a much lower risk of 
violent death a€“ despite the destructive potential of modern technology, which goes
hand in hand with its more productive, ameliorating features. The real puzzle of the long twentieth 
century is not why it failed to achieve what its first inhabitants might have hoped
for: ita€™ s why the achievement of far more than its first inhabitants ever dared to hope for has 
seemed to us, looking backwards, to be so little cause for celebration. Not everyone
would agree with this downbeat assessment a€“ but the fact that so many people do is surely one of 
the most striking facts that any modern social commentator can seek to address.
Even merely for framing the question in this way, DeLonga€™ s book deserves a wide readership.

The authora€™ s answer to the question is delivered through a set of seventeen narrative chapters, 
divided sometimes on thematic but mostly on chronological lines. A recurring
theme is the tension between a vision of markets as the solution to all social problems, presented 
as the brainchild of Friedrich von Hayek, and a contrasting vision of the market as
an inadequate response to human beingsa€™ legitimate assertions of rights, presented as the 
brainchild of Karl Polanyi. DeLong is an engaging writer, full of unexpected
information about subjects ranging from the struggle between Nikola Tesla and Thomas Edison over 
whether the electric grid would carry direct or alternating current to the
experience                                                                                  of his 
own grandfather relocating his shoe factory to Maine after facing bankruptcy in Massachusettsand 
the chemistry of making semiconductors, as well as the details
of a ten-week stay in New York City in early 1917 by Lev Davidovich Bronstein, shortly to become 
famous as Leon Trotsky. I learnt something on almost every page. As a set of
thought-provoking essays on themes related to its overall topic, Slouching Towards Utopia is hard 
to fault.

Yet there is much the book doesna€™t give us. The first disappointment is a painfully inadequate 
set of references, apparently inflicted by the publishers, who seem to think that
readers who like this kind of history will be put off by too many footnotes. The result is many 
unsourced assertions (often plausible, sometimes not), plus some summary
generalizations that may puzzle non-specialist readers while making specialists wince. There is, 
for example, the airy assertion that a€oefull globalizationa€D a€“ whatever that
means   a€“ only got going around 1870. Or the summary of Hayeka€™ s views in the repeated mantra 
a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away, blessed be the name of the
marketa€D, for which (despite the quotation marks) no source is given, and which is a strange 
dictum to attribute to someone who insisted there was nothing moral, let alone
blessed, about what the market distributed. Hayek may have been a zealot at times, but his vision 
of the market was pragmatic, as something that delivered the goods.

It will likewise be hard, without bibliographic help, for readers to know how to situate this book 
in the growing literature on a€oeHow the World Became Richa€D, to take the title
of Mark Koyama and Jared Rubina€™ s comprehensive overview, published earlier this year. In fact, 
DeLong doesna€™ t really try to get under the skin of this phenomenon. After
nodding to the threefold blessings of a€oefulla€n globalization, the modern corporation and the 
industrial research laboratory, he tells us a little about globalization, but nothing,

for example, about how many industrial laboratories there were, or how they functioned, or about 
how or when the a€oemodern corporation^ □ came into existence, or what
difference it made. There is an entire chapter on military tactics in the Second World War, but 
next to nothing on the key institutions (such as research laboratories and corporations)
that made the economic miracle possible. This is clearly an authorial choice, but it does seem 
strange in the context of a book that is supposedly dedicated to the economics of the
long twentieth century.

We are even left in some doubt as to how much DeLong is convinced by his own answer to his 
penetrating question. He tells us repeatedly that economics mattered more than
anything else during this century, but he then explains that the economic and social insanity of 
the First World War was caused by a€cenationalisma€D and a€oearistocracya€n a€
“   the members of the latter seeking to prevent the erosion of their influence and status. He 
cites many reasons for concluding that a€oehyperglobalization has not impoverished the
workers of the major industrialized economiesa€D, but has only a few speculative sentences to add 
about why globalization came to be a€oesuch a powerful red cape to elicit rage

at the end of the long twentieth centurya€D. He alludes to ideas such as a link between economic 
gains for women and a diminished status for men, but leaves it unclear how
imnnrtant a nart nf the answer the.v are


That is not a criticism as such a€“ his question is tough, and few other commentators have better 
answers to give. But it tells us something about the experience of reading J.
Bradford DeLong. He is a charming companion, full of entertaining stories, and he asks deep 
questions in newly engaging ways. We dona€™ t want the experience to end. But
thata€™ s partly because we sense wea€™re not getting the answers we thought he was offering.

Paul Seabright teaches at the Toulouse School of Economics and was until 2021 Director of the 
Institute for Advanced Study in Toulouse. He is the author of The Company of
Strangers: A natural history of economic life, 2010

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

