Subscribe now

In 1764, in BritainaC™ s Massachusetts colony, Abigail Smith was 20. She had had no formal 
education at all: girls werena€™ t worth it. She married a man she had known for five years: the 
up-and-coming 30-year-old lawyer John Adams, future President of the United States. Children 
rapidly followed their marriage: Nabby (1765),
John Quincy (1767), Suky (1768, died at 2), Charles (1770, died at 10), Thomas (1772), probably a 
miscarriage or two or three from 1774-6, then Elizabeth (1777, stillborn), then (perhaps) another 
miscarriagea€”but I suspect not. She spent five years pregnant. She was rich enough that she, 
probably, hired a wet-nurse for her children,
but somebody or somebodies nursed her children for perhaps fourteen more years: some woman or women 
were thus eating for two for more than a full decade to raise the next generation of Adamses.

In 1776 she writes a famous letter to her husband in which she begged him to write laws providing 
women with legal personality in the new revolutionary country he was building:

Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourablea€!. Do not put such unlimited power into 
the hands of the Husbandsa€!. Such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of 
Master for the more tender and endearing one of Friend. Why then, not put it out of the power of 
the vicious
and the Lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity ?a€! Regard us then as Beings 
placed by providence under your protection and in immitation of the Supreem Being make use of that 
power only for our happinessaCI

Her husband John Adams thought this was a great joke:


Subscribe now

In 1764, in Britaina€™ s Massachusetts colony, Abigail Smith was 20. She had had no formal 
education at all: girls werena€™ t worth it. She married a man she had known for five years: the 
up-and-coming 30-year-old lawyer John Adams, future President of the United States. Children 
rapidly followed their marriage: Nabby (1765),
John Quincy (1767), Suky (1768, died at 2), Charles (1770, died at 10), Thomas (1772), probably a 
miscarriage or two or three from 1774-6, then Elizabeth (1777, stillborn), then (perhaps) another 
miscarriagea€”but I suspect not. She spent five years pregnant. She was rich enough that she, 
probably, hired a wet-nurse for her children,
but somebody or somebodies nursed her children for perhaps fourteen more years: some woman or women 
were thus eating for two for more than a full decade to raise the next generation of Adamses.

In 1776 she writes a famous letter to her husband in which she begged him to write laws providing 
women with legal personality in the new revolutionary country he was building:

Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourablea€!. Do not put such unlimited power into 
the hands of the Husbandsa€!. Such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of 
Master for the more tender and endearing one of Friend. Why then, not put it out of the power of 
the vicious
and the Lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity ?a€! Regard us then as Beings 
placed by providence under your protection and in immitation of the Supreem Being make use of that 
power only for our happinessa€l

Her husband John Adams thought this was a great joke:

I cannot but laugha€l. Your letter was the first intimation that another tribe, more numerous and 
powerful than all the rest, were grown discontented. This is rather too coarse a compliment, but 
you are so saucy, I won't blot it out. Depend upon it, we know better than to repeal our masculine 
systemsa€!. We have
only the name of masters, and rather than give up this, which would completely subject us to the 
despotism of the petticoat, I hope General Washington and all our brave heroes would fighta€!

Read the letter entire <https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Adams/04-01 -02-0241>, and you 
learn that Abigail Smith Adams:

1. Ran John Adamsa€™ s Boston-Braintree household and property operations while he played on the 
political stage;

2. dealt with death and disease of children and neighbors that were omnipresent, with a€oeour 
Neighbour Trota€! striped of two lovely children in one weeka€!a€D, a€oeBecky Peck they do not 
expect will live out the daya€!a€U, a€oeyour Brothers youngest child lies bad with convulsion 
fittsa€!a€D;

3. was desperate for news of what was going on in the wider world, for a€oel wish you would ever 
write me a Letter half as long as I write youa€!. Where your Fleet are gone? What sort of Defence 
Virginia can make against our common Enemy? Whether it is so situated as to make an able 
Defence?a€!a€d;

4. fears the alliance with Virginia as potentially subordinating them to those used to rule by the 
lash: a€oeAre not the Gentery Lords and the common people vassals? Are they not like the 
uncivilized Natives Brittain represents us to be?a€!a€D;

5. thus warns her husband to be very, very careful of the Massachusetts rebels alliance with teh 
slaveholders of Virginia, for a€oethe passion for Liberty cannot be Eaquelly Strong in the Breasts 
of those who have been accustomed to deprive their fellow Creatures of theirsa€!a€D;

6. begs him for at least some fig leaf of legal protection from abuse and brutality for her 
sisters; and, of course;

7. is desperately desperate concern that more of her children not join the shades in their graves: 
a€oeour own little flocka€! My Heart trembles with anxiety for thema€!a€D
A very talented, very energetic, very capable woman, confined to a much narrower sphere of life 
than she could have occupieda€”and patronized by her husband.

Why male supremacy was so firmly established back in the Agrarian Age is something that is not 
obvious to me.

•  Yes, it was very important to have surviving descendants. Yes, attaining a reasonable chance of 
having surviving descendants to take care of one in onea€™ s old age meant that the typical woman 
spent 20 years eating for two: pregnant and breastfeeding.

• Yes, eating for two is an enormous energy drain, especially in populations near subsistence.

•  Yes, Agrarian Age populations were near subsistence^”my great-grandmother Eleanor Lawton 
Cartera€™ s maxim was a€oehave a baby, lose a tootha€D as the child-to-be leached calcium out of 
the mother to build her or his own bones. And she was an upper-class Bostonian, born in the 
mid-1870s.

•  Yes, prolonged breastfeeding was a substantial mobility drain kept women very close to their 
children, and impelled a concentration of female labor on activities that made that easy: gardening 
and other forms of within-and-near-the-dwelling labor, especially textiles.

•  Yes, there were benefits to men as a group from oppressing womena€’’especially if women could be 
convinced that they deserved it: a€oeUnto the woman he said, a€~I will greatly multiply thy sorrow 
and thy conception; in sorrow thou shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy 
husband; and he shall rule over
theea€™ a€!a€D

But surely even in the Agrarian Age a shift to a society with less male supremacy would have been a 
positive-sum change?

Women as equal participants in society, rather than just chattels, classified as a little bit above 
slaves and cattle, can do a lot. Wea€”optimistica€’’economists have a strong bias toward believing 
that people in groups will find ways to become, collectively, more productive and then to 
distribute the fruits of higher productivity in a way
that makes such a more productive social order sustainable.

But apparently not.

The bio-demographic underpinnings of the cultural pattern of high male supremacy began to erode 
even before 1870. But it was over 1870-2016 that these underpinnings dissolved utterly. Reductions 
in infant mortality, the advancing average age of marriage, and the increasing costs of child 
raising together drove a decrease in fertility.
The number of years the typical woman spent eating for two fell from twentya€”if she survived her 
childbeda€”down to four, as better sanitation, much better nutrition, and more knowledge about 
disease made many pregnancies less necessary for leaving surviving descendants, and as birth 
control technology made it easier to plan
families. And, after exploding in the Industrial Age, the rate of population growth in the 
industrial core slowed drastically. The population explosion turned out to be a relatively 
short-run thing. Human population growth rapidly headed for zero long-run population growth.

The path of within-the-household technological advance also worked to the benefit of the typical 
woman over 1870-2016: dishwashers, dryers, vacuum cleaners, improved chemical cleansing products, 
other electrical and natural gas appliances, and so on, especially clothes-washing machinesa€”all 
these made the tasks of keeping the
household clean, ordered, and functioning much easier. Maintaining a nineteenth-century, 
high-fertility household was a much more than full-time job. Maintaining a late twentieth-century 
household could become more like a part-time job. And so much female labor that had been tied to 
full-time work within the household because of
the backward state of household technology became a reserve that could now be used for other 
purposes. And, as Betty Friedan wrote in the early 1960s, women who sought something like equal 
status could find it only if they found a€oeidentitya€!in worka€! for which, usually, our society 
pays.a€D As long as women were confined to
separate, domestic, occupations which the market did not reward with cash, it was easy for men to 
denigrate and minimize

I see the centrality of the economic and the extraordinary upward leap in prosperity as the 
principal news that the future will remember from the history of the Long 20th Century, and the 
coming of feminism as one ofa€”a very important one ofa€”its ramifications. But I am male. If I 
were female, would I see the demographic
transitiona€”the shift of the typical womana€™ s experience from one of eating for two for twenty 
years (and of having one chance in seven of dying in childbed) to eating for two for four 
yearsa€”and the rise of feminism as the biggest news?

Quite possibly.

Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support 
my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

