Subscribe now

First: COVID PLAGUE:

Note, first, that neither the delta variant nor the likely-to-be-called-nu variant is a€oeSouth 
Africana€D any more than the 1918-1920 influenza plague was a€ceSpanisha€D. The South African 
public health authorities are doing a global service in tracking and analyzing, and have long been 
doing so, and deserve much kudos for this global service they are performinga€’’perhaps Pfizer and 
Moderna could mark such kudos with more aggressive mRNA supplies for South
Africa? Just a thought:

There are signs that B.l. 1.529 may be triggering a new wave in South Africa A new variant is 
spreading rapidly in South Africa, and appears to be out-

competing other variants much faster than previous variants of concern did


20,000 daily cases

in South Africa

Share of all sequenced cases* in South Africa accounted for by each variant,
by number of days since it passed 1%

15,000


Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep
2020                          2021

Source: FT analysis of data from Gisaid and the South African National Health Laboratory Service

•'FT

’Growth of B.l.1.529 is modelled from SGTF data rather than full genomic sequences

Source: FT analysis of data from Gisaid and the South African National Health Laboratory Service

^FT


B.l.1.529 - potential impact of mutations

BN©

NEWS

BNO Newsroom o

@BNODesk

JUST IN: Belgium reports 2 suspected cases of new
coronavirus variant

• Multiple RBD and NTD mutations associated with resistance to neutralizing
antibodies (and therapeutic monoclonal antibodies)


•  Cluster ot mutations (H655Y + N679K + P681H) adjacent to S1/S2 Turin cleavage site -

associated with more efficient cell entry -> enhanced transmissibility

•  nsp6 deletion (A105-107) - similar to deletion to Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Lambda - may
be associated with evasion of innate immunity (interferon antagonism) -> could also
enhance transmissibility

•  R203K+G204R mutations in nucleocapsid - seen in Alpha, Gamma, Lambda -
associated with increased infectivity

John Burn-Murdoch: a€™Five quick tweets on the new variant B .1.1.529. Caveat first: data here is 
very preliminary, so everything could change. Nonetheless, better safe than sorry. 1) Based on the 
data we have, this variant is out-competing others far faster than Beta and even Delta did. 2) This 
is coinciding with a wider rise in cases in South Africa. Again, currently wea€™re talking about 
small numbers (both of B. 1.1.529 and of cases in SA
overall), but therea€™ s a clear upward trend. This may be a blip, but this is how waves start. 3) 
Aside from its rapid rise in South Africa, the other key reason for concern here is that the 
specific mutations that B.l .1.529 has are a€” based on what wea€™ ve seen with other variants a€” 
known to be associated with greater transmissibility & immune evasion. 4) Caveats: a€0 This variant 
wasna€™ t known about last week. V[ery] early days. a€0
Case rates v[ery] low when it emerged, so some of this could be a founder effect. Nonetheless ita€™ 
s outcompeting Delta. a€0 Urgent search for more data means some growth could be due to targeted 
testing/sequencing. 5) But what data we do have is clearly cause for concerna€!. To be clear: a€0 I 
dearly hope this turns out just to be a blip. a€0 If it does Ia€™ 11 gladly walk thru the charts 
Ia€™ ve made here & talk thru why they looked
alarming at the time despite not ending up to be significant, and what that would mean for future 
variant emergence charts/dataa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/iburnmurdoch>

My view: we are going to need 20 billion worldwide doses of mRNA vaccine every year going forward, 
provided on a six-month cycle with mRNA-platform doses tuned to the most recent case data 
available. That means no trials: design, start manufacturing, inject, and use your first injections 
as your trails (with some placebos for RCTs inserted for the first 100,000 vaccinated or so). How 
long are we going to need this? Maybe for our lives and beyond. Maybe this would
be an overreaction. But, as Jim Stock told me (and others) in February 2020: a€oeif you dona€™ t 
think you are doing vastly too much, and if you dona€™t look back and conclude that you did vastly 
too much, you are not doing enough.a€D That statement of his has proved true every month since 
then.

But there is a lot of COVID good news. At least at European levels of past infection, a 75% 
vaccination rate does appear to provide enough semi-herd immunity that the virus becomes only a 
background threat. And as long as we keep up our boosters, things will only improve as real, 
effective therapeutics come on line:


Ricrht nnw GArmanv             cprinnc PQCP.rmint wav? Rut fpw npnnlp QTA* IIVAIW tr» rliA r»f it-


Daily new confirmed COVID-19 cases

7-day rolling average. Due to limited testing, the number of confirmed cases is lower than the true 
number of infections.

Our World
in Data


(^LINEAR

LOG O Add country

Germany

Netherlands
Poland
France
Belgium
Czechia

Slovakia

Switzerland
Denmark

On the other hand, the Trumpists and the grifters and Fox News appear to have given six out of 
every 100 people in states like Wyoming and Florida cases of COVID serious enough to be recorded:


Cumulative confirmed cases of covid-19 in New York, Honda, California and Wyoming

Cumulative cases (per 100k)

Wyoming


18,000

16,000

14,000

12,000

10,000

8,000

6,000

4,000

2,000

0

Feb1
2020

Feb
2021

>• Florida

New York
California


Source: Financial Times analysis of data from the Johns Hopkins CSSE.

Data updated November 22 20211.58pm GMT. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

On the other hand, the Trumpists and the grifters and Fox News appear to have killed one out of 
every 1000 people in states like Wyoming and Florida:

Cumulative deaths attributed to Covid-19 in New York, Florida, California and Wyoming

Cumulative deaths (per 100k)


280

260

240

220

200

180

160

140

120

100

80

60

/.n

Florida
New York

Wyoming

California


Feb 1 Apr Jun Aug Oct Dec
2020

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from the Johns Hopkins CSSE.

Data updated November 22 2021 1.58pm GMT. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

Feb Apr Jun Aug
2021

Oct

FINANCIAL TIMES

And for what? Political advantage, and ad revenue.
It gives me no joy to say that I predicted this:


rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

COVID Delta Is Coming for Carbon County, Montana; + BRIEFLY NOTED: For 2021-08-15 Su

FIRST: So Friday morning I woke up with the sniffles in Carbon County, Montanaa€”east northeast of 
the Yellowstone-Grand Teton National Park complex. No fever. Full senses of smell and taste. No 
coughing or perceived shortness of breath (after accounting for the altitude: I was at 5,500 feet 
instead of the sea level I am used toa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- 16 comments
Share

One Picture:

A woman called a€ceToada€D, because of her highly-prized and attractive yellowish-brown skin tone, 
as painted by Victorian-Era Polish painter Henryk Siemiradzki in 1889: Phryne at the Poseidonia in 
Eleusis'.


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Lauren Wolfe: Afghanistan Is Sliding Into Famine'. a€~As winter approaches, Afghans are facing 
more hardships, a hunger crisis, and dire choicesa€! 
<https://washingtonmonthly.com/2021/11/25/afghanistan-is-sliding-into-famine/>

•  Ewen Callaway: Heavily Mutated Coronavirus Variant Puts Scientists on Alert: a€~Researchers are 
racing to determine whether a fast-spreading variant in South Africa poses a threat to COVID 
vaccinesa€™ effectivenessa€l <https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-021-03552-w>

•  Ewa StanisA,awska & Maritta Paloviita: How Euro Area Consumers Adjust Their Medium-Term 
Inflation Expectations in Turbulent Times: a€~Consumers adjust their medium-term inflation views in 
response to changes in short-term inflation expectations and inflation perceptions. Covida€“19 
contributed to an increase in consumer inflation expectations, but greater trust in the ECB is 
associated with more muted responsiveness of inflation expectationsa€!

<https://voxeu.org/article/how-euro-area-consumers-adiust-their-medium-term-inflation-expectations-t
urbulent-times>

•  Kaushik Basu: The Inflation Conundrum: a€~From the US and Brazil to Turkey and India, growing 
price pressures are leaving policymakers facing some difficult decisions. Unlike in many previous 
global inflationary episodes, what is remarkable this time is how different the cross-country 
experiences have beena€! 
<https://www.proiect-syndicate.org/commentary/rising-inflation-poses-different-policy-challenges-for
-countries-by-kaushik-basu-2Q21-ll>

• Jeet Heer: You Dona€™ t, in Fact, Have to Hand it to Mussolini: a€~The new fascist apologia is 
based on bad historya€!



The Time of Monsters

You Dona€™ t, in Fact, Have to Hand it to Mussolini

The paleoconservative scholar Paul Gottfried has a new book, Antifascism: The Course of a Crusade, 
out on the dangers of anti-fascism. According to a laudatory review by John M. Vella, the book 
argues that a€oethe fear of fascism is used as a political weapon by the post-Marxist left to bully 
their politically da€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- 1 comment A- Jeet Heer

Paragraphs:

David Glasner: High-Inflation Anxiety. a€~Again, Summers is simply recycling the same argument. We 
know that there has been a short-term increase in inflation. The question we need to grapple with 
is whether this short-term inflationary blip is likely to be self-limiting, or will feed on itself, 
causing inflation expectations to become a€ceunanchoreda€D. Forward prices of oil may not be 
showing that the price of oil will decline rapidly, but they arena€™ t showing
expectations of further increases. Without further increases in oil prices, it is fair to ask what 
the source of further, ongoing inflation, that will cause a€oeunanchoringa€n?As it has in the past, 
the threat of a€ceunanchoringa€D, is doing an awful lot of work. And it is not clear how the work 
is being done except by way of begging the question that really needs to be answered not beggeda€!

LINK: <https://uneasvmoney.com/2021/11/16/high-inflation-anxiety/>

Dienekes Pontikos: Bell Beakers from Germany: Y-haplogroup Rib: a€~A Bell Beaker sample from 
Germanya€! a cultural phenomenon epitomized by burials with the eponymous Bell Beaker potterya€! 
[or] a true invading population[?]a€!. I have always been on the a€cepeoplea€D side of the 
conflicta€!
LINK: <https://dienekes.blogspot.eom/2012/05/bell-beakers-from-germanv-v-haplogroup.html>

Bret Devereaux: Collections: The Queena€™ s Latin or Who Were the Romans, Part V: Saving & Losing 
an Empire: a€~While there is certainly some continuity between the Late Antique and the early 
Middle Ages, the fall of Rome (in the West) killed lots of people (precipitous declines in 
population in societies without reliable birth control; probably this is mostly food scarcity, not 
direct warfare) and that living standards also declined to a degree that the results are
archaeologically visible. As Brian Ward-Perkins notes in The Fall of Rome and the End of 
Civilization (2005), the collapse causes cows to shrink, speaking to sudden scarcity of winter 
fodder (which in turn likely speaks to a general reduction in available nutrition). Some areas were 
worse hit than others; Robin Flemming, Britain After Rome (2010) notes, for instance, that in 
post-Roman Britain, pot-making technology was lost (because ceramic production had been focused
in     cities which had been largely depopulated out of existence). The fall of Rome might have 
been good for some people, but the evidence is, I think, at this point inescapable that it was 
quite bad for most people. Especially, one assumes, all of the people who got depopulated)a€!

LINK: 
<https://acoup.blog/2Q21/07/3Q/collections-the-queens-latin-or-who-were-the-romans-part-v-saving-and
-losing-an-empire/>

Alexis Coe: Chernow Gonna Chernow: a€~Jessie Serfilippi, a 27-year-old part-time interpreter at the 
Schuyler Mansion State Historic Site in Albany, New Yorka€! published a paper that clearly hit a 
nerve. a€oea€~As Odious and Immoral a Thinga€™: Alexander Hamiltona€™ s Hidden History as an 
Enslavera€D offers persuasive evidence that the first Secretary of the Treasury indeed owned Black 
people. This time, Chernow had comments for all the major outlets. In
an email to the Times, he wrote that Serfilippia€™ s paper a€oeseems to be a terrific research job 
that broadens our sense of Hamiltona€™ s involvement in slavery in a number of ways,a€D at the same 
time dismissing her for focusing too much on slaverya€!in a paper explicitly about slavery. As he 
put it to Smithsonian Magazine, a€oeThere is, inevitably, some distortion of vision by viewing 
Hamiltona€™ s large and varied life through this single lens.a€D Chernow
bemoaned Serfilippia€™ s a€oebald conclusions,a€D but never offered a defense of his own claims. In 
his biography, he writes that a€oethe memories of his West Indian childhood left Hamilton with a 
settled antipathy to slavery.a€D In her paper, Serfilippi counters that a€oethere is no indication, 
either in documents from Hamitona€™ s childhood or adulthood, that the horrors of slavery he 
witnessed on St. Croix turned him into an abolitionist.a€D Did Chernow cite the
missing documents? No. Instead, he told the Times that Serfilippi a€oeomits all information that 
would contradict her conclusions,a€D This is false; in her paper, Serfilippi notes that there are 
documented instances in which Hamilton criticized slavery and that he was a member of the New-York 
Manumission Society, which advocated gradual emancipation. But Hamilton worked as a lawyer, and as 
Serfilippi points out, ita€™ s hard to imagine that his pro-slavery clients,
whom he advised on the issue, would have sought his services a€oeif he were known among his peers 
as having only abolitionist leaningsa€Da€l

LINK:

STUDY
MARRY


Chernow Gonna Chernow

A quick note: My most recent book, You Never Forget Your First, conies out in paperback on Tuesday! 
If you plan on picking up a copy, therea€™ s still time to pre-order (it makes a difference, but so 
do all sales!) from Amazon, Bookshop, or better yet, your local indiea€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 34 likes A- 1 comment A- Alexis Coe

John Ganz: Thank You All!: a€~Almost One Year Later. In the spirit of the holiday, I just want to 
say thank you to all the subscribers of Unpopular Front for (almost) one whole yeara€!. All your 
support has been deeply encouraging and allowed me to not only keep this effort going, but to 
branch out to other projects as well. It hasa€”quite literallya€’’sustained me this past year, 
which I know has been a difficult and frustrating one for everyone. Writing full time for a
living is a wonderful privilege I never fully dared imagining myself doing and I am very grateful 
to all of you for making that possible. Please have a happy a Thanksgiving and a wonderful holiday 
seasona€!

LINK:


Thank You All!

In the spirit of the holiday, I just want to say thank you to all the subscribers of Unpopular 
Front for (almost) one whole year. When I started this newsletter, I had been laid off from my job, 
was very unsure what I would do with my life and if I could make writing work as a career, and was 
frankly pretty scared. Even when you can find the means to kea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 17 likes A- 4 comments A- John Ganz

Ryan Avent: Crypto: a€~Is there any there there?a€! Cryptophiles seem to view what theya€™re 
involved in as fundamentally about Technology rather than Finance, in such a way that all the 
things we think we know about finance dona€™t apply. As a consequence, they seem fated to repeat 
all the mistakes that people in finance have made, then forgotten and painfully remade, over the 
past half millennium or soa€!
LINK:

The Bellows
Crypto

Crypto has been around for a while now but it has, at long last, gone mainstream. A-list 
celebrities are hawking crypto stuff, crypto outfits are buying stadium naming rights, and you can 
bet good money there will be crypto ads running during the Super Bowl. It has thus become time, 
once again, to ask: is there anything to it, or is it all a huge scam? a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- 1 comment A- Ryan Avent
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Thank You All!

In the spirit of the holiday, I just want to say thank you to all the subscribers of Unpopular 
Front for (almost) one whole year. When I started this newsletter, I had been laid off from my job, 
was very unsure what I would do with my life and if I could make writing work as a career, and was 
frankly pretty scared. Even when you can find the means to kea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 17 likes A- 4 comments A- John Ganz

Ryan Avent: Crypto: a€~Is there any there there?a€! Cryptophiles seem to view what theya€™re 
involved in as fundamentally about Technology rather than Finance, in such a way that all the 
things we think we know about finance dona€™t apply. As a consequence, they seem fated to repeat 
all the mistakes that people in finance have made, then forgotten and painfully remade, over the 
past half millennium or soa€!
LINK:

The Bellows
Crypto

Crypto has been around for a while now but it has, at long last, gone mainstream. A-list 
celebrities are hawking crypto stuff, crypto outfits are buying stadium naming rights, and you can 
bet good money there will be crypto ads running during the Super Bowl. It has thus become time, 
once again, to ask: is there anything to it, or is it all a huge scam? a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- 1 comment A- Ryan Avent
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

