Subscribe now

CONDITION: Gross Domestic Product & Gross Domestic Income".


These two should be exactly the same. That they are not makes understanding the current state of 
the economya€! rather difficult:

FRED    Real gross domestic income

Real Gross Domestic Product

2019 2020 2021 2022

-2.5

Q4 2020          Q1 2021          Q2 2021          Q3 2021          Q4 2021          Q1 2022        
  Q2 2022          Q3 2022

Share

FOCUS: Why Oh Why Cana€™t We Have a Better Press Corps?: Yet Another Semafor/New York Times 
Edition:

In the end, the internet threat did not lead to a better American press corps than we had back in 
the days of Izzy Stone. In fact, I think it is somewhat worse. Fox News and company are clear to 
me. But it is not clear to me why the mainstream is not better. I only know that is it not.

For example: McConnella€™ s aim since election day 2008 has been to deny Democratic presidents any 
legislative victories whatsoever. The business of the country can, he thinks (with notably rare 
exceptions) be done when a Republican is in the oval office. Legislative gridlock is the first step 
to painting the Democratic president as a failure, and then winning congressional majorities and 
the presidency:

Michael Grunwald: a€~Biden says that during the [2008-2009] transition, he was warned not to expect 
any cooperation on many votes. a€oel spoke to seven different Republican Senators, who said, 'Joe, 
Ia€™ m not going to be able to help you on anything,a€™ he recalls. His informants said McConnell 
had demanded unified resistance. a€oeThe way it was characterized to me was: 'For the next two 
years, we cana€™ t let you
succeed in anything. Thata€™ s our ticket to coming back,a€™ a€D Biden says. The vice president 
says he hasna€™ t even told Obama who his sources were, but Bob Bennett of Utah and Arlen Specter 
of Pennsylvania both confirmed they had conversations with Biden along these linesa€!

And then last week we had:

Steve Clemons: As is so often the case, Mitch McConnell, R-Ky. got what he wanted: a€~The Senate 
minority leader ignored the jeering from his right and helped push through the $1.7 trillion 
omnibus bill that rained billions more on the Pentagon than the White House had requested, secured 
aid for Ukraine, and kept down domestic spending.  It was part of a successful strategy to pursue 
some of his own self-interested goals, like

keeping centrists happy so they would protect the filibuster...


But what McConnell wanted was gridlocka€”a€oewe cana€™ t let you succeed in anything. Thata€™ s our 
ticketa€!a€C
He could not get gridlock, because gridlock was unacceptable to the unified Democratic caucus.

So McConnell settled. And then was double-crossed by Manchin, or fell victim to wishful thinking. 
He thought that he had killed all components of Build Back Better in exchange for allowing CHIPS to 
go forward, and then found himself watching not just CHIPS but the IRA go down the tracks.
And yet Steve Clemons portrays it as McConnella€™ s a€oesuccessful strategyaCD.

Is he dumb? Is he in the tank?

I really do not know why he has to burnish the image of Mitch McConnell as all-controlling Svengali.
At least with Maggie Haberman, we dona€™ t have to wonder why she does what she does:

Cassidy Hutchinson: a€~His phone is ringing. I look down at his phone. Ita€™ s Maggie Haberman 
calling him. And I looked at Stefan, and I said, a€oeStefan, did you tell Maggie Haberman that we 
were meeting with the committee today?a€D
And hea€™ s like, a€oeNo, no. Maybe thata€™ s not what shea€™ s calling me about.a€D

And I said, a€oeStefan, did you tell Maggie that we were meeting with the committee today?a€D

And he said, a€oeNo, no, but I should probably answer to see if she knows, right? I should 
answer.a€D

And I said, a€oeStefan, no. I dona€™ t think you should answer that call. She probably wants to 
know if we met with the committee today.a€D
He said, a€oeCass, Ia€™ m just going to answer. It will just be 2 seconds. I just want to find out 
what shea€™ s going to talk to me about.a€D

He answers. I cana€™ t hear what shea€™ s saying, but I hear Stefan say, a€oeYeah, yeah, we did 
just leave her third interview. You can put it out, but dona€™ t a€” dona€™ t a€” dona€™ t a€” 
dona€™ t make it too big of a deal. I dona€™ t think shea€™ 11 want it to be too big of a deal. All 
right. Thanks.a€D
And I said, a€oeStefan, was that Maggie Haberman asking about my interview?a€D

And he said, a€oeYeah, but dona€™ t worry. Shea€™ s not going to make it a big deal.a€D
I said, a€oeStefan, I dona€™ t want this out there.a€D

He said, a€oeDona€™ t worry. Like, Maggiea€™ s friendly to us. Wea€™ 11 be fine.a€D
So I was just like, a€ceWhatevera€da€l

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: & We Have a Rainy Season Here in California!

Hooray!

NWS Bay Area dY(E%₀ @NWSBayArea

Preliminary (not official) rainfalldY(E§i'.Dtotals looking back 48 hours, ending 6 am this morning. 
#cawx

48HR Precip Totals (in)

Mount Tamalpais RAWS             4.76

Manchester            457               Soquel              457 ;

Manchester            4.46 | I  Napa Justin-siena Hs          4.43 |


|        2 E Fetters Hot Spring

|           Santa Cruz

4.28 1           Rohnert Park

4.18              Ross

4.22 |

4.16

Austin Creek- Russian River        4.04 |             Santa Cruz             3.99 |

Soquel              3.99 |           Windsor jT_              3.93 I


I              Fairfax

3.92 । |

Graton

3.90 1


.           Occidental

3.78 j |            Cazadero  

3.73 1

Kentfield             3.68 I |   Windsor               3.68 j

Ben Lomond Mountain (raws)       3.67           Boyes Hot Springs           3.63

UC-DAVIS MARINE LAB BODEGA 6 WSW CA US 359               Felton              3.47 |


'       1 ENE Windsor            3.44             Sebastopol             3.40 ’

Sebastopol             3.39           Woodacre Raws            3.37

Oak Ridge             3.36   Felton              3.36 1


2:43 PM a~™ Dec 28,2022

Leave a comment

BRIEFLY NOTED:

Mill Valley             3.31             Cloverdale              3.29 1

Mill Valley             3.27             Santa Rosa             3.24 '

Los Gatos             3.16             Santa Rosa             3.15

Sonoma             3.12              Lagunitas              3.10

Mill Valley             3.05              Kenwood              3.03

Y«W at of Orc J!W> 01 JI am - W ian francHCQ Kay Area
(Mio by. Brian Garo*

ONE AUDIO: Near-Term AI Forecasts:

Unfortunately paywalled:

Ben Thompson: An Interview with Daniel Gross and Nat Friedman about ChatGPT and the Near-Term 
Future of AIa€! a€~DG: [The] fundamental issuea€! [is] Ia€™m sayinga€! the final wordsa€! but 
therea€™re all sorts of things Ia€™m not saying because I have a model of a world, of the listener, 
of Nata€!. Ia€™ma€ Reasoning througha€! word-by-worda€!. These modelsa€! were just trained on the 
final output by humans, not
on the actual reasoninga€!. And soa€! they lack a real fundamental piece of our psyche. We can see 
hintsa€! [of] how valuable this isa€! [in] examples ofa€! thinking step-by-step...

Start writing today. Use the button below to create your Substack and connect your publication with 
Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Start a Substack

ONE IMAGE: Homelessness & Apartment Rents:

Median contract rent versus PIT count (per capita)

Dashed lines indicate a linear regression of per capita PIT counts onto median contract
rent between 2007 and 2019 for a sample of U.S. regions.

cont             ' I

C ‘


$500    $1,000    $1,500    $2,000      $500    $1,000    $1,500    $2,000

veil tor the ilope of the retye

Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

• Brooke Masters: Three ways Big Tech got it wrong: a€~Racing for scale with buggy, money-losing 
products doesna€™ t work in most sectorsa€!

• Adrian Daub: It's a Festivus Debunking!: a€~Whether you teacha€! or studya€! work in IT at 
Stanforda€! you can absolutely use the word a€oeAmericana€Da€!. If you are responsible for putting 
standardized language on official Stanford websites, maybe you should consider using the more 
precise term a€oeUS citizena€D. And maybe also avoid the word a€cetr**nya€D. All of this can be 
gleaned from the document the WSJ so gleefully
shared...

•  Sam Hammond: How to profit off AI: a€~Education seems especially exposed to disruption by 
near-term large language models.... So why not create an adaptive AI tutor?... Higher education may 
face the hardest reckoning.... If Ais can make anyone a good writer... many existing sources of 
status distinction will likely wither away.  No one should expect unemployed coal miners to 
a€oelearn to code,a€D almost anyone can a€oelearn to

prompta€D...

•  John Ganz: What Makes Fascism Fascist?: a€~Conservatives tend to emphasize the patriarchal and 
staid parts of traditional masculinitya€’’the stern but beneficent father... but the fascistsa€™ 
cult of masculinity... explicitly centers violence and war.... Authoritarian conservatives... 
[prefer the]] break with constitutional legality... to originate within the existing A©lite...

•  Matt Yglesias: Why hasna€™t technology disrupted higher education already?: a€~The past couple 
of centuries have seen a steady increase in the market demand for certain kinds of skillsa€!. 
People wanta€! training to earn a better living, and education as a formal process is a very useful 
motivational crutch...

•  Casey Newton: How Elon botched his war on bots: a€~All of this is, to say the least, a fluid 
situationa€!. But Ia€™ d rather risk being out of the loop than give any of my best work to Gab Jr. 
The Twitter we once knew as dead, and what replaced it is well on its way toward becoming a smoking 
ruin...

•  Paul Campos: The wrong path: a€~Here is somebody in their mid-30s, whose net worth is currently 
down to $2.5 million, who is devastated by the realization that theya€™ 11 never be able to afford 
a $10 million house on a W-2 incomea€!

• Eric Jones: Preface and acknowledgements - The European Miracle: a€~Oscar Wilde expected to be 
met at the Pearly Gates by St Peter bearing an armful of sumptuously bound volumes and declaring, 
a€oeMr Wilde, these are your unwritten worksa€D. I have often felt that The European Miracle would 
turn out to be among St Peter's armful for me...
Get 33% off a group subscription


AJs:

A%cmilio Torres: a€~Those whoa€™ ve followed me for the past year know that Ia€™ ve published lots 
of critiques of longtermisma€”but very little about Effective Altruism (EA), out of which 
longtermism emerged. Well, buckle ina€!. EA is, frankly, a massive grifta€!. The EA community has 
so much money that the Centre for Effective Altruism, cofounded by MacAskill, even bought a 
a€oepalatial estateaCO in Oxfordshirea€! on the market just last year
for A£15 milliona€.\. This is what EA isa€i. Just dona€™t fall for the grift...

John Ganz: The Dishonorable Society, Part 1: a€~Dylan Rileya€™ s formula for fascism requires a 
stronga€’’indeed overflowinga€’’civic life, and a lack of effective political leadership: in a kind 
of perverse form of democratic demand, society calls for a strong, technocratic leadership to 
replace parliamentary immobilism and govern directly in its interest. As Riley writes, a€oeThey 
therefore attempted to replace political struggle, and representative
institutions, with a form of nonpolitical interest representation. In this sense fascist regimes 
were never exactly rightist or leftist; they represented instead a distinctive rejection of 
politics as sucha€Da€!

David French: The Oddly Intense Anger Against Volodymyr Zelensky: a€~An astonishing outpouring of 
raw vitriol.  Donald Trump Jr. called Zelensky an a€ reinternational welfare queen.a€Da€l Carlson 
said that Zelenskya€’’who wore fatigues similar to the ones hea€™s worn since the conflict 
starteda€”a€ redressed like the manager of a strip club.a€Da€! Matt Walsh told his 1.2 million 
Twitter followers that Zelensky was a a€regrifting leech.a€Da€!

Turning Point USA President Charlie Kirk, said Zelensky is a€rethe perfect person for DC. Barely 
can speak English, an actor, and totally corrupt.a€da€! Partisan polarization doesna€™ t just 
explain the fact of right-wing opposition to Ukraine; it also explains its raw intensity. Simply 
put, ita€™ s not about Ukraine. Ita€™ s about you. A key reason why the new right hates Zelensky is 
that the new right hates you. You are the real enemy, and anything or
anyone you like, they will hatea€!. Polarization against the Democrats, against the Republican 
establishment, and against traditional Reagan conservatives like mea€!

Michael Strain: The Myth of Income Stagnation: Many economists, journalists, business leaders, and 
elected leaders (from both parties) believe that for a large share of households, real 
(inflation-adjusted) income has not increased for decades. But new data from a nonpartisan, 
independent arbiter show that what everyone seems to know just isn't so: a€~Median household income 
from market activitiesa€! from 1990 to 2019a€! grew by 26%a€! in line with
wage growtha€!. The bottom 20% of households enjoyeda€! market income growth of 51% and 
after-tax-and-transfer income growth of 74%a€!. While inequality of post-tax-and-transfer income 
did rise by 7% from 1990 to 2019, all the increase occurred between 1990 and 2007, before the 
explosion of political and media interest in inequality. Since 2007, inequality has fallen by 5%...

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.
Share

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.
Share

Subscribe now

