Why has the last century has left much of us vastly richer yet still profoundly dissatisfied.

Before 1870, most people lived in dire poverty, the benefits of the slow crawl of invention 
continually offset by a growing population. Then came a great shift: invention sprinted forward, 
doubling our technological capabilities each generation, and creatively destroying the economy 
again and again. Brad DeLonga€™ s Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth 
Century <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> tells the story of the major economic and
technological shifts of the 20th century.

DeLong charts the unprecedented explosion of material wealth after 1870 which transformed living 
standards around the world, freeing humanity from centuries of poverty, but paradoxically has left 
us now with unprecedented inequality, global warming and widespread dissatisfaction with the status 
quo. Our ancestors believed that by now utopia would have been the inevitable result of such 
material wellbeing a€“ instead of arriving at utopia we are slouching
towards it.

In this conversation with Bristol Ideasa€™ Andrew Kelly, DeLong looks at the role of public 
understanding of the complexity of economics; writing grand narratives and the inspiration of Eric 
Hobsbawm; and the importance of editors. They discuss economic growth from 1870 in the great 
transformation; Mill, Keynes, von Hayek and Karl Polanyi; the great period of social democracy and 
welfare in the a€~Trente Glorieusesa€™ post-Second World War; the
collapse of the New Deal Order and how it might have been saved; the impact of neoliberalism; and 
the challenges now and what to do next.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Stable Diffusion Isa€! Very Interesting Indeeda€!

Especially what it does with hats and architectural columns:

Creations Collections Feed Explore Challenges      CREATE



Anonymous User

a few seconds ago

wedding friedrich von hayek as the bride and
karl polanyi as the groom john maynard keynes
as the priest holding the shotgun z'

ADD TO C

BUY /

Leave a comment

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Alexandra Scaggs: A short history of rate hikes: Happy Fed Day everyone! Buckle up: As markets 
prepare for another 75bps rate increase from the Federal Reserve, Goldman Sachs have reviewed the 
historical rate-hike playbook for central banks in Group of 10 countries. Ita€!a€%oisna€™ 
ta€%oentirely discouraging. It goes a little something like this: a€” hike until something breaks 
a€” try to fix whatever broke by cutting ratesa€!

•  Joe Nye: The Evolution of Americaa€™ s China Strategy: a€~While US President Joe Bidena€™ s 
administration is right to question the basic assumptions that underlay Americaa€™ s strategy of 
engagement with China, those who devised that strategy over two decades ago were also right in 
their own way. Then as now, even distant scenarios must be left opena€!

•  Jared Brey: Why Are U.S. Transit Projects So Costly? This Group Is on the Case: a€~Boston and 
New York in the high-cost category, and Stockholm, Italy and Istanbul in the low-cost categorya€! 
politicization of project managementa€! the expanding role of consultants, the costs of labor, and 
efforts to limit disruption to normal traffica€!

• Ben Thompson & Dan Wang: The China Chip Bana€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Noah Smith: Twitter's problems: a roundup: a€~Elon Musk bought Twitter. Personally, Ia€™m pretty 
sanguine about this development. Ita€™ s no secret that I think that Twitter is a uniquely 
dystopian feature of the modern media sphere a bad equilibrium that traps the nationa€™ s 
journalists, politicians, and intellectuals in close quarters with all the nastiest and most 
strident anonymous bottom-feeders. ThereaC™ s a nonzero chance Musk will be able to
improve this situation; if not, ita€™ s hard to see how he could make it particularly worse. If he 
destroys the platform, wea€™ 11 find something else a€” probably a number of different somethings, 
which I think would be good for the media ecosystema€!. Twittera€™ s power of a€oecancellationa€n 
is boosted by another feature of the internet: permanence. Anyone who searches for your name will 
always be able to find those 200 people who got mad at you
on Twitter. This means that a€oecancel culturea€D is different than traditional social ostracism, 
which you could escape by moving to a new town or by people forgetting a controversy over timea€!

Matt Yglesias: One Billion Americans a€” now more than ever: a€~We want a story to tell China and 
the world about a path to enduring American primacy that doesna€™t involve keeping everyone else 
down. We know that China is already facing extremely stiff demographic headwinds. We know that lots 
of people from around the world would like to move to the United States. And we know that we have 
the capacity to do more to financially support
parents of young children. We should try to address those issues in ways that are sensitive to 
conservatives^™ concerns, but we should in fact try to address them and have more legal immigration 
and more of a policy tilt against the trend toward ever-fewer children. That doesna€™t answer all 
the dozens of specific diplomatic, economic, military, and political questions posed by U.S 
.-Chinese rivalry, but it would put us on a fundamentally firmer footing. And
now that the country is really committed to the rivalry, I hope more people can see thata€!

Michael O'Hare: What To Do On the Last Day of Class: a€~Any coursea€! can have no more than five 
big ideasa€l. Mmy current last-day programa€!. Divide the class into small groups in some obviously 
random waya€!. Have each group gather to come up with a consensus version of the five ideasa€!. 
Have a scribe from each group come to the board and write the group's 5 ideasa€!. Have a brief 
discussion of "any surprises? anything especially interesting?
a€Ua€! Collect the group forms and post them as a PDF on the course web sitea€!. Say goodbyesa€!. 
It's surprising and illuminating to see how varied the responses are (and reassuring that there's a 
fair amount of overlap); every student in the room actually experiences a different course, and I 
now have a much better idea of this distributional

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

