Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) If you read one thing about why the Biden administration is trying to do what it is trying to 
do, read this:

David Mitchell: The Evidence Behind Bidena€™ s Big Plans for Rebuilding Infrastructure, Reducing 
Poverty, & Combating Inequality'. a€~The American Jobs Plan and the
American Families Plana€! designed to complement the temporary economic boosters included in the 
American Rescue Plana€!. Many of the big ideas included in the two new
plans  are backed by extensive academic evidence, much of which has been funded and featured by the 
Washington Center for Equitable Growth. Leta€™ s walk through the major
elements of the administration^™ s new plans, which were outlined by the president in a joint 
address to Congress last night, alongside the underlying academic evidencea€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-evidence-behind-bidens-big-plans-for-rebuilding-infrastructure-redu
cing-poverty-and-combating-inequality/>

2) Powerful documentation of a large-scale societal failure relative to the yardstick provided by 
other global-north societies:

Robert Manduca & al.: The American Dream Is Less of a Reality Today in the United States, Compared 
to Other Peer Nations'. a€~ The hope that children will grow up to have
higher standards of living than their parents is widespread around the world. In the United States, 
this concept is considered by many to be a core component of the American
Dreama€!. More than 90 percent of U.S. children born in 1940 had higher real incomes at age 30 than 
their parents did, but only about 50 percent of children born in 1980 can say
the same. This raises the question: Was this decline part of a global trend, or is the United 
States alone in its low rates of upward mobility? In short, does the American Dream live
on, but in other countries?a€! Contrary to the self-conception that the United States is the 
a€oeland of opportunity ,a€D relative social mobilitya€’’the likelihood of a child born to
low-income parents climbing to the top of the income distribution as an adulta€”is low in the 
United States, compared to many European countries. The United States also has a
distinctive welfare state, with less social insurance and lower labor union penetrationa€!. The 
variation in upward mobility rates among these countries is strikinga€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-american-dream-is-less-of-a-reality-today-in-the-united-states-comp
ared-to-other-peer-nations/>

3) My former student Trevon Logan did a superb job herea€”and the Equitable Growth tweeters did a 
superb job of covering and summarizing it:

Equitable Growth: Livetweeting Trevon D. Logana€™ s Senate Banking Committee Testimony. a€™ Outside 
of mergers, market concentration, and monopsony itself is the rise of
what I term 21st century Factory Discipline. E.g. incl. NCAs and non-poaching agreements among 
franchisees. Both of these can work to depress wages by structurally reducing
labor market mobility. Recent survey evidence shows that one in five workers with a high school 
education or less are subject to an NCA. Non-poaching agreements have also
proliferated, and today more than half of all major franchises forbid their franchisees from 
competing for one anothera€™ s workers. NCAs exacerbate racial wage gaps, accounting
for as much as 9% of the wage differentials^!. There are solutionsa€!. The first is to understand 
that antitrust law should be applied to the potential labor market impacts of
monopsony power via market concentration^!

LINK: <https://twitter.eom/equitablegrowth/status/1387775972607504390>

4) This is an important point that has always bothered me. Whenever one does the matha€”tries to 
calculate which market prices are "wrong" from the perspective of taking a well
functioning market could be one in which the prices are at the correct values to guide the 
market-system-as-societal-calculating-machine in its task of increasing societal well-
beinga€”the wrongest prices are those whose wrongness springs from inequality in the distribution 
of income. Yet Ia€”and Takasha Negishi, of coursea€”are the only people I
ever hear saying this. Why only us?:

Brad DeLong: RHETORICAL QUESTION: Why Do Economists Ignore the Greatest of All Market Failures?'. 
a€~The Chicago School underwent an enormous change between the
Midwestern Populist days of Henry Simons, for whom private monopoly was the big foe and large 
inequalities an enormous menace, and the monopoly-toleranta€! Stigler & co.
created. This transformation from Simons to Stigler was possible only by a€ceotheringa€D the 
non-rich by every means possible, so that their low weight in the marketa€™ s
Negishi-weighted SWF could be dismissed as deserved. I put it to you that taking the Murray 
Rothbard Road in race relationsa€! was a very important part and remains a very
important part of that shift away from economics understood as a policy science that attempts to 
implement a Benthamite or a Millian utilitiarianism that seeks the greatest good of
the greatest numbera€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/why-do-economists-ignore-the-greatest-ld7>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Yes, the United States has been underinvesting in science since Reagan took an axe to the 
federal discretionary budget. Any more questions?:

Jonathan Gruber & Simon Johnson: Infrastructure for the Next American Century. a€~Bidena€™ s 
Republican opponents disagree. In their view, the United States need only
renew some of its post-World War II physical infrastructure, with a€oeroads and bridgesa€Da€l. But 
Americaa€™ s post-World War II prosperity was based on more than good
roads and bridges; it drew on a much broader push to generate shared scientific knowledge and put 
it to work productivelya€!. By the mida€“ 1960s, the US government was
spending nearly 2% of GDP on public science investmentsa€”and the returns were extraordinarya€!. 
And yet the US has since retreated from its commitment to public funding of
basic science. Federal science spending has fallen toward 0.6% of GDP, placing the US 12th in the 
worlda€!. China now spends roughly 1.3% of GDP on government-supported
sciencea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/biden-infrastructure-plan-increases-federal-science-fu
nding-bv-ionathan-gruber-and-simon-iohnson-2021-04>

2) Tracking the recovery. There is going to be inflationa€”you cannot merge onto the superhighway 
without leaving skidmarks. But that is a very different thing than the
stagflationary problems of the 1970s:

Neil Irwin: The Economy Is (Almost) Back. It Is Looking Different Than It Used To: a€~Americansa€™ 
spending on durable goodsa€”cars and furniture and other goods meant to
last a long timea€”rose at a stunning 41.4 percent annual rate in the first three months of the 
year. Enjoy your Pelotons and Big Green Eggs, everybodya€!. The economy is
recovering rapidly, and is on track to reach the levels of overall G.D.P. that would have been 
expected before anyone had heard of Covida€“19. But that masks some extreme shifts
in composition^!. The United States is on track to surge above that 2019 trend in the second 
quarter currently underway. Buta€! spending on cars and trucks is 15.1 percent higher
than it would have been on the 2019 trajectory; spending on furnishings and durable household 
equipment is 16.6 percent higher; and spending on recreational goods is a whopping
26 percent higher. Altogether, durable goods spending is running $348.5 billion higher annuallya€!. 
The housing sector is experiencing nearly as big a surge. Residential investment
was 14.4 percent above its prepandemic trenda€!. Spending on transportation services remains 23 
percent below its prepandemic trend, recreation services 31 percent, and
restaurants and hotels 19 percent. Those three sectors alone represent $430 billion in 
a€oemissinga€D economic activitya€’’largely equivalents! to the combined shift of
economic  activity toward durable goods and residential real estatea€!. Less widely understood is a 
steep pullback in the energy sectora€!. Consumer spending on gasoline and other
energy goods is down 11 percent from its prepandemic trend line. And business spending on 
structures is down 19 percents!

LINK: <https://www.nytim.es .com/2021/04/29/upshot/economy-gdp-report,html>

3) Economists did a lot of damage when they put forward orthodox doctrines that each tool of 
economic management was good for one and only one thinga€’’financial regulation
for preventing crises, monetary policy for stabilizing employment and inflation, and fiscal policy 
for promoting long-run growth. It was always much messier. And a large part of
our failure to deal with the Great Recession properly stems from the orthodox target-instrument 
doctrine. As Ivan Werning and Emmanuel Farhi point out here, it does not even
make theoretical sense:

Ivan Werning: Taming a Minsky Cycle: a€™In a SoeMinsky momenta€Da€! risk is re-priced, asset prices 
crash, imprudent borrowers de-lever, aggregate demand falls, and a


recession ensues. Wea€! ask what policymakers should do about it. To answer this question, we build 
a stylized model with boom-bust financial cycles fueled by extrapolative
expectationsa€!. With extrapolative expectations during the busta€! monetary policy must be 
conducted with an eye towards financial stability instead of focusing exclusively on
macroeconomic stabilitya€!. Financial stability becomes a multidimensional target influenced by 
leverage and beliefs/asset prices. Macroprudential policy cannot control both at the
same   time and monetary policy must shoulder a share of the burden. Limiting leverage falls on 
macroprudential policy, and managing beliefs/asset prices on monetary policya€!

LINK: chttps://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B_pJsPXUVMs>

4) This is, I think, a very important point that Matthew Zeitlin makes. The biggest differences 
between Bill Clinton and Barack Obamaa€™ s administrations on the one hand and
Joe Bidena€™ s on the other is this: Joe Biden is a Northeastern politician, while Bill Clinton is 
a Southern politician and Barack Obama is an African-American meritocrat:

Matthew Zeitlin: Personnel Isna€™ t Policy, Policy Is Personnel'. a€~Janet Yellen is a fiscal and 
monetary hawk. Or at least she was. Sorta. But no longera€!. While on the Fed
and in the Clinton White House, she supported policies that would be anathema to the current 
administration, she was affiliated with deficit hawk groups that, for now, have no
particular hold over current Democratic Party thinking. And yet I have no doubt that Yellen will be 
an effective advocate and architect of exactly what the Biden administration and
Democratic congress wants to do right: spend money on families, Covid relief, the environment, and 
not get too stressed about the deficita€!. It wasna€™ t Larry Summers who
allegedly  told Romer that monetary policy had a€oeshot its wad,a€D or tried to explain high 
unemployment with reference to bank tellers and ATMs. It was Barack Obamaa€!.

The principal shapes the advisors, or essentially farms out different a€cemodulesa€D of thinking to 
different people (a deficit hawk here, a stimulus advocate there, a health care
reformer over there) and then shifts the degree to which she takes their input in accordance with 
what she already wants to doa€!. [Summers] is as on board for more spending as
anyone in Greater Bidenberga€!

LINK: <https://zeitlin.substack.com/pZpersonnel-isnt-policy-policy-is-personnel>

5) This has no relevance at all to the mission of Equitable Growth. I simply found it fascinating. 
The evolutionary process is very very clever indeed:

Cariad J. Williams & al.: Helically Arranged Cross Struts in Azhdarchid Pterosaur Cervical 
Vertebrae And Their Biomechanical Implications'. a€~Trabeculae in a pterosaur
cervical vertebra are helically arranged. As few as 50 trabeculae increase the buckling load by up 
to 90%. Subsuming the neural tube into the centrum adds stiffness to the cervical
seriesa€!. Azhdarchid pterosaurs, the largest flying vertebrates, remain poorly understooda€!. A 
complex internal micro-architecture fora€! hyper-elongate cervical vertebraea€!.
Incorporation of the neural canal within the body of the vertebra and elongation of the centrum 
result in a a€oetube within a tubea€D supported by helically distributed trabeculae
[bands                                                                                   or columns 
of connective tissue]. Linear elastic static analysis and linearized buckling analysis, accompanied 
with a finite element model, reveal that as few as 50 trabeculae
increase the buckling load by up to 90%a€!. Subsuming the neural tube into the centrum tube adds 
considerable stiffnessa€! permitting the uptake of heavy prey items without
risking damage to the cervical series, while at the same time allowing considerable skeletal mass 
reductiona€!

LINK: <https://www.cell .com/iscience/fulltext/S2589-0042(21)00306-0>

6) When things become important, it seems easier for humans to create a machine-readable data 
format than for machines to read raw human complexity and messiness. Will this
always be true? When the stakes are high enough, yesa€”until we have Turing-class AI entities. And 
then, as Paul Krugman says, we will not have AI assistants and intelligence
amplifiers, but rather partnersa€”or slaves:

Cal Paterson: We Were Promised Strong AI, But Instead We Got Metadata Analysis'. a€~Perhaps the 
best measure of this problem is how often I have to append the search terms
a€oereddita€D or a€oesite:reddit.coma€n to a query. Increasingly this is the only way to find the 
opinions of people who arena€™ t being paid to give thema€!. When you search
with   Google a€! you are really just searching the sum total of things that people have put, and 
managed to keep, on the web since about 1995. Perhaps this is one reason why
commercial a€oecontent sitesa€D appear often in searches: they put a lot of stuff on the weba€!. 
When your elected government snoops on you, they famously prefer the metadata
of                                                                                who you emailed, 
phoned or chatted to the content of the messages themselves. It seems to be much more tractable to 
flag people of interest to the security services based on who
their friends are and what websites they visit than to do clever AI on the messages they senda€!. 
Artificial Intelligence is used when first doing some new thing. Then, once the
value of doing that thing is established, society will find a way to provide the necessary data in 
a machine readable format, obviating (and improving on) the AI modelsa€!

LINK: <https ://calpaterson.com/metadata.html>

7) I do not understand the transformation of the Republican Party over the past 70 years. It was 
the party of the rich and those who intended to become rich. It believed that its
principal policy goal was to boost the pace of economic growth, so that its large relative slices 
of the economic pie would be even larger an absolute magnitude. It is now the party
of those who are terrified of change and growth because they think they cannot compete and will 
lose out. Some of it is that when you are no longer able to minimize lines of
economic cleavage you shift instead to maximizing fear. But I do not think that is an adequate 
explanation. Here is John Quiggina€™ s take. I am not sure that it is right. I am not
sure  that it is wrong:

John Quiggin: Republicans & the End of Hard Neoliberalism: a€~In the 1980s and 1990s, the 
Republicans were a hard neoliberal partya€!. Now the situation is reversed. The
Republicans are a white grievance partya€! [that] still attempt to attract support from 
corporations by advocating tax cutsa€!. Think of the Eisenhower-era Republican party as a
complicated mixturea€! and the Trump era party as a crystalised mass of plutocratic economics, 
racism and all-round craziness. The development over the 60 yearsa€! keeping the
mixture simmering, while adding more and more appeals to racial animus and magical thinkinga€!. 
Boiling off is the process by which various groups (Blacks and Northeastern
liberal Republicans in C20, liberaltarians more recently) have left the Republican coalition in 
response to its racism and know-nothingism. The dregs that have precipitated out are
ideas that were supposed to be important to Republicans (free trade, scientific truth, classical 
liberalism, moral character and so on) that turned out not to matter at all. Trumpa€™ s
arrival is the catalyst seed crystal that produces the phase changea€!

LINK: <https://crookedtimber.org/2021/04/26/republicans-and-the-end-of-hard-neoliberalism/>

8) There is something profoundlya€! I shouldna€™ t say ita€! I really shouldna€™ t say ita€! I have 
to say it: There is something profoundly stupid about arguments that voter­
suppression laws are unimportant because they trigger counter-mobilizations that then wash out the 
distorting effects of voter suppression on who wins elections. This happens only
when peopole think voter suppression laws are important. That is what triggers 
counter-mobilization. To claim that voter-suppression laws are not important is, frankly, to tell a 
lie.
And to claim that voter-suppression laws are not important is to powerfully assist them in 
accomplishing their intended goal of changing the winners of elections. Voter-suppression
laws are important. And it is only by understanding how they are important that we can accurately 
assess and deal with them:

Ryan Teague Beckwith: What Every one d€™ s Getting Wrong About Mail-In Ballots and Early Voting in 
2020: a€~Recent studies have confirmed that changes to voting in 2020
had little or no effect on turnouta€i. If there was a partisan benefit from expanding voting by 
mail, it probably helped Republicansa€!. Myth 1: Voter fraud is a big problem: It
isna€™ta€!. Myth 2: Early voting boosts turnouta€!. In 20 studies reviewed by the U.S. Government 
Accountability Office, five found mixed evidence, seven found no significant
effect,  and eight found that early voting actually decreased turnout. One theory: It reduces the 
significance of Election Day, which otherwise spurs some halfhearted voters to show
up. Myth 3: Strict voter ID laws hurt minority turnout: The evidence is inconclusivea€!. Some 
studies show no statistical link, and others show they hurt turnout somewhat. Some
scholars suggest they may even inadvertently motivate people in minority groups to vote, or spur 
campaigns to do more outreach to them. Myth 4: Strict voter ID laws boost
confidence  in elections: They dona€™t seem to have any effect on confidence^!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-Q4-28/what-evervone-s-getting-wrong-about-mail-in-ball
ots-and-early-voting-in-2Q2Q>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


