Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: Ukraine:

At least as I see it, the DonBas is pretty alienated from Kyiv and Lviv and Odessaa€”and pretty 
attracted to Moscow. It makes no sense to me to promise that NATO soldiers will die to preserve the 
rule of Kiev over Donbas. I think it may makes sense to draw the line at Kyiv and Lviv and Odessa:

Daniel Larison: The Insanity of Russia Hawks'. a€~Farkas is proposing waging a war on Russiaa€™ s 
doorstep where they have virtually every advantagea€!

Eunomia

The Insanity of Russia Hawks

Evelyn Farkas, a former Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense, goes full alarmist: The world will 
watch our response. Any subsequent acceptance of Russian gains will spell the beginning of the end 
of the international order. If Europe, NATO, and its allies in Asia and elsewhere fail to defend 
the foundational United Nations principles of sanctity of borda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- 2 comments A- Daniel Larison

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!

Share

First: a€~Stacking: Josh Barro (& Sara Fay) Join the Horde

Here we have:

Josh Barro: This Is Very Serious: a€~I try to write for people I disagree witha€!. I was for Joe 
Biden in the 2020 presidential primary and so were most Democratic primary voters. Yet my normie 
positiona€”an apparently a€cecontrariana€D one if you looked on Twitter in January 2020a€”was 
weirdly absent from the commentariata€!. I am contrarian in relation to that subculture,
but not to our overall politics or society, within which I sit closer to the median than most other 
people you will hear from in the pressa€!. My intention with this newsletter is to offera€! 
coverage that punctures conventional wisdom on politics, business, the economy, and mayonnaisea€!. 
On Tuesdays and Thursdays, youa€™ 11 get my Very Serious takes on politics, business and the
economy. On Wednesdaysa€! the Mayonnaise Clinic, a weekly dialogue with readersa€!. On Fridays 
wea€™ll release the Very Serious with Josh Barro podcasta€!. On some Saturdays, youa€™ 11 get my 
unsolicited opinions about cooking, shopping, traveling and entertaining, all of which you may be 
doing wronga€!

LINK:


This Is Very Serious

A lot of writers write about people they disagree with. I think part of what makes me different a€” 
and has made me different through my career a€” is that I try to write for people I disagree with. 
Of course, when you write for people you disagree with, you can end up looking like a contrarian, 
or at least it can cause people to call you a contrarian. And ca€!

Read more

a year ago A- 28 Ekes A- 30 comments A- Josh Barro

And:

Josh Barro: Today in the Mayonnaise Clinic: Why is Josh a Democrat?'. a€~Why do I complain about 
Democrats so much? Firsta€! I want Democrats to win, and I think a lot of the things they are doing 
are interfering with that goal. Some Democratic officeholders^’’and many of the liberal activists 
those officeholders have failed to gain enough distance froma€”have taken wacky
positionsa€!. They also havena€™t done enough to show voters theya€™re taking inflation seriously, 
though President Biden and his team have gotten better on that lately, which I appreciate. I think 
public dissatisfaction with Democrats on these issues is going to be a way bigger determinant of 
who controls the government in coming years than the number of ballot drop boxes in
Fulton County or whatever procedural issue liberals are obsessing about this week. While 
a€oeRepublicans are worsea€D is a good enough reason for me to vote Democratic in the midterms, I 
dona€™t think ita€™ s going to be a good enough reason for enough voters to get Democrats over the 
top by itself. And thata€™ s why Ia€™ 11 be pushing for my party not to screw upa€!.
And youa€™ 11 be hearing more on that from me in coming weeksa€!

LINK:

Today in the Mayonnaise Clinic: Why is Josh a Democrat?

I had thought we might need to wait until week two for the first installment of the Mayonnaise 
Clinic, but the first-day response from subscribers has been overwhelming and I have a lot of your 
questions to answer already. (As a reminder, you can submit your questions to the Mayonnaise Clinic 
by emailinga€!

Read more

a year ago A- 48 likes A- 33 comments A- Josh Barro

Yes, Josh Barro and editor/producer Sara Fay have joined the a€~Stacking horde. And I at least 
expect to learn a lot from them. Why? Because I already did, before they started this a€oeVery 
SeriousaCD venture. And because I know where they are coming from and understand it: they do not 
want Democrats to do stupid sa€”- that pointlessly alienates median voters, and they do not want 
Democrats to do
stupid sa€”- that is counterproductive policy that leaves the country worse-off. I am not always 
going to agree with them as to what is stupid and not-stupid, but I do not have to worry that there 
is some editor who wants a€cethe appearance of balancea€D or some source that needs to be 
beat-sweetened in the background pulling the strings.

That they are joining is good news about the a€~Stack as aa€! we might as well call it a a€oeWeb3 
public spherea€D. But how is the a€~Stack doing at that, which I have decided is its 
world-historical task?

Restart the computer. Anonymize the browser. Make sure Apple Private Relay is on. This is as close 
as I can get to a zero-information client showing up at <http://substack.com>. I do so, and what do 
I see? A few hoops jumped through, and I see six featured recommendations:

Indigenous Wire: Journalist Rob Capriccioso is behind this new Substack focused on Indigenous 
policy, politics, media, and sovereignty. By Rob Capricciosoa€!. Cobie: Cryptocurrency expert Cobie 
writes about what hea€™ s learned about crypto over the past decade, along with his thoughts on the 
futurea€!. BOSSBARISTA: Ashley Rodriguez brings her barista
background to this podcast and newsletter exploring workplace equity and empowerment in the service 
industrya€!. LogoArchivea€™s Newsletter: A weekly design newsletter dedicated to researching and 
sharing the fascinating stories behind modernist logosa€!. The Signal From David Katznelson: This 
music industry veteran is on a daily quest to unearth inspirational and
exciting articles, poetry, records, and ideasa€!. The Half Marathoner: Half marathon expert Terrell 
Johnson is behind this newsletter and community devoted to the ways running helps us find meaning. 
By Terrell Johnsona€!

All save Terrell Johnsona€™ s are characterized as a€oeLauncheda€!a€D, which I think means that 
they have less than 100 (paid) subscribers. Terrella€™ s is characterized as a€oehundreds of 
subscribersa€Da€”but whether that means more than 100, or 200 or more, I do not know.
Leta€™ s look at the upper tail: a€~Stacks with a€oetens of thousands of subscribersa€D. I think 
there are :

Politics:

•  Letters from an Americana€! the history behind today's politics. By Heather Cox Richardson A- 
Tens of thousands of subscribers A- $5/month


•  The Dispatch: Fact-based reporting and commentary on politics, policy and culture informed by 
conservative principles, lens ot thousands ot subscribers A- $10/month

•  TK News by Matt Taibbi: Regular news and features by award-winning author and investigative 
reporter. Tens of thousands of subscribers A- $5/month

•  Bulwark+: Analysis and reporting on politics and culture in America. No partisan loyalties. No 
tribal prejudices. Tens of thousands of subscribers/ $10/month

•  Glenn Greenwald: Independent, unencumbered analysis and investigative reporting, captive to no 
dogma or faction. Tens of thousands of subscribers A- $5/month

• Unreported Truths: Independent, citizen-funded journalism. By Alex Berenson A- Tens of thousands 
of subscribers A- $6/month

•  Common Sense: Honest news for sane people brought to you by Bari Weiss. Tens of thousands of 
subscribers A- $5/month

•  The Weekly Dish: "To see what is in front of one's nose needs a constant struggle,11 - Orwell. 
Tens of thousands of subscribers A- $5/month

• Slow Boring: Passion and Perspective from Matthew Yglesias. Tens of thousands of subscribers A- 
$8/month

• Popular Information: Independent accountability journalism. By Judd Legum A- Tens of thousands of 
subscribers A- $6/month

•  Steady: Hopefully we can build a safe harbor amidst a sea of noise. Please join me. Tens of 
thousands of subscribers A- $5/month

•  Dr. Mercola's Censored Library (Private Membership) Join the private membership of Dr. Mercola's 
Censored Library today to begin accessing must-read information you won't find anywhere else.

By Dr. Joseph Mercola

Food & Drink:

• a newsletter: recipes, stories, unsolicited advice. Tens of thousands of subscribers A- $5/month

Podcasts:

•  The Pomp Letter: The best daily newsletter analyzing the business, finance, and technology 
industries. Join 210,000 subscribers by signing up below. By Anthony Pompliano A- Tens of thousands 
of subscribers A- $10/month

Faith:

•  Tipping Point Prophecy Update: In this inspired newsletter, Jimmy Evans and other experts 
explore biblical prophecy, walking you through the many parallels between today's world and the End 
Times. Tens of thousands of subscribers A- $7/month

Crypto:

•  The Bitcoin Forecast by Willy Woo: A solid forecast of Bitcoin's price moves using blockchain 
data. Willy Woo is an industry pioneer of on-chain analysis; more than 700,000 investors follow him 
for his data-rich insights. Thousands of subscribers A- $150/three months

•  Bankless: The ultimate guide to DeFi, NFTs, Ethereum, and Bitcoin. Join 120,000+ others on the 
Bankless journey. We blend money and tech insight to help you level up your open finance game. 
Let's front-run the opportunity! Tens of thousands of subscribers A- $22/month

That looks to be 17. There also look to be about 120 more with a€oethousands of subscribersa€D. 
Thata€™ s a $7 million/year top-tier revenue slice. (No, I have no idea how large the long tail 
is.) I also get the distinct impression that the second tier are much better information sources 
than the top tiera€”too many tuned-up echo-chambers in the top tier, while the people with merely 
a€oethousands of
subscribersa€D seem more likely to know their stuff, be trying to inform, and not to be grifters of 
any sort. But even with the top tier, I do think that you get better true-information value from 
these than you do from, say, the Atlantic Monthly§€”let alone CNN.

What I do find remarkable and depressing about this a€ceWeb3a€D phenomenon is that the different 
a€~Stacks do not seem to be spending much time engaging with each other. For that to start 
happening would, I think, would be a clear win for all. If it is going to endure, it needs to be a 
conversation, and not a set of silosa€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Audio:

Eric Newcomer & Phil Libin: No One Wants to Spend Any Amount of Time With a Plastic Thing Strapped 
to Their Face'. a€™ Why the founder of Evernote and Mmhmm thinks the metaverse is a€oeobvious 
bullshita€D:

Newcomer

No One Wants to Spend Any Amount of Time With a Plastic Thing Strapped to Their Face (w/Phil Libin)

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- Eric Newcomer

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Caroline Mimbs Nyce: You Should Still Try to Avoid COVID Right Now. a€~l. You can help reduce 
the burden on hospitalsa€!. 2. Better treatments to help the most vulnerable are on the way..3. 
Getting it now doesna€™ t guarantee that you wona€™ t get it againa€! 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/author/caroline-mimbs-nyce/>

•  Robert Shrimsley: For Boris Johnson, The Party Really May Be Over This Time'. a€~Increasingly 
Tories are wondering if the only choices left to them are a surgical strike or lingering deatha€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/75134d52-07lf-42b6-bef5-ea89b5ff4a0f>

• Jonathan Bernstein: What Bidena€™ s Voting Rights Speech Did & Didna€™ t 
Do<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-01-12/what-biden-s-voting-rights-speech-did-and-d
idn-t-do>


•  Barry Eichengreen: Submerged by COVID: a€~Major economic forecasters like J.P. Morgan and S&P 
Global Ratings are painting a rosy picture of emerging marketsa€™ growth prospects this year. But 
there are multiple reasons to believe that the consensus view will soon prove to be 
unsustainablea€l <https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentarv/unrealistically-rosy-forecasts-for-
emerging-economies-this-year-by-barry-eichengreen-2022-01>

• Jeff Su & al.: Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. Ltd. (TSM) Q4 2021 Earnings Call Transcript 
<https://news.alphastreet.com/taiwan-semiconductor-manufacturing-co-ltd-tsmc-q4-2021-earnings-call-t
ranscript/>

• Nicole Hemsoth: HPC at the Heart ofTSMCa€™s Growth: a€~The a€ceHPCa€D designation in the headline 
likely caught the eye of those in the supercomputing world but for TSMC , high performance 
computing (HPC) includes all high-end server processors, from CPUs to GPUs, no matter what the end 
use casesa€l <https://www.nextplatform.com/2021/07/16/hpc-at-the-heart-of-tsmcs-
growth/>

•  Joseph A. Lewnard & al.: Clinical Outcomes Among Patients Infected with Omicron (B.1.1.529) 
SARS-CoVa€“2 variant in southern California <https://www.medrxiv.Org/content/10.l 
101/2022.01.11.22269045vl .full.pdf>

•  Mike Bird: a€™Big study of~70k Covid cases showing Omicrona€™ s far lower severity of outcomes 
vs Delta: Symptomatic hospitalisation a€“53% Median hospital stay length a€“70% ICU admission 
a€“74% Mortality a€“91% Major effects among both vaccinated and unvaccinated patients 
<https://t.co/xxxlYanRVL> <https://t.co/3fsddlOLIR>a€!

Mike Bird @Birdyword

Big study of ~70k Covid cases showing Omicron's far lower severity of outcomes vs Delta Symptomatic 
hospitalisation -53% Median hospital stay length -70% ICU admission -74% Mortality -91% Major 
effects among both vaccinated and unvaccinated patients. medrxiv.org/content/10.110a€!

A: Symptomatic hospitalization        B: ICU admission

C: Mechanical ventilation            D: Mortality

4:28 AM a~™ Jan 12,2022

503Likesl 3 6Re tweets

•  Bob Wachter: a€™ A) a€oeEveryone will be exposed to Omicrona€LJB) a€ceE very one will get 
Omicrona€D Theya€™re different. (A) promotes appropriate caution till surge ends: boost, N95, 
outdoor>indoor. (B) promotes counterproductive behavior as hospitals are overwhelmed. Biggest 
difference: A is true. B is nota€!

Bob Wachter @Bob Wachter

A) "Everyone will be exposed to Omicron" B) "Everyone will get Omicron" They're different. (A) 
promotes appropriate caution till surge ends: boost, N95, outdoor>indoor. (B) promotes 
counterproductive behavior as hospitals are overwhelmed. Biggest difference: A is true. B is not.
3:30 PM r™ Jan 12,2022

19,269Likes4,708Retweets

•  Noah Smith: Web 3 Had Better Not Be Transaction Cost Hell: a€~Lots of transaction costs arena€™ 
t paid in dollarsa€”theya€™ re paid in seconds of effort, in the mental cost of 
attention-switching, and in the hassle and stress of keeping things in mind. Web3 should focus on 
stuff that allows people to pay fewer of those costs, rather than stuff that forces them to pay 
morea€!


Web3 had better not be Transaction Cost Hell

In recent months, there has been a lot of excitement around the idea of a new World Wide Web based 
on blockchains. Ita€™ s commonly referred to as a€ceweb3a€D, to be contrasted with a€cewebla€D 
(websites) and a€oeweb2a€D (social media platforms). The creators of Ethereum have beena€!

Read more

a year ago A- 72 Ekes A- 71 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Joseph Politano: The Inflation Outlook'. a€~The result has been an unprecedented jump in prices 
for durable goods relative to services. When I say unprecedented I mean ita€”a jump of this size 
has never occurred in American history^€\


Apricitas - an Econ Blog

The Inflation Outlook

The views expressed in this blog are entirely my own and do not necessarily represent the views of 
the Bureau of Labor Statistics or the United States Government. December was another month of high 
inflation with the Consumer Price Index (CPI) increasing 7% year over year and 0.5% since November. 
Core CPI, which excludes food and energy, rose by 0.6a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- Joseph Politano

•  Matthew C. Klein: Where Have the d€ceExcessd€UJSavings Gone?: a€~Ita€™ s mostly in bank accounts 
held by the highest earners, plus housing. Also: digging into the weakness in dividend incomea€! 
LINK:

TUC



The Overshoot

Where Have the "Excess11 Savings Gone?

U.S, households have saved about $2.4 trillion above and beyond what would have been expected based 
on the pre-pandemic trend. In my previous note, I focused on the origins of these a€ceexcessa€D 
savings. American consumers have spent about $1 trillion less since the pandemic began than would 
have been expected, but this has been almost entirely offset by a comparable shortfall in
income from work and investments. Household saving rose so much more than normal because the 
federal government disbursed $2.2 trillion in aid in response to the economic consequences of the 
pandemica€”and because consumers effectively saved all of that money, plus a little extraa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 2 comments A- Matthew C. Klein

•  Heather Cox Richardson: January 11, 2022: a€~Trump loyalists in Michigan and Arizona also 
submitted false certificates to the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) declaring 
Trump the winner of Michigana€™ s and Arizonaa€™ s electoral votes. In Arizona, they actually 
affixed the state seal to their papersa€!

Letters from an American
January 11,2022

January 11,2022 (Tuesday) The United States came perilously close to losing its democracy in 2020, 
when an incumbent president refused to accept the results of an election he lost and worked with 
supporters to declare himself the winner and remain in powera€!

Read more

a year ago A- 771 likes A- 400 comments A- Heather Cox Richardson

• John Holbo (2010): Libertarianism, Property Rights, & Self-Ownership<


DeLong's Grasping Reality

READING: John Holbo (2010): Libertarianism, Property Rights, & Self-Ownership

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”I really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
ana€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong


Paragraphs:

Duncan Black: What The Fa€” Is Wrong With These People'. a€~Ia€™ m often reminded (this is a fuzzy 
half invented memory at this point because it was a long time ago and I am old, so I wona€™ t say 
who) of an economist who helped drive post-Soviet Russia into the ditch who, when asked about what 
went wrong, angrily said something like, a€oeWe told them to do 5 things and they only did 4 of
them!! !a€Ua€! His brilliant plan for a transition to a capitalist utopia required doing 5 things 
precisely right, and if they only managed to do 4 of thema€! THEY HAD NO ONE BUT THEMSELVES TO 
BLAME. Therea€™ s a petulant, a€oefa€” it, taking my ball and go home,a€D attitude with this, 
rather than, a€oeita€™ s my responsibility to deal with this imperfect mess even if the people 
arena€™ t
all doing exactly what I tell them to doa€D:

A senior administration official argued an effort to send N95 or KN95 masks to Americans would make 
little difference because a€~half the country wona€™ t wear any mask.a€™ a€~It may be popular in 
certain corners of Twitter, but for masking to work as a public health tool, people need to 
actually wear thema€!a€™ a€D Plenty of people wear masks, plenty of people are
willing to wear masks, all of those people would happily wear better masks. Polls show lots of 
support for wearing masks, and even if there are corners of the country where this is not the 
majority view, ita€™ s still a substantial minority view and every little bit helps. Another reason 
to do it, like many other things, is to signal that ita€™ s important, to model behavior by putting
resources behind ita€!

LINK: <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/01/what-fuck-is-wrong-with-these-people.html>

Toni Morriso: Ten Steps Towards Fascism'. a€~l. Construct an internal enemy, as both focus and 
diversion. 2. Isolate and demonize that enemy by unleashing and protecting the utterance of overt 
and coded name-calling and verbal abuse. Employ ad hominem attacks as legitimate charges against 
that enemy. 3. Enlist and create sources and distributors of information who are willing to 
reinforce the
demonizing process because it is profitable, because it grants power and because it works. 4. 
Palisade all art forms; monitor, discredit or expel those that challenge or destabilize processes 
of demonization and deification. 5. Subvert and malign all representatives of and sympathizers with 
this constructed enemy. 6. Solicit, from among the enemy, collaborators who agree with and can 
sanitize the dispossession
process.                                                                                            
                                                                                        7. 
Pathologize the enemy in scholarly and popular mediums; recycle, for example, scientific racism and 
the myths of racial superiority in order to naturalize the pathology. 8. Criminalize the enemy. 
Then prepare, budget for and rationalize the building of holding arenas for the enemy a€” 
especially its males and absolutely its children. 9. Reward mindlessness and apathy with 
monumentalized
entertainments and with little pleasures, tiny seductions, a few minutes on television, a few lines 
in the press, a little pseudo-success, the illusion of power and influence, a little fun, a little 
style, a little consequence. 10. Maintain, at all costs, silencea€!

LINK: <https://kottke.org/22/01/toni-morrisons-ten-steps-towards-fascism>

Anil Seth: We Are Beast Machine'. a€~We Are Beast Machines_: a€™ Perceptual experiences are not 
simple read-outs of a world, or of a body. They are active constructions in which the braina€™ s 
top-down, inside-out predictions about whata€™ s going on are continuously calibrated by sensory 
signals flowing in the opposite (outside-in) direction. By treating sensory signals as prediction 
errors, and
trying to minimize them everywhere and all the time, the brain settles and re-settles on a 
continuously evolving best-guess of the causes of these sensory signals, and this best guess is 
what we consciously perceive. The distinctive thing about experiences of emotion and mood is that 
the relevant causes are to be found within the body, rather than out there in the worlda€!. The 
brain has no direct access to
physiological states of the body, and so these states have to be inferred through best guessinga€!. 
All of our perceptions and experiences, whether of the self or of the world, are inside-out 
controlled and controlling hallucinations that are rooted in the flesh-and-blood predictive 
machinery that evolved, develops, and operates from moment-to-moment, always in light of a 
fundamental biological drive to stay
alivea€!

<https://nautil.us/issue/ll l/spotlight/we-are-beast-machines>

Matthew Yglesias: Jamaica & the Case for Energy Abundance: a€~Noah Smith did an interesting post 
just before Christmas on whata€™s worked and what hasna€™t for Jamaicaa€!. The tl;dr is that 
Jamaica hasna€™t really managed to get on the manufacturing train to supplement and complement 
their tourism sector (which is a notorious development dead end) and natural resource exportsa€!. 
This
saga does seem to me to intersect with an obsession of mine: energy abundancea€!. Whata€™ s 
Jamaicaa€™ s problem here? Well, a majority of their exports are made up of bauxite, a material 
thata€™ s used to make aluminum. This is lucrative enough to keep the value of Jamaicaa€™ s 
currency high and make it a bad place from which to do very low-end globally competitive 
manufacturing. But the
blessing of even the lowest-end manufacturing is that it gets you on the path of export discipline 
where you can move up the value chain from apparel to light goods to more advanced products. 
Bauxite mining, by contrast, is a road to nowherea€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

Jamaica and the case for energy abundance

Noah Smith did an interesting post just before Christmas on whata€™ s worked and what hasna€™ t for 
Jamaicaa€™ s economic development. The country is doing a lot better than many, but its growth of 
living standards seems to have stalled out in the 21st century, while other countries (mostly in 
Asia, but also the nearby Dominican Republic) have raced ahead. And the tl;dr is that Jamaica 
hasna€™ t
really managed to get on the manufacturing train to supplement and complement their tourism sector 
(which is a notorious development dead end) and natural resource exportsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 109 likes A- 208 comments A- Matthew Yglesias
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

A piecea€”that for all that it is seven years olda€”badly needs more work. It will, I think, become 
a key part of my extended-notes justification of my treatment of Friedrich A. von Hayek in 
Slouching Towards Utopia. So I have until September 6 to whip it into shape. But OBJECTS IN YOUR 
CALENDAR ARE CLOSER THAN THEY APPEAR:



DeLong's Grasping Reality

Making Sense of Friedrich A. von Hayek

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
ana€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong


Become a free subscriber to receive this a€ Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported pubhcationa€ I really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
ana€i

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

