Subscribe now

FILATOIO DA AOVA


Early machines in Italy: here are two designs for a filatoto for producing organzine (thrown silk)
on rhe Bolognese model, one daring from 1607 (on rhe left), rhe other from 1833. Organzine is a
double, triple or quadruple thread of thrown silk used as a warp. The first silk-mill to be set up
in England in 1716-17,' a true factory, the first in England', was copied by rhe English after two
years of industrial espionage in Italy. An almost identical model had been working since the
early seventeenth century in Bologna, the city of its invention (cf. the work oi C. Poni). Totally
mechanized - the workers had only to watch it and reconnect rhe threads that broke - the
machine      was made up of an internal turning mechanism, rhe lanterna (bottom left) activated by
a water-wheel, and surrounded by a fixed frame (top left) holding a very large number of
spindles, bobbins and winders. If mechanization had been the only cause of the industrial
revolution,  Italy would have got there first. On rhe right is a filatoto of 1833. From P. Negri,
Manual? practwo per la stima delle case et deglt optstzi idrauliti, Bologna, 18;;.


ernana Krauaei: Civilization & capitalism, muuac "isuu: me Perspective oj tne world: 
acceEjjiorescencesacLdin West Eurasia since ac "iuu: afe ‘ "Alexandrian Kgypt: My nrst example, an 
ancient but intriguing one, is Ptolemaic Bgypt. Pernaps tms looks too like cnapter one in a scnooi 
textbook - but steam nad actually made its appearance m Alexandria between          1UUand so PC, 
eighteen ormneteen-nundred yearsbetore Denis Papin or James watt.

Should one dismiss as of no account the invention by the a€~engineera€™ Hero, of the aeolipile, a 
sort of steam-powered turbine - a mere toy, but one which nevertheless operated a mechanism capable 
of opening and shutting a heavy temple door some distance away?

This discovery followed in the wake of several others - the suction pump, the force pump, some 
early versions of the thermometer and the theodolite, various engines of war - more theoretical 
than practical admittedly - which depended on compressed or expelled air, or massive springs. In 
those distant days, Alexandria was a throbbing powerhouse of invention. Severalrevolutions 
hadalready taken place thereduring the preceding century or two -cultural,
commercial and scientific: this was the age of Euclid, Ptolemy the astronomer and Eratosthenes; 
Dicaearchus, who seems to have lived in the city early in the third century BC, was the first 
geographer a€~to draw a line of latitude across a map, the line running from the Straits of 
Gibraltar along the Taurus and the Himalayas to the Pacific Oceana€™.

A detailed study of the long Alexandrian episode would of course take us too far, through the 
extraordinary Hellenistic world resulting from Alexandera€™ s conquests, in which territorial 
states like Egypt and Syria replaced the earlier model, the Greek city-state. It was a 
transformation which in some ways brings to mind the early development of modern Europe. And it 
tells us something we shall find frequently repeated: that inventions tend to come in
clusters, groups or series, as if they all drew strength from each other, or rather as if certain 
societies provided simultaneous impetus for them all.

Brilliant though it was, the Alexandrian era eventually came to an end without its inventions 
giving rise to a revolution in industrial production (despite their being specifically directed 
towards technical application: Alexandria even had a school of engineering in the third century). 
No doubt the explanation lies largely in the existence of slavery, which provided the ancient world 
with the easily-exploited workforce it required. Thus in the East, the horizontal
water-wheel remained a rudimentary mechanism adapted only to the heavy tasks of grinding grain, an 
everyday chore, while steam was used merely to operate ingenious toys, since, as a historian of 
technology has written, a€~no need was felt for a more powerful [source of energy] than those 
already knowna€™ , Hellenistic society remained indifferent to the inventions of its 
a€~engineersa€™

It might also be argued that the Roman conquest, coming as it did shortly after this age of 
invention, bears some responsibility. The economy and society of the Greeks had been open to the 
rest of the world for several centuries. Rome by contrast enclosed herself within the Mediterranean 
world; and by destroying Carthage, and subjugating Greece, Egypt and the East, Rome shut three 
doors leading to wider horizons. Would the history of the world (as Pascal
suspected) have been different if Anthony and Cleopatra had won the battle of Actium in 31 BC? In 
other words, is an industrial revolution possible only at the heart of an open world-economy?

The earliest industrial revolution in Europe: horses and mills, from the eleventh to the thirteenth 
century: In the first volume of this book, I dwelt at some length on the changes of this period - 
in the use of horses, the horse-collar (an invention from eastern Europe which increased the 
animala€™ s traction power); oats (which Edward Fox has argued brought the centre of gravity of 
Europe back to the great rainswept cereal-growing plains of the north, in
the days of Charlemagne and heavy cavalry); and triennial crop rotation, which was quite an 
agricultural revolution in itself.

I also referred to water-mills and windmills, the latter new inventions, the former a revival. I 
can therefore afford to be brief on this subject, about which information is now increasingly 
available, especially since many studies of this a€~firsta€™ industrial revolution have been 
written, including Jean Gimpela€™ s lively and intelligent book, Guy Boisa€™ s vigorous and 
provocative study, and M. Carus-Wilsona€™ s classic 1941 article, which revived, and
gave wide currency to the term a€oethe first industrial revolutiona€D to describe the widespread 
adoption in England of fulling-mills (about 190 between the twelfth and the thirteenth centuries) 
and sawmills, paper-mills, grinding-mills, etc. a€oeThe mechanising of fulling in the Middle 
Agesa€™ , E.M. Carus-Wilson writes, a€Uwas as decisive an event as the mechanisation of spinning 
and weaving in the eighteenth century."

The large wooden paddles turned by a water-wheel and introduced to the major industry of the time - 
woollen cloth - to replace the feet of the fulling-workers, proved to be the instruments of a 
revolutionary upheaval. Most water courses near the towns, which were generally in the lowlands, 
did not have the motive force of the upland streams and waterfalls. Fulling-mills therefore tended 
to be sited in less populated areas, to which they attracted their merchant
clientA' le. The hitherto jealously guarded craft monopoly of the towns was thus by-passed. The 
towns inevitably tried to defend themselves by forbidding weavers working within the walls to have 
their cloth fulled outside. The authorities in Bristol in 1346 forbade "any man to take outside 
this city for fulling any kind of the cloth known as raicloth on pain of losing xi d. per clotha€~. 
That did not prevent the "mill revolution^™ from taking its course, both in
England and throughout the continent of Europe which certainly did not lag behind on this occasion.

But the point is that this revolution took place alongside a number of other revolutions: a 
significant agricultural revolution which pitted large numbers of peasants against forest, marsh, 
seashore and river, and encouraged the adoption of triennial rotation; and a simultaneous urban 
revolution prompted by demographic expansion - never before had towns sprung up so thickly within 
such easy reach of one another. A clear distinction of functions, a a€~division of
laboura€™ between town and countryside, sometimes brutally felt, became the norm. The towns took 
over industrial activity, became the motors of accumulation and growth, and re-invented money. 
Trade and traffic increased. With the Champagne fairs, the new economic order of western Europe 
became first discernible then clearly visible. In the Mediterranean, shipping and overland routes, 
especially to the east were gradually reconquered by the Italian
cities. The whole economic area was undergoing the expansion without which no growth would be 
possible.

The word growth, in the sense of overall development is indeed unhesitatingly used in this context 
by Frederic C. Lane. In his view, we can undoubtedly talk of a period of a€~sustained growtha€™ in 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries in, say, Florence or Venice. How could it be otherwise at a 
time when Italy was the very centre of the world-economy? Wilhelm Abel even maintains that the 
whole of western Europe was caught up in a wave of general
development from the tenth to the fourteenth century, citing as evidence the fact that wages rose 
faster than cereal prices.

The thirteenth and early fourteenth centuries [he writes] witnessed the first industrialization of 
Europe. At this time, the towns with all their commercial and craft activities were undergoing 
vigorous development, less perhaps because of the technical advances of the age (though these were 
not negligible) than as a result of the generalization of the division of labour, thanks to which 
work yields were increased, and it was probably this
higher productivity which made it possible not only to resolve the difficult problem of providing a 
growing population with its essential food supplies, but even to feed it better than ever before. 
The only analogous occasion was during the a€~second indus- trializationa€™ in the nineteenth 
century - admittedly on a very different scale.

In other words, the eleventh century saw the beginning of what was effectively a period of 
a€~sustained growtha€™ on the modern pattern, one which would not recur before the English 
industrial revolution. It is hardly surprising that the a€~global developments™ theory seems the 
logical explanation. A whole series of inter-related advances were taking place in production and 
productivity, in agriculture, industry and commerce, as the market expanded.
During this first serious awakening of Europe, there was even expansion in the a€~tertiarya€™ 
sector (another sign of development) with a rise in the number of lawyers, notaries, doctors and 
university professors.

We actually have some statistics about the notaries: in Milan in 1288, there were 1500 for a 
population of about 60,000; in Bologna, 1059 for a population of 50,000; in Verona in 1268 there 
were 495 for 40,000; in Florence in 1338, there were 500 for a population of 90,000 (but Florence 
was a special case: business was so well organized there that bookkeeping methods often rendered 
the services of a notary unnecessary). And predictably, with the fourteenth­
century recession, the number of notaries declined comparatively; although it climbed again in the 
eighteenth century it never again reached the heights attained in the thirteenth - no doubt because 
the abnormal rise in the number of notaries in medieval days was created both by the increase in 
economic activity and by the need for the services of clerks when the vast majority of people were 
illiterate.

Europea€™ s great leap forward ended in the monster recession of the fourteenth and fifteenth 
centuries (roughly from 1350a€“1450) following the Black Death which may have been as much 
consequence as cause - the slowing-down of the economy, dating from the cereal crisis and famine of 
13I5a€“17, preceded the epidemic and may have rendered its sinister work easier. So plague was not 
the only grim reaper of the prosperity of a previous age: this was
already slowing down if not at a standstill by the time the disaster struck.

How then is one to explain Europea€™ s greatest triumph and greatest disaster before the eighteenth 
century? Most probably by the dimensions of a demographic explosion with which agricultural 
production found it impossible to keep pace. Falling yields are the mark of any agriculture pushed 
beyond the bounds of its productive capacity, when it does not possess the methods or techniques 
which might compensate for the rapid exhaustion of the land.

Guy Boisa€™ s study, based on the example of eastern Normandy, analyses the social aspects of this 
phenomenon: the underlying crisis of feudalism which broke up the old partnership between the 
landlord and the peasant farmer. This destructured society, shorn of its code and vulnerable to 
disorder and random warfare, was in search both of a new equilibrium and a new code - results not 
attained until the establishment of the territorial state which would be the
salvation of the seigniorial regime.

Other explanations could be suggested - in particular the fragility of the countries most affected 
by the energy revolution represented by the new mills: northern Europe from the Seine to the Zuyder 
Zee, from the Low Countries to the Thames valley. New territorial states like France and England, 
although by now strong political units, were not yet manageable economic units: they were to be 
seriously affected by the crisis. What was more, in the early years of
the century, with the decline of the Champagne fairs, France, having been for a brief moment the 
centre of European trade now found herself excluded from the circuit of profitable trading links 
and the first capitalist successes. The cities of the Mediterranean were soon to take over from the 
new northern states, and this would mark the end, for the time being, of that supreme confidence 
visible in Roger Bacona€™ s extraordinary glorification of the machine:

Machines may be made by which the largest ships, with only one man steering them, will be moved 
faster than if they were filled with rowers; wagons may be built which will move with incredible 
speed and without the aid of beasts; flying machines can be constructed in which man maya€! beat 
the air with wings like a birda€!. Machines will make it possible to go to the bottom of seas and 
rivers.

The age of Agricola and Leonardo da Vinci: a revolution in embryo: When after this long and painful 
crisis Europe began to revive again, a wave of renewed trade and vigorous growth ran along the axis 
linking the Netherlands and Italy, through the middle of Germany. And it was Germany, a secondary 
zone for trade, which led the way in industrial development: possibly because this was one way of 
breaking into international exchange, situated as
Germany was between the two dominant poles, to the north and south.

But it was above all because of the development of mining. The early revival of the German economy 
in the 1470s, ahead of the rest of Europe, was not the only result. The extraction of metallic ores 
- gold, silver, copper, tin, cobalt and iron - stimulated a whole series of innovations (the use of 
lead to separate out silver from copper ore for instance) as well as the creation of machinery, on 
a gigantic scale for the time, to pump out water from the mines and to
bring up the ore. The engravings in Agricolaa€™ s book provide an impressive picture of the 
sophisticated technology developed at this time.

It is tempting to see these achievements, which were imitated in England, as the real forerunners 
of the industrial revolution. The expansion of mining did indeed have repercussions in every sector 
of the German economy of the time in fustians, wool, the leather trade, various kinds of 
metallurgy, tin, wire, paper, the new arms industry and so on. Trade stimulated large-scale credit 
networks and big international firms like the Magna Societas were established.
The urban crafts flourished: there were 42 craft guilds in Cologne in 1496; 50 in LAUbeck; 28 in 
Frankfurt-am-Main. Transport was improved and modernized; large firms began to specialize in 
carrying goods. And Venice, the queen of the Levant trade, established close trading relations with 
High Germany, since she needed silver.

The German cities unquestionably offered for over half a century the spectacle of a 
rapidly-expanding economy in virtually every sector. But everything began to slow down or stop in 
the years around 1535 when, as John Nefa€™ s work has shown, silver from America started to compete 
with the output of the German mines; at about the same time, 1550, Antwerpa€™ s commercial 
supremacy was alsobeing challenged. Was it not a source of inferiorityfor the
German economy to be dependent on external powers, to have been manufactured to meet the needs of 
the two real centres of the European economy, Venice and Antwerp? The age of the Fuggers, when all 
is said and done, was the age of Antwerp.

Even more outstanding success was achieved in Italy, at about the time when Francesco Sforza came 
to power in Milan in 1450. It was outstanding, partly because it had been preceded by a series of 
exemplary revolutions. The first of these was a demographic revolution which continued until 
mid-sixteenth century. The second was the appearance in the early fifteenth century of the first 
territorial states,still small in size, but already modern in structure:it even
seemed for a brief moment that Italian unity was in the air. And lastly, an agricultural revolution 
along capitalist lines was taking place among the canals of the great Lombardy plains. All this in 
a climate of scientific and technical discovery: this was the age when hundreds of Italians, 
sharing the enthusiasm of Leonardo da Vinci, were filling their notebooks with designs for 
extraordinary machines.

Milan now entered upon a singular phase in its history. Having been spared during the terrible 
crisis of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries (precisely because of its agricultural 
productivity, according to Zangheri), the city witnessed a remarkable spurt of manufacturing 
activity. Woollens, cloth of gold and silver, and armour began to take the place of the fustians 
which had been Milana€™ s staple industry in the early fourteenth century. The Lombard capital
was caught up in a huge wave of commercial activity linking it to the fairs of Geneva and 
Chalon-sur-SaA'ne, to cities like Dijon and Paris, and to the Netherlands.

At about the same time, the Milanese capitalists were completing their takeover of the countryside, 
with the reorganization of properties into large estates, the development of irrigated meadows and 
livestock farming, the digging of canals both for irrigation and transport, the introduction of 
rice as a new crop, and even in many cases the disappearance of fallow land, with continuous 
rotation of cereals and forage crops. It was in fact in Lombardy that a€~high
farminga€™ - later to be developed in the Netherlands and transferred with celebrated results to 
England, first saw the light.

Hence the question put by our informant and guide Renato Zangheri: why did this substantial 
transformation of both the industry and the countryside of Milan and Lombardy come to nothing? Why 
did it not lead to an industrial revolution? Neither the infant technology of the time nor the lack 
of energy supplies seems an adequate explanation. "The English industrial revolution was not based 
on any scientific or technical progress not already available in the
sixteenth century.: Carlo Poni was astonished to discover the sophistication of the hydraulic 
machines used in Italy to throw, spin and mill silk, with several mechanical processes and rows of 
spindles all turned by a single water-wheeel.

Lynn White has argued that even before Leonardo da Vinci, Europe had already invented the whole 
range of mechanical devices which would actually be developed during the next four hundred years, 
that is until electrical energy, as and when the need was felt for them.** As he puts it: a€~a new 
device merely opens a door; it does not compel anyone to entera€™ . Quite so. But why did the 
exceptional conditions which were combined in fifteenth-century
Milan fail to create any such need or demand? Why did the Milanese revolution crumble instead of 
thrive?

The available historical data does not really provide enough evidence to answer this question. We 
are reduced to conjecture. In the first place, Milan did not have access to any large national 
market. And the profits from land did not outlast the first wave of speculation. The prosperity of 
the first industrial entrepreneurs, if we are to believe Gino Barbieri and Gemma Miani, was only on 
a small scale, creating a sort of modest capitalist class.

But how strong an argument is that? After all, the first cotton magnates often had very humble 
beginnings. Was it not rather Milana€™ s misfortune to be so close to Venice, yet so far from 
sharing Venicea€™ s dominant position? And not to be a port, with access to the Mediterranean and 
the international export trade, free to experiment and take risks? Is the failure of Milana€™ s 
a€~industrial revolutiona€™ perhaps proof that an industrial revolution, as a
total phenomenon, cannot be built up entirely from within, simply by the harmonious development of 
the various sectors of the economy; that it must also be based on command of external markets - the 
sine qua non of success? In the fifteenth century, as we have seen, this commanding position was 
occupied by Venice, and to some extent (for Spanish trade) by Genoa.

John U. Nef and the first British industrial revolution, 1560a€“1640: The industrial expansion 
which took place in England between 1540 and 1640 was much more clear-cut and thorough-going than 
the early experiences either of Italy or Germany. In mid-sixteenth century, the British Isles were 
still, industrially speaking, far behind Italy, Spain and the Netherlands, Germany and France. A 
hundred years later, the situation had been miraculously reversed
and the speed of the transformation had been so fast that there is no parallel before the 
equivalent wave of change in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century, in other words, the 
industrial revolution.

By the eve of the Civil War (1642) England had become the leading industrial nation in Europe and 
was to remain so. It is this a€~first industrial revolutiona€™ to which John U. Nef drew attention 
in his article which caused a sensation when it was originally published in 1934 and has lost none 
of its analytic force today.

But why did this happen in England, when all the major innovations of the period -1 am thinking for 
example of the blast furnaces, the various apparatus used for underground mining: tunnels, 
ventilation systems, pumps and winding gear - were all borrowings, demonstrated to the English by 
German miners hired for the purpose? Why England, when it was the craftsmen and workers of more 
technically advanced countries - Germany, the Netherlands, but also
Italy (for glass) and France (wool and silk textiles) - who contributed the necessary techniques 
and skills for the establishment of a series of industries quite new to Britain - paper-mills, 
powder-mills, glass, mirrors, cannon-founding, alum and copperas (green vitriol), sugar refining, 
saltpetre, and so on? The remarkable thing is that when these industries did arrive, England should 
have developed them on a scale hitherto unknown: the growing size of firms, the
dimensions of the buildings, the rising numbers of workers, soon running into tens or even 
hundreds, the comparatively high level of investment which was reaching thousands of pounds, 
whereas the annual wage of a worker was only about A£5 - all these were completely new and indicate 
how extraordinary was the expansion of English industry in this period.

On the other hand, the decisive feature of this revolution - a completely home-grown one so to 
speak - was the increasing dependence on coal, which had become a major element in the English 
economy. Not as it happened by deliberate choice, but in order to meet a visible deficiency. Wood 
had become increasingly scarce in England and was costing high prices by mid-sixteenth century; 
scarcity and expense dictated the move to coal. Similarly, the sluggish
flow of most English rivers, which had to be raised by dams and diverted by canals to work overshot 
wheels, made hydraulic energy much more expensive here than in continental Europe and would 
eventually provide an incentive to research into the power of steam, or so John Nef suggests.


So England, unlike France or the Netherlands, went in for coal-mining on a grand scale, beginning 
with the Newcastle coalfields and the many local seams. Mines which had previously been worked 
open-cast by a part-time rural labour force now began to operate continuously; pits were dug up to 
40 or 100 metres deep. From about 35,000 tons in 1560, output had risen to 200,000 tons by the 
beginning of the seventeenth century. Wagons running on rails carried
the coal from the pithead to the docks: specialized ships, in ever-increasing numbers were taking 
it all over England and even to Europe, by the end of the century. Coal was already being regarded 
as a form of national wealth:

Englanda€™ s a perfect world, hath Indies too,

Correct your maps, Newcastle is Peru

as an English poet put it in 1650. The replacement of charcoal by coal not only made it possible to 
heat domestic interiors - bringing a sinister pall of smoke to London; it also affected industry 
which had however to learn to adapt to the new fuel and devise new expedients, in particular to 
protect the matter being processed from the sulphurous fumes of the burning coals. One way and 
another, coal was introduced to glassmaking, to breweries, brick-works, alum
manufacture, sugar refineries and the industrial evaporation of sea-salt. In every case, this meant 
a concentration of the workforce and inevitably of capital. Manufacturing industry was born; with 
it came the great workshops and their alarming din which sometimes proceeded uninterrupted day and 
night, and their throngs of workers who, in a world used to artisans, were remarkable both for 
their large numbers and as a rule for their lack of skill.

One of the farmers of the a€~alum housesa€™ built during the reign of James I on the Yorkshire 
coast and each employing about sixty workers, explained in 1619 that the manufacture of alum was a 
a€~distracted worke in severall places, and of sundry partes not possible to bee performed by anie 
one man nor by a fewe. But by a multitude of the baser sort of whom the most part are idle, 
careless and false in their laboura€™ .

Technically then, with larger factories and the widespread use of coal, England was certainly 
innovating in the industrial sector. But what really gave the impetus to industry and probably to 
innovation as well, was the substantial enlargement of the domestic market, for two complementary 
reasons. The first was rapid population growth - estimated at 60% in the course of the sixteenth 
century. At the same time there was a large rise in agricultural incomes, which
turned many peasants into consumers of industrial products. To meet demand from the growing 
population and especially from the visibly-expanding towns, agricultural output was increased in 
several ways - by the reclamation of land, by enclosures at the expense of commons and grazing, by 
crop specialization but without any truly revolutionary measures to increase productivity or the 
fertility of the soil. These would only begin to appear after 1640 and then
only very gradually until 1690.

Agricultural output thus began to lag somewhat behind demographic expansion as is proved by an 
agricultural price rise much greater overall than the industrial price rise. The result was a 
visible increase in prosperity in the countryside. This was the age of the a€~great rebuildinga€™ 
as rural dwellings were restored, improved and enlarged, as upper storeys replaced attics, windows 
were glazed, chimneys were built for burning domestic coal. Inventories
compiled after death tell us of a new-found affluence reflected in furniture, linen, hangings, 
pewter vessels. This domestic demand undoubtedly stimulated industry, trade and imports.

Promising though it appeared, this lively burst of industrialization did not carry all before it. 
Some important sectors continued to lag behind. In metallurgy for instance, the blast furnace on 
the modern German model, a heavy user of fuel, by no means ousted all the bloomeries, old-fashioned 
furnaces some of which were still in operation in 1650 - and in any case even the blast furnaces 
continued to burn charcoal. Only in 1709 did the first coke-fuelled blast
furnace appear - and this remained unique of its kind for another forty years.

Several explanations have been suggested for this by T. S. Ashton and others, but Charles Hydea€™ s 
conclusion in his recent book seems to me to be irrefutable: if coke only replaced charcoal in 
about 1750, it was simply because until then production costs favoured the latter. What was more, 
even after the adoption of coke, English metallurgy long remained inferior, both in quality and 
quantity to that of Russia, Sweden or France. And while light metal
industries (cutlery, nail-making, tools, etc.) grew steadily from mid-sixteenth century, they were 
using imported Swedish steel.

Another backward sector was the cloth industry, now faced with a long crisis in foreign demand 
which made it necessary to undergo some painful adjustments while output remained virtually 
stationary from 1560 to the end of the seven- tenth century. Still largely a rural cottage 
industry, cloth production was increasingly brought within the putting-out system. Whereas in the 
sixteenth century this industry alone had been responsible for 90% of English exports,
and the figure was still 75% in 1660, by the end of the century it had fallen to only 50%.

But these problems cannot explain the stagnation that set in in England after the 1640s: while the 
economy did not decline, neither did it progress. The population had stopped rising, agriculture 
was producing more and better quality crops; it was investing for the future - but rural incomes 
had fallen with prices; industry was ticking over but no longer innovating, at least not until 1680 
or so. If this standstill had been confined to England, one might perhaps have
put it down to the effects of the Civil War which began in 1642 and brought considerable 
disruption; or one could point to the still inadequate nature of the national market, or Englanda€™ 
s comparatively poor position in the European world-economy, in which Holland was still the 
dominant economic power. But England was by no means alone in this experience - one that was 
undoubtedly shared by all the north European countries which had been progressing
alongside her and were now simultaneously retreating. The a€oeseventeenth-century crisisa€D might 
strike at different times, but it left its mark everywhere.

To return to England however, John U. Nefa€™ s own diagnosis is that while the industrial advance 
certainly slowed down there after 1642, it did not collapse; there was no slipping backward either. 
What may in fact have happened, and we shall return to this point apropos E. L. Jonesa€™ s 
analysis, was that the seventeenth-century crisis, like all periods of demographic slowdown, 
brought some increase in per capita incomes and a transformation of
agriculture, which had repercussions on industry too. By taking Nefa€™ s arguments further, we 
might say that the English industrial revolution of the eighteenth century had already begun in the 
sixteenth and was simply making progress by stages. It is an explanation from which some lessons 
may be drawn.

But could not the same be said of the whole of Europe, where since at least the eleventh century, a 
series of linked and in a sense cumulative transformations had been experienced? Every region in 
turn sooner or later underwent a burst of pre-industrial growth, with the accompanying features one 
could expect, particularly in agriculture. Industrialization was in a sense endemic throughout the 
continent. Outstanding and important as Britaina€™ s role was in this
story, Britain was by no means the sole initiator and inventor of the industrial revolution 
accomplished on her soil.

This explains why that revolution had scarcely appeared, let alone achieved its decisive successes, 
before it was spreading unopposed to nearby Europe, where it scored a series of comparatively easy 
triumphs, encountering none of the obstacles which so many under-developed countries have met in 
the twentieth centurya€!
LINK: <https://archive.org/details/civilizationcapiQ3brau/page/557/mode/lup?view=theater>

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

