Subscribe now


How is it that Donald Trump still commands the allegiance of the overwhelming majority of 
Republican office-holders and publicists? All agree that his judgment is bad, that his personality 
is vindictive. Alla€”even his daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law Jared Kushnera€’’regularly leak 
to favored reporters as they have done
for years that they are appalled.

And yet what Trump says goes, among Republican office holders and publicists as a group.
Share

The furthest any but a small minority of Republican worthies will go is, I think, best exemplified 
by ex-Vice President Michael Pencea€™ s declaration that he and Trump a€oewill never see 
eye-to-eyea€D on the events of January 6,2021, when Trump sicced a violent mob that hoped to hang 
Mike Pence on the Capitol, in the
hope that the mob would panic the Congress and derail the certification of Joe BidenaC™ s 
legitimate election victory. It dida€”but for less than twelve hours.

Are there useful historical analogies?

Cast yourself back into history, seeking an erratic narcissitic politician with very bad judgment, 
but with a strong charismatic link to a basea€”a link that ohters hope to benefit from and take 
over.

In 1958, at the Lu Mountain Plenary Meeting of the Chinese Communist Party, Marshall Peng Dehuai 
let the cat out of the bag: Mao Zedonga€™ s judgment was off, he could no longer be trusted as 
primus inter pares. The implication was clear: time to sideline and retire Mao as soon as the 
grandees were confident they could do
without Maoa€™ s charismatic link to the base.

Mao struck first: the Cultural Revolution. Peng Zhen, Luo Ruiqing, Lu Dingyi, and Yang Shangkun 
purged firsta€”with the rest of the grandees going along. Peng Dehuai and Liu Shaoqi wind up dead. 
Deng Xiaoping and his supporters wind up purged. China winds up in total chaos. But the 
beneficiaries from the purges must be
kept insecure in turn. Chen Boda purged. Lin Biao dead. Mao brings back Deng, a person with 
reputation and competence to run the bureaucracy, to keep insecure the radicals and beneficiaries 
for whom chaos has been a ladder. And Mao brings in Wong Hong wena€’’backed by the rest of the 
future Gang of Four and Kang
Shenga€”as a possible successor to unsettle Deng. Mao brings in Hua Guofeng as a third bowstring. 
Mao purges Deng again.

In this chaos the constant questions were two and only two: Was he obsequiously loyal? Was he 
powerless?
A a€oeyesa€D to both, and he would be praised, honored, and promoted.

A a€cenoa€D to eithera€”unless he was the always-constantly-obsequiously-loyal-to-Mao Zhou 
Enlaia€”and he would be taken down a peg, or sent to work as a pipe-fitter, or wind up dead.

Always, always there were enough who saw chaos as a ladder and doing Maoa€™ s bidding now to their 
advantage. Mao was dangerous to cross, had a charismatic link with a gullible base, and would not 
be a force for long: Mao was old, and low-energy, and rapidly on his way to meet Karl Marx.

And so it was to the end: officials falling over each other to a€oework towards the Chairmana€D 
even when only his nephew Mao Yuanxin and his aide Zhang Yufeng would even claim that they 
half-understood his grunts and scrawls. Even after Maoa€™ s death the factions competed to show 
that they were the ones who had
done Maoa€™ s true bidding and won his favor: Hua Guofeng waving around the Mao quote a€oeif you 
are in charge, I am at easea€d, and talking about how the Cultural Revolution had been a great 
success and that China should look forward to more such; Wong Hengwen and the Gang-of-Four faction 
boasting that they were
Maoa€™ s ideological heirs; even Deng Xiaoping whispering that after his second purging he still 
had had Maoa€™ s favor, and that it had been Mao via Wang Dongxing rather than Denga€™ s military 
allies who had protected him against the wrath of the Gang of Four.

Is this not the pattern of the Trump administration and post-administration (with, of course, only 
comparatively small-scale tortures of would-be immigrants, and only a few deaths)?

Those without power among Republicans who are sufficiently obsequious Trump promotes. Those with 
power among Republicans he cuts off at the kneesa€”for he knows they have no confidence in him, and 
would seek to sideline them as soon as they gained control of policy levers or forged their own 
links to the base. And then
come the denunciations from Mar-a-Lago about how all the people he hired and who worked for him in 
the past are losers and RINGS. Trump tells reporters that Nikki Haley asked for an audience with 
him, and he refused. Trump tells everyone that he is a€oevery disappointeda€D in Mike Pence. And 
Minority Leader McConnell
is a€oea dumb son-of-a-bitcha€!a€D The Democrats have the advantage, says Trump, because a€oethey 
don't have the [Mitt] Romneys, Little Ben Sasses, and [Elizabeth] Cheneys of the world. 
Unfortunately, we doa€!. There are consequences to being ineffective and weaka€!a€D

And yet the overwhelming bulk of Republican office holders and publicists cling to Trump, hoping 
appeasing him will get them access to levers of power and help them forge links to the base. 
a€oeWho the fa€” do you think you are talking to?a€D House Minority Leader Kevin McCarthy yelled 
over the phone at Donald Trump
as rioters broke into his office through the windows. And yet it is Kevin McCarthy who then voted 
to overturn Bidena€™ s election victory by refusing to accept valid electoral votes, and later 
visited Mar-a-Lago to pledge fealty to Trump. After all, what harm can it do to appease Trump and 
do his bidding? He is dangerous to
cross, has a charismatic link with a gullible base, and will not be a force for long: he is old, 
and low-energy, and on his way to meet Roy Cohn.

As with Mao Zedong, the odds are very high that even after Trump passes from the scene the 
Republican grandees will continue to compete with each other to demonstrate that they were the ones 
who were truly loyal to Donald J. Trump. Thata€™ s the way these things work.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

