Subscribe now

Brad DeLong (1998): Slouching Towards Utopia'. a€~The historian Felipe Fernandez-Armesto wrote in 
Millennium, his history of the past thousand years (a book big in scope) that he was haunted by an 
image a museum in the far future in which a Crusader chain mail shirt shares a display case with a 
Coca-Cola can, both labeled a€oeSecond Millennium
Artifacts.a€D Let us adopt such a millennial perspective, for it may allow us to see more clearly 
what the history of our twentieth century has been.

From that perspective, the history of the twentieth century has been overwhelmingly economic 
history. The economy was the dominant arena of events, and economic changes were the driving force 
behind other changes, in a way rarely, if ever, seen before.

Before this century, the core of history, its most interesting and important parts, has been only 
tangentially related to economic factors. The historic factors. The history of the fourth, seventh, 
and sixteenth centuries is primarily religious the consolidation of Christianity in the Roman 
Empire, the spread of Islam, the Protestant Reformation. The history of the fifteenth
century is primarily cultural in Europe the Renaissance, in China the cultural flourishing during 
the Ming Dynasty. The history of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries is primarily 
political the American and French Revolutions and their consequences. In these centuries, economic 
factors changed slowly. The structure and functioning of the economy at the
end                                                                                                 
                                                                     of any century was pretty 
close to what they had been at the beginning.

In the twentieth century things have been very different.

In the twentieth century the pace of economic change has been so great as to shake the rest of 
history to its foundations. For perhaps the first time, changes in the way we produce, distribute, 
and consume the necessities and conveniences of daily life have been historya€™ s driving force.

In the twentieth century, the material wealth of humankind has exploded beyond all previous 
imagining. We, at least those of us who belong to the upper middle class and live in the industrial 
core of the world economy, are now so much richer that the amount is nearly impossible to calculate.
In the twentieth century, the gulf between different economies has grown at an astonishingly rapid 
pace. Region by region and nation by nation, the world has become more unequal in material 
prosperity than ever before.

At the end of the twentieth century, the economic glass might be viewed as either half empty or 
half full. Half empty because we live in the most unequal world ever. Half full because much of the 
world has made the transition to sustained growth and has greater wealth than writers of previous 
centuriesa€™ Utopias could have possibly imagined.

AN EXPLOSION OF MATERIAL WEALTH

Between the invention of agriculture and the commercial revolution that marked the end of the 
Middle Ages, wealth and technology developed slowly indeed. Medieval historians tell of the 
centuries it took for key inventions like the watermill or the heavy plow to diffuse across the 
landscape. And, during this period, increases in technology led to increases in the
population, with little if any appearing as improvements in the median standard of living.

Even the early years of the Industrial Revolution produced more a€oeimprovementsa€n than 
a€cerevolutionsa€D in standards of living. With the railroad and the spinning and weaving of 
textiles as important exceptions, most innovations of that period were innovations in how goods 
were produced and transported, and in new kinds of capital, but not in consumer
goods. Standards of living improved, but styles of life remained much the same. The eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries saw a faster and different kind of change. For the first time, technological 
capability outran population growth and natural resource scarcity. By the last quarter of the 
nineteenth century, the typical inhabitant of the leading economies - a Briton, a
Belgian, an American, or an Australian - had perhaps three times the standard of living of someone 
in a preindustrial economy.

Still, so slow was the pace of change that people, or at least aristocratic intellectuals, could 
think of their predecessors of a thousand years before as effectively their contemporaries. Marcus 
Tullius Cicero, a Roman aristocrat, author, and politician, might have felt more or less at home in 
the company of Thomas Jefferson. The plows were better in Jeffersona€™ s
time. Sailing ships were much improved. But these might have been insufficient to create a sense of 
a qualitative change in the order of life for the elite. And being a slave of Jefferson was 
probably a lot like being a slave of Cicero.

So slow was the pace of change that intellectuals in the early nineteenth century debated whether 
the Industrial Revolution was worthwhile. Was it an improvement or a degeneration in the standard 
of living? And opinions were genuinely divided, with as optimistic a liberal as John Stuart Mill 
coming down on the side of the a€oepessimistsa€n as late as the end of
the 1840s. But, in the twentieth century, standards of living exploded. The growth in material 
wealth has been so great as to make it nearly impossible to measure.

Consider a sample of consumer goods available through Montgomery Ward in 1895, when a one-speed 
bicycle cost $65. Since then, the price of a bicycle measured in a€cenominala€D dollars has more 
than doubled (as a result of inflation). But the bicycle today is much less expensive in terms of 
the measure that truly counts, its a€cereala€D price the work and
sweat needed to earn its cost. In 1895, it took perhaps 260 hoursa€™ worth of the average American 
workera€™ s production to amass enough money to buy a one-speed bicycle. Today, an average American 
worker can buy one of higher quality for less than 8 hoursa€™ worth of production.

On the bicycle standard, measuring wealth by counting up how many bicycles it can buy, the average 
American worker today is 36 times richer than his or her counterpart was in 1895. Other commodities 
would tell a different story. An office chair has become 12.5 times cheaper in terms of the time it 
takes the average worker to produce enough to pay for it. A
Steinway piano or an accordion is only twice as cheap. A silver teaspoon is 25 percent more 
expensive.

Thus, the answer to the question a€oeHow much wealthier are we today than our counterparts of a 
century ago?a€D depends on which commodities you view as important. For many personal services - 
having a butler to answer the door and polish your silver spoons - you would find little difference 
in average wealth between 1895 and 1990. An hour of a
butlera€™ s time costs about the same then as now. But for mass-produced manufactured goods - like 
bicycles - we are wealthier by as much as 36 times.

THE RANGE OF GOODS AND SERVICES

Such calculations substantially understate the improvement in our material well-being, for they 
fail to consider the enormous expansion in the range of goods and services we can consume.

So when we are told that the standard of living in the United States in 1900 was roughly equal to 
$12,000 per worker per year (at todaya€™ s prices), we tend to think about what we could buy today 
with $12,000. But that is not at all what material standards of living were like then. Imagine, 
instead, what our life would be if we had $12,000 to spend, but we were
required to spend it all on commodities that were around in 1900 no fluoridated toothpaste, 
electric toaster ovens, clothes-washing machines, dishwashers, synthetic fiber-blend clothes, 
radios, plastic bottles, intercontinental telephones, xerox machines, notebook computers, 
automobiles, airplanes, or steel-framed skyscrapers. How would we calculate the impact on
our living standards?

And here I believe we can gain insight by looking not at economic statistics, but at one of the 
best-selling novels of the 1890s, Looking Backward, by Edward Bellamy - a wooden, poorly-written 
book that sold in extraordinary numbers because it offered the late nineteenth century a vision of 
Utopia.
In Looking Backward, the narrator, who is living in the year 2000, is asked by his host a€oe Would 
you like to hear some music?a€D

He expects his host to play the piano - a social accomplishment of upper-class women of the time. 
Instead, the narrator is stupefied to find that, in the year 2000, his host need merely touch 
a€oeone or two screws,a€D and immediately the room was a€oefilled with music; filled, not flooded, 
for, by some means, the volume of melody had been perfectly graduated to
the size of the apartment. a€~Grand!a€™ he cries. a€~Bach must be at the keys of that organ; but 
where is the organ?a€™ a€D

His host has called the orchestra on the telephone; in fact he has a choice of orchestras, four 
playing at any moment. At the end of the nineteenth century, this was considered Utopia - the 
choice of four orchestras played through a speakerphone. To Bellamya€™ s narrator, this was a€oethe 
limit of human felicity already attained a€!a€D What if someone were to take
him to Tower Records? Or Blockbuster Video? His heart would stop.

We do not think of our ability to listen to high-fidelity, go-anywhere, listen-to-anything music as 
remarkable. We do not daily give thanks for our cassette players and genuflect in front of our CD 
collections. We do not reflect that they have brought us to the limit of human felicity. We do not 
think about it at all.

This is the most important piece of the history of the twentieth century. In the twentieth century, 
the human race passed from the realm of necessity, where providing basic food, clothing, and 
shelter took up the liona€™ s share of economic productive potential, to the realm of economic 
freedom in which our collective production is largely made up of conveniences
and luxuries.

A VAST AND GROWING ECONOMIC GULF

This upward jump in productivity and wealth has not been confined to the industrial core of the 
world economy. In 1987, about 97 percent of households in Greece owned a television set. In Mexico, 
there was one automobile for every sixteen people, one television for every eight, one telephone 
for every ten.

Nonetheless, while economies that were relatively rich at the start of the twentieth century have, 
by and large, seen their material wealth and prosperity explode, those nations and economies that 
were relatively poor have grown richer, but more slowly. A country that was 10 percent richer than 
another in 1870, was (on average) likely to be about 15 percent richer in
1995. A country that was 30 percent richer in 1870, was (on average) likely to be about 45 percent 
richer in 1995. Thus, the relative gulf between rich and poor economies has grown steadily over the 
past century.

The extraordinary trajectory of the United States is the most manifest example of a rich nation 
forging ahead. Between 1890 and 1930, a host of innovative technologies and business practices was 
adopted in the United States and nowhere else. Henry Forda€™ s assembly lines in Detroit, and his 
mass production of the Model-T, are only the most prominent examples
of these new methods of mass production and distribution. The fact that other industrial economies 
were unable to quickly follow gave the United States a level of industrial dominance that persists 
to this day.

At the other end of the wealth spectrum, it is hard to argue that the typical African is much 
better off in material terms than his or her counterpart of a generation ago.

Some have argued for the importance of culture. But the presence or absence of a a€oeculture of 
entrepreneurshipa€D is not usually a deciding factor. Throughout South Asia, for example, emigrants 
from China play key roles in trading and manufacturing, while China proper remains relatively poor. 
Consider also that some British observers in the early 1900s
believed that the Japanese did not have and could not learn the patterns of behavior necessary for 
successful industrialization. And consider that one of the most far-sighted social scientists of 
the early twentieth century, the German sociologist Max Weber, argued that the Hindu, Buddhist, and 
Confucian traditions militated powerfully against the development of
modern market economies and industrial societies in Asia. Yet, from todaya€™ s vantage point, such 
confident predictions appear naA"ve.

Moreover, in the twentieth century, cultures have become more malleable and permeable than ever. 
Potential contacts among nations include an enormous number of tourist visits, acts of economic 
exchange, and cultural broadcasts. If there are strands in any culture that can encourage and 
support entrepreneurship (and there are such strands in every culture), then they
have every prospect of being able to support a growing, industrializing economy. Entrepreneurship 
can flourish almost anywhere, if incentives and institutions are right.

However, this does suggest one decisive factor Who controls the coercive powers of the state, and 
for what ends? Consider how countries fared under Communism. The location of the Iron Curtain is an 
historical accident where Stalina€™ s armies stopped after World War II, where Maoa€™ s armies 
stopped in the early 1950s, and where Giapa€™ s armies stopped
in the mid 1970s. But the countries fortunate enough to lie outside the old Communist boundaries 
are vastly more prosperous today. Mexico is some eight times as wealthy as Cuba, an outcome few 
would have predicted before Castro seized power. Greece is some six and a half times as well off as 
Bulgaria. And Taiwan is nineteen times as well off as the Chinese
mainland.

Governments that fostered market incentives have encouraged their economies to put resources to 
their most productive uses, whereas bureaucratic command economies exerted pressure to allocate 
resources following other logics. Moreover, market economies have prospered and grown when they 
were managed in the interests of the business class. Whenever a
government has intervened to set prices and quantities in order to distribute income away from the 
productive and entrepreneurial classes (both current and prospective future members of the 
bourgeoisie), and toward urban consumers, bureaucrats, or small farmers, that nationa€™ s growth 
and prosperity have suffered.


RICH COUNTRIES GROW RICHER, WHILE POOR COUNTRIES UXG BEHIND

VIRTUOUS AND VICIOUS SPIRALS

In the twentieth century, the persistence and increasing size of large gaps in productivity levels 
and living standards across nations seems bizarre. We can understand why preindustrial 
civilizations had different levels of prosperity. They had different exploitable natural resources, 
and the diffusion of new ideas and technology from one civilization to another could be
slow.

But in the twentieth century, the principal producers of wealth are an economya€™ s workers. And 
the major source of growth is the storehouse of technological capabilities invented since the 
beginning of the Industrial Revolution. This storehouse is no onea€™ s private property. Most of it 
is accessible to anyone who can read. With modern telecommunications,
ideas can spread at the speed of light. And the benefits of taking advantage of this storehouse are 
immense.

So why do we see a€ce di verge nceaCD instead of a€ceconvergencea€D in the relative wealth of 
nations? Even outside the Communist world, the wealthier countries have been able to maintain and 
even increase their lead, while countries that stumbled were likely to lag ever farther behind.
A large part of the answer is the existence of powerful virtuous and vicious spirals If a country 
was doing well one period, it tended to do even better the next; but a country doing poorly saw its 
options - demographic, economic, and political - narrowing.

A richer country went through the demographic transition more rapidly. As wealth increased, parents 
became more likely to limit family size and concentrate their parental energies on raising a few 
children for whom they could provide ample nourishment and education, rather than on raising many 
children in the hope that a few would survive. Thus, a rich country
found its birth rate shrinking and its rate of population growth slowing. The slower rate of 
population growth meant more investment could go to multiplying the stock of capital available to 
the average worker, and less had to go to merely equipping new workers with the countrya€™ s 
average level of capital per worker.

A richer country could more easily afford to invest. Rich countries have adopted the technologies 
of the Industrial Revolution, whose principal focus is on how to make capital goods more cheaply. A 
small relative diversion of resources from todaya€™ s consumption in a rich country can produce a 
large increment to the economya€™ s productive capital stock.
Moreover, a richer country could maintain domestic peace and political stability more easily. A 
rapidly growing pie meant that politics could take the form of how to distribute the benefits from 
growth. And everyone - or almost everyone - could see that they were living significantly better 
than their parents, and that their children would live better still.

By contrast, in countries where growth was slow, politics tended to be more vicious. Enriching one 
group meant impoverishing another. The benefits from working for higher productivity seemed lower 
than the benefits from grabbing someone elsea€™ s share of the pie. When economic growth is slow, 
productive entrepreneurship can seem less attractive than
predatory entrepreneurship.

Moreover, a country in which growth was slow found its demographic transition delayed, its 
population growing rapidly, and thus its investment diverted away from deepening the capital stock 
at the disposal of the average worker. And in a slowly growing economy, it is hard to afford the 
capital goods that embody so much of modern machine technology. Capital
goods cost more in less developed countries. A larger relative diversion of resources from current 
consumption is needed to produce even a small increment to the economya€™ s productive capital 
stock.

Taken as a group, poor countries have not closed any of the gap relative to the worlda€™ s 
industrial leaders since World War II. And this divergence in living standards and productivity 
levels will continue to grow. After all, the factors that have kept economic growth slow in 
todaya€™ s poor countries are still operating today. What signs do we have that they will
cease in the near future?

This is a source of great danger not just for developing countries, but for industrial nations as 
well. The world in the twenty-first century will be sufficiently interdependent - politically, 
militarily, ecologically - that passage to a truly humane world requires that we get there at 
roughly the same time.

CONCLUSION

The best way to tell the history of the twentieth century is as a story of liberty and prosperity, 
as a tale of partial escapes from (and at times and places the falls back down into) servitude and 
poverty. But its ending is not clear. History as it unfolds has no immanent logic Nothing except 
our own and our descendantsa€™ efforts and struggles can give this particular
grand narrative a happy rather than a tragic conclusion.

One of the glories of the history of the twentieth century is that, although it has an extremely 
depressing middle, it seems to be moving more toward a (relatively) happy ending than a tragic one. 
We live in a (relatively) free and prosperous country and, compared to the past, a relatively free 
and prosperous world. We are slouching toward Utopia.

The Success of Social Democracy: Despite failures in other spheres, twentieth-century governments 
have made a success of social democracy. The industrial market economies have created legal and 
institutional infrastructures that have allowed the private economy to flourish, while also 
building systems of a€oesocial insurancea€D to greatly diminish the
vulnerability of individuals and families to individual and collective economic catastrophes. 
Social democracy has enabled stable democracy to coexist with incentives for entrepreneurship, 
investment, and enterprise.

In the United States today, social democracy comprises the interstate highway system, airport 
construction, air traffic control, the Coast Guard, the National Parks, government support for 
direct research and development through agencies like the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and the National
Institutes of Health. It includes the antitrust lawyers of the Department of Justice and the 
Federal Trade Commission, the financial regulators in the Securities and Exchange Commission, the 
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Reserve System, and the Pension Benefit 
Guaranty Corporation.

It includes the National Labor Relations Board to regulate and guide the bargaining between workers 
and employers. It includes the promise by the federal government to insure small bank depositors 
against bank failures. It includes Social Security and all of its means-tested and non-means-tested 
cousins - Supplemental Security Income, Food Stamps, Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families, and Head Start. It includes (with much less success) farm subsidy 
programs.

None of these programs would be seen as a proper use of the government by even a moderate classical 
liberal. None of them fit under the definition of the a€oenight watchmana€D state. But over the 
twentieth century, these programs and analogs in other advanced industrial countries have been 
remarkably successful.
They have been remarkably successful politically. Voters distrust politicians who seek to cut back 
on the major programs of the social insurance state. Voters find taxes earmarked to support social 
insurance programs less distasteful than taxes that flow into general revenues.

These programs have also played a large role in drawing the fangs of potential revolutionary 
movements. The Marxist argument that a market economy cannot function without a grossly unequal and 
ever-worsening distribution of wealth has not survived the success of the social democratic safety 
net for the middle class. The ability of social democracies to deliver
more-or-less constant economic growth together with a more-or-less stable relative distribution of 
wealth, has created a powerful consensus in favor of their current institutional setup.

Because most of the redistributions have occurred within the middle class, economists tend to 
assess these programs as having no positive effect - a mere churning of the income distribution. 
And they worry about any adverse incentives.

Yet, there is a sense in which economistsa€™ views are too narrow. For the underlying logic of 
social insurance is the political and cultural logic of universalism Social insurance provides 
rights and services that are yours by virtue of your standing as a citizen, and voters are more 
likely to approve of such universal rights and services as just than they are to approve
of welfare programs with a more limited scope.

Killing in the Name of Economics: It is not possible to write economic history without taking the 
sometimes bloody hands of twentieth-century governments into account. First, the possibility that 
the secret police will knock at your door and drag you off is a serious threat to your material 
well-being. Second, shooting and starvation were part of certain
governmentsa€™ a€oemanagementa€n of the economy. They were tactics used to compel the people to 
perform service and labor as the government wished.

But, perhaps most important, the twentieth century is unique in that its wars, purges, massacres, 
and executions have been largely the result of economic ideologies. Before the twentieth century, 
people slaughtered each other over theology eternal paradise or damnation. People slaughtered each 
other over power who gets to be top dog and command the material
resources of society. Only in the twentieth century have people killed each other on a large scale 
in disputes over the economic organization of society. The two most prominent examples the 
Communist governments in Russia and China, which, according to the political scientist Rudolph 
Rummel, were responsible for the deaths of almost 100 million people.

Communism in Russia was born when the a€ceBolshevika€D or majority faction of the Russian Social 
Democratic Party, led by Vladimir Lenin, seized power in a latea€“1917 coup from the government led 
by Kerensky. A brutal civil war followed that lasted three years.

When the war ended, Lenin began the task of eliminating capitalism. According to the Marxist theory 
that Lenin deeply believed, capitalism - private ownership of businesses and land, and private 
receipt of profits - was the source of inequality or exploitation. Marx believed in the labor 
theory of value that human productive labor (but only a€oesocially necessarya€D


iaoor, oniy iaoor using lecniuques ai me leaning euge or lecimoiogy; miDueu a community wiui 
a'euevaiuea^Lj oy virtue ui me social reiaiionsmp ueiween pronucer aim consumer in me marKei 
economy.

All sources of income other than the direct payment to the production-line worker of the value of 
his production were immoral and constituted exploitation, including not only the return to 
investment and the rewards to entrepreneurship, but also the wages paid to those who distributed 
and marketed the product. Thus, it was not enough to simply nationalize all
property and prevent the bourgeoisie from receiving interest and profits extracted from 
production-line workers. You also had to eliminate the market - because all intermediary profits 
from market exchange had their ultimate origin in value exploited from the toiling masses.

But, how then do you run industry and economic life? Lenina€™ s answer was that you organize the 
economy like an army. Lenin had been impressed by what he saw of Germanya€™ s centrally directed 
war economy of World War I and tried to copy it.

How do you industrialize rapidly? Lenina€™ s answer was to follow Marxa€™ s interpretation of how 
Britain industrialized - steal land from the peasantry, force them to migrate to the cities as a 
penniless urban working class, and use the resulting resources to build factories.

Thus, Lenin and his successors believed that in order to industrialize, the ruling Communists must 
wage economic war against Russiaa€™ s peasants. Squeeze their standard of living to feed the 
growing industrial cities. Keep urban wages just high enough to provide migrants to the citiesa€™ 
jobs, but no higher. Every kopek that was not spent on consumption goods
was a kopek that could go to building a new dam, a new railroad, or a new steel mill. And the more 
this generation sacrificed, the quicker utopia would be attained.

Great ruthlessness was exercised. And the dictator who won the struggle for power after Lenina€™ s 
death - Josef Stalin - was even more brutal in pursuit of economic ideology. The story of Mao in 
China is similar to that of Stalin in Russia The same ruthless commitment to remake society and 
preserve Communist Party rule, the same desire to override other social
forces and centralize economic and social life into a near-military hierarchy.

LINK: 
<https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/regional-review/1998/quarter-3/slouching-toward-utopia.aspx>
NBER Working Paper version:

Delong Nber 7569

1.18MB a™ PDF File
Download

Download
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Give a gift subscription

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

