Andrew Carnegie (1889): Wealth: An Historical Document

The problem of our age is the proper administration of wealth so that the ties of brotherhood may 
still bind together the rich and poor in harmonious relationship. The conditions of
human life have not only been changed, but revolutionized, within the past few hundred years. In 
former days there was little difference between the dwelling, dress, food, and
environment of the chief and those of his retainers. The Indians are to-day where civilized man 
then was. When visiting the Sioux, I was led to the wigwam of the chief. It was just
like the others in external appearance, and even within the difference was trifling between it and 
those of the poorest of his braves. The contrast between the palace of the
millionaire and the cottage of the laborer with us to-day measures the change which has come with 
civilization.

This change, however, is not to be deplored, but welcomed as highly beneficial. It is well, nay, 
essential for the progress of the race, that the houses of some should be homes for all
that is highest and best in literature and the arts, and for all the refinements of civilization, 
rather than that none should be so. Much better this great irregularity than universal
squalor. Without wealth there can be no MAicenas. The a€oegood old timesa€D were not good old 
times. Neither master nor servant was as well situated then as to-day. A relapse
to  old conditions would be disastrous to botha€“not the least so to him who servesa€“and would 
Sweep away civilization with it. But whether the change be for good or ill, it is
upon us, beyond our power to alter, and therefore to be accepted and made the best of. It is a 
waste of time to criticise the inevitable.

It is easy to see how the change has come. One illustration will serve for almost every phase of 
the cause. In the manufacture of products we have the whole story. It applies to all
combinations of human industry, as stimulated and enlarged by the inventions of this scientific 
age. Formerly articles Were manufactured at the domestic hearth or in small shops
which formed part of the household. The master and his apprentices worked side by side, the latter 
living with the master, and therefore subject to the same conditions. When these
apprentices rose to be masters, there was little or no change in their mode of life, and they, in 
turn, educated in the same routine succeeding apprentices. There was, substantially
social equality, and even political equality, for those engaged in industrial pursuits had then 
little or no political voice in the State.

But the inevitable result of such a mode of manufacture was crude articles at high prices. To-day 
the world obtains commodities of excellent quality at prices which even the
generation preceding this would have deemed incredible. In the commercial world similar causes have 
produced similar results, and the race is benefited thereby. The poor enjoy
what   the rich could not before afford. What were the luxuries have become the necessaries of 
life. The laborer has now more comforts than the landlord had a few generations ago.
The farmer has more luxuries than the landlord had, and is more richly clad and better housed. The 
landlord has books and pictures rarer, and appointments more artistic, than the
King could then obtain.

The price we pay for this salutary change is, no doubt, great. We assemble thousands of operatives 
in the factory, in the mine, and in the counting-house, of whom the employer can
know little or nothing, and to whom the employer is little better than a myth. All intercourse 
between them is at an end. Rigid Castes are formed, and, as usual, mutual ignorance
breeds mutual distrust. Each Caste is without sympathy for the other, and ready to credit anything 
disparaging in regard to it. Under the law of competition, the employer of
thousands  is forced into the strictest economies, among which the rates paid to labor figure 
prominently, and often there is friction between the employer and the employed, between
capital and labor, between rich and poor. Human society loses homogeneity.

The price which society pays for the law of competition, like the price it pays for cheap comforts 
and luxuries, is also great; but the advantage of this law are also greater still, for it
is to this law that we owe our wonderful material development, which brings improved conditions in 
its train. But, whether the law be benign or not, we must say of it, as we say of
the change in the conditions of men to which we have referred: It is here; we cannot evade it; no 
substitutes for it have been found; and while the law may be sometimes hard for the
individual, it is best for the race, because it insures the survival of the fittest in every 
department.

We accept and welcome therefore, as conditions to which we must accommodate ourselves, great 
inequality of environment, the concentration of business, industrial and
commercial, in the hands of a few, and the law of competition between these, as being not only 
beneficial, but essential for the future progress of the race. Having accepted these, it
follows that there must be great scope for the exercise of special ability in the merchant and in 
the manufacturer who has to conduct affairs upon a great scale. That this talent for
organization and management is rare among men is proved by the fact that it invariably secures for 
its possessor enormous rewards, no matter where or under what laws or
conditions.

The experienced in affairs always rate the MAN whose services can be obtained as a partner as not 
only the first consideration, but such as to render the question of his capital
scarcely worth considering, for such men soon create capital; while, without the special talent 
required, capital soon takes wings. Such men become interested in firms or
corporations using millions; and estimating only simple interest to be made upon the capital 
invested, it is inevitable that their income must exceed their expenditures, and that they
must accumulate wealth. Nor is there any middle ground which such men can occupy, because the great 
manufacturing or commercial concern which does not earn at least interest
upon its capital soon becomes bankrupt. It, must either go forward or fall behind: to stand still 
is impossible. It is a condition essential for its successful operation that it should be
thus far profitable, and even that, in addition to interest on capital, it should make profit.

It is a law, as certain as any of the others named, that men possessed of this peculiar talent for 
affair, under the free play of economic forces, must, of necessity, soon be in receipt of
more revenue than can be judiciously expended upon themselves; and this law is as beneficial for 
the race as the others.

Objections to the foundations upon which society is based are not in order, because the condition 
of the race is better with these than it has been with any others which have been
tried. Of the effect of any new substitutes proposed we cannot be sure. The Socialist or Anarchist 
who seeks to overturn present conditions is to be regarded as attacking the
foundation upon which civilization itself rests, for civilization took its start from the day that 
the capable, industrious workman said to his incompetent and lazy fellow, a€oelf thou
dost  net sow, thou shalt net reap,a€D and thus ended primitive Communism by separating the drones 
from the bees. One who studies this subject will soon be brought face to face
with the conclusion that upon the sacredness of property civilization itself dependsa€“the right of 
the laborer to his hundred dollars in the savings bank, and equally the legal right
of the millionaire to his millions.

To these who propose to substitute Communism for this intense Individualism the answer, therefore, 
is: The race has tried that. All progress from that barbarous day to the present
time has resulted from its displacement. Not evil, but good, has come to the race from the 
accumulation of wealth by those who have the ability and energy that produce it. But even
if we admit for a moment that it might be better for the race to discard its present foundation, 
Individualism,a€“that it is a nobler ideal that man should labor, not for himself alone,
but in and for a brotherhood of his fellows, and share with them all in common, realizing 
SwedenborgaC™ s idea of Heaven, where, as he says, the angels derive their happiness,
not from laboring for self, but for each other,a€“even admit all this, and a sufficient answer is, 
This is not evolution, but revolution. It necessitates the changing of human nature
itself a work of aeons, even if it were good to change it, which we cannot know. It is not 
practicable in our day or in our age. Even if desirable theoretically, it belongs to another and
long-succeeding sociological stratum.

Our duty is with what is practicable now; with the next step possible in our day and generation. It 
is criminal to waste our energies in endeavoring to uproot, when all we can
profitably or possibly accomplish is to bend the universal tree of humanity a little in the 
direction most favorable to the production of good fruit under existing circumstances. We
might  as well urge the destruction of the highest existing type of man because he failed to reach 
our ideal as favor the destruction of Individualism, Private Property, the Law of
Accumulation of Wealth, and the Law of Competition ; for these are the highest results of human 
experience, the soil in which society so far has produced the best fruit. Unequally
or  unjustly, perhaps, as these laws sometimes operate, and imperfect as they appear to the 
Idealist, they are, nevertheless, like the highest type of man, the best and most valuable of
all that humanity has yet accomplished.

We start, then, with a condition of affairs under which the best interests of the race are 
promoted, but which inevitably gives wealth to the few. Thus far, accepting conditions as they
exist, the situation can be surveyed and pronounced good. The question then arises, a€“and, if the 
foregoing be correct, it is the only question with which we have to deal, a€“What
is  the proper mode of administering wealth after the laws upon which civilization is founded have 
thrown it into the hands of the few ? And it is of this great question that I believe I
offer the true solution. It will be understood that fortunes are here spoken of, not moderate sums 
saved by many years of effort, the returns on which are required for the comfortable
maintenance and education of families. This is not wealth, but only competence which it should be 
the aim of all to acquire.

There are but three modes in which surplus wealth can be disposed of: It call be left to the 
families of the decedents; or it can be bequeathed for public purposes; or, finally, it can be
administered during their lives by its possessors.

Under the first and second modes most of the wealth of the world that has reached the few has 
hitherto been applied. Let us in turn consider each of these modes:

The first is the most injudicious. In monarchical countries, the estates and the greatest portion 
of the wealth are left to the first son, that the vanity of the parent may be gratified by
the thought that his name and title are to descend to succeeding generations unimpaired. The 
condition of this class in Europe to-day teaches the futility of such hopes or
ambitions .The successors have become impoverished through their follies or from the fall in the 
value of land. Even in Great Britain the strict law of entail has been found
inadequate   to maintain the status of an hereditary class. Its soil is rapidly passing into the 
hands of the stranger. Under republican institutions the division of property among the

children is much fairer, but the question which forces itself upon thoughtful men in all lands is: 
Why should men leave great fortunes to their children? If this is done from affection,
is it not misguided affection? Observation teaches that, generally speaking, it is not well for the 
children that they should be so burdened. Neither is it well for the state. Beyond
providing for the wife and daughters moderate sources of income, and very moderate allowances 
indeed, if any, for the sons, men may well hesitate, for it is no longer questionable
that  great suns bequeathed oftener work more for the injury than for the good of the recipients. 
Wise men will soon conclude that, for the best interests of the members of their


lamines aim 01 me state, suun Dequesis dre dii improper use ot ineir mediis.

It is not suggested that men who have failed to educate their sons to earn a livelihood shall cast 
them adrift in poverty. If any man has seen fit to rear his sons with a view to their
living idle lives, or, what is highly commendable, has instilled in them the sentiment that they 
are in a position to labor for public ends without reference to pecuniary
considerations, then, of course, the duty of the parent is to see that such are provided for in 
moderation. There are instances of millionairesa€™ sons unspoiled by wealth, who,
being     rich, still perform great services in the community. Such are the very salt of the earth, 
as valuable as, unfortunately, they are rare; still it is not the exception, but the rule, that
men must regard, and, looking at the usual result of enormous sums conferred upon legatees, the 
thoughtful man must shortly say, a€oel would as soon leave to my son a curse as
the almighty dollar,a€D and admit to himself that it is not the welfare of the children, but family 
pride, which inspires these enormous legacies.

As to the second mode, that of leaving wealth at death for public uses, it may be said that this is 
only a means for the disposal of wealth, provided a man is content to wait until he is
dead before it becomes of much good in the world. Knowledge of the results of legacies bequeathed 
is not calculated to inspire the brightest hopes of much posthumous good being
accomplished. The cases are not few in which the real object sought by the testator is not 
attained, nor are they few in which his real wishes are thwarted. In many cases the
bequests are so used as to become only monuments of his folly. It is well to remember that it 
requires the exercise of not less ability than that which acquired the wealth to use it so
as to be really beneficial to the community. Besides this, it may fairly be said that no man is to 
be extolled for doing what he cannot help doing, nor is he to be thanked by the
community to which he only leaves wealth at death. Men who leave vast sums in this way may fairly 
be thought men who would not have left it at all, had they been able to take it
with them. The memories of such cannot be held in grateful remembrance, for there is no grace in 
their gifts. It is not to be wondered at that such bequests seem so generally to lack
the blessing. -

The growing disposition to tax more and more heavily large estates left at death is a cheering 
indication of the growth of a salutary change in public opinion. The State of
Pennsylvania now takesa€“ subject to some exceptionsa€“one-tenth of the property left by its 
citizens. The budget presented in the British Parliament the other day proposes to
increase    the death-duties; and, most significant of all, the new tax is to be a graduated one. 
Of all forms of taxation, this seems the wisest. Men who continue hoarding great sums all
their lives, the proper use of which for - public ends would work good to the community, should be 
made to feel that the community, in the form of the state, cannot thus be
deprived                                                                                  of its 
proper share. By taxing estates heavily at death the state marks its condemnation of the selfish 
millionaire^™ s unworthy life.

It is desirable, that nations should go much further in this direction. Indeed, it is difficult to 
set bounds to the share of a rich mana€™ s estate which should go at his death to the
public through the agency of the state, and by all means such taxes should be graduated, beginning 
at nothing upon moderate sums to dependents, and increasing rapidly as the
amounts swell, until of the millionaire^™ s hoard, as of Shylocka€™ s, at least:

a€!The other half

Comes to the privy coffer of the state.

This policy would work powerfully to induce the rich man to attend to the administration of wealth 
during his life, which is the end that society should always have in view, as
being that by far most fruitful for the people. Nor need it be feared that this policy would sap 
the root of enterprise and render men less anxious to accumulate, for to the class whose
ambition it is to leave great fortunes and be talked about after their death, it will attract even 
more attention, and, indeed, be a somewhat nobler ambition to have enormous sums
paid  over to the state from their fortunes.

There remains, then, only one mode of using great fortunes; but in this we have the true antidote 
for the temporary unequal distribution of wealth, the reconciliation of the rich and
the poora€“a reign of harmony a€ “another ideal, differing, indeed, from that of the Communist in 
requiring only the further evolution of existing conditions, not the total overthrow
of our civilization. It is founded upon the present most intense individualism, and the race is 
projected to put it in practice by degree whenever it pleases. Under its sway we shall
have an ideal state, in which the surplus wealth of the few will become, in the best sense the 
property of the many, because administered for the common good, and this wealth,
passing through the hands of the few, can be made a much more potent force for the elevation of our 
race than if it had been distributed in small sums to the people themselves.

Even the poorest can be made to see this, and to agree that great sums gathered by some of their 
fellow-citizens and spent for public purposes, from which the masses reap the
principal benefit, are more valuable to them than if scattered among them through the course of 
many years in trifling amounts.

If we consider what results flow from the Cooper Institute, for instance, to the best portion of 
the race in New York not possessed of means, and compare these with those which
would have arisen for the good of the masses from an equal sum distributed by Mr. Cooper in his 
lifetime in the form of wages, which is the highest form of distribution, being for
work done and not for charity, we can form some estimate of the possibilities for the improvement 
of the race which lie embedded in the present law of the accumulation of wealth.
Much of this sum if distributed in small quantities among the people, would have been wasted in the 
indulgence of appetite, some of it in excess, and it may be doubted whether
even the part put to the best use, that of adding to the comforts of the home, would have yielded 
results for the race, as a race, at all comparable to those which are flowing and are
to flow from the Cooper Institute from generation to generation. Let the advocate of violent or 
radical change ponder well this thought.

We might even go so far as to take another instance, that of Mr. Tildena€™ s bequest of five 
millions of dollars for a free library in the city of New York, but in referring to this one
cannot help saying involuntarily, how much better if Mr. Tilden had devoted the last years of his 
own life to the proper administration of this immense sum; in which case neither
legal contest nor any other cause of delay could have interfered with his aims. But let us assume 
that Mr. Tildena€™ s millions finally become the means of giving to this city a
noble public library, where the treasures of the world contained in books will be open to all 
forever, without money and without price. Considering the good of that part of the race
which congregates in and around Manhattan Island, would its permanent benefit have been better 
promoted had these millions been allowed to circulate in small sums through the
hands of the masses? Even the most strenuous advocate of Communism must entertain a doubt upon this 
subject. Most of those who think will probably entertain no doubt
whatever.

Poor and restricted are our opportunities in this life; narrow our horizon; our best work most 
imperfect; but rich men should be thankful for one inestimable boon. They have it in
their power during their lives to busy themselves in organizing benefactions from which the masses 
of their fellows will derive lasting advantage, and thus dignify their own lives.
The highest life is probably to be reached, not by such imitation of the life of Christ as Count 
Tolstoi gives us, but, while animated by Christa€™ s spirit, by recognizing the
changed conditions of this age, and adopting modes of expressing this spirit suitable to the 
changed conditions under which we live ; still laboring for the good of our fellows, which
was the essence of his life and teaching, but laboring in a different manner.

This, then, is held to be the duty of the man of Wealth: First, to set an example of modest, 
unostentatious living, shunning display or extravagance; to provide moderately for the
legitimate wants of those dependent upon him; and after doing so to consider all surplus revenues 
which come to him simply as trust funds, which he is called upon to administer,
and strictly bound as a matter of duty to administer in the manner which, in his judgment, is best 
calculated to produce the most beneficial results for the communitya€“the man of
wealth thus becoming the mere agent and trustee for his poorer brethren, bringing to their service 
his superior wisdom, experience and ability to administer, doing for them better
than they would or could do for themselves.

We are met here with the difficulty of determining what are moderate sums to leave to members of 
the family; what is modest, unostentatious living; what is the test of
extravagance. There must be different standards for different conditions. The answer is that it is 
as impossible to name exact amounts or actions as it is to define good manners,
good    taste, or the rules of propriety ; but, nevertheless, these are verities, well known 
although undefinable. Public sentiment is quick to know and to feel what offends these. So in
the case of wealth.

The rule in regard to good taste in the dress of men or women applies here. Whatever makes one 
conspicuous offends the canon. If any family be chiefly known for display, for
extravagance in home, table, equipage, for enormous sums ostentatiously spent in any form upon 
itself, if these be its chief distinctions, we have no difficulty in estimating its nature
or  culture. So likewise in regard to the use or abuse of its surplus wealth, or to generous, 
freehanded cooperation in good public uses, or to unabated efforts to accumulate and hoard
to the last, whether they administer or bequeath. The verdict rests with the best and most 
enlightened public sentiment. The community will surely judge and its judgments will not
often be wrong.

The best uses to which surplus wealth can be put have already been indicated. These who, would 
administer wisely must, indeed, be wise, for one of the serious obstacles to the
improvement of our race is indiscriminate charity. It were better for mankind that the millions of 
the rich were thrown in to the sea than so spent as to encourage the slothful, the
drunken, the unworthy. Of every thousand dollars spent in so called charity to-day, it is probable 
that $950 is unwisely spent; so spent, indeed as to produce the very evils which it
proposes to mitigate or cure.

A well-known writer of philosophic books admitted the other day that he had given a quarter of a 
dollar to a man who approached him as he was coming to visit the house of his
friend. He knew nothing of the habits of this beggar; knew not the use that would be made of this 
money, although he had every reason to suspect that it would be spent improperly.
This man professed to be a disciple of Herbert Spencer; yet the quarter-dollar given that night 
will probably work more injury than all the money which its thoughtless donor will
ever be able to give in true charity will do good. He only gratified his own feelings, saved him- 
self from annoyance ,a€“ and this was probably one of the most selfish and very
worst actions of his life, for in all respects he is most worthy.

In bestowing charity, the main consideration should be to help those who will help themselves; to 
provide part of the means by which those who desire to improve may do so; to

give those who desire to use the aids by which they may rise; to assist, but rarely or never to do 
all. Neither the individual nor the race is improved by alms-giving. Those worthy of
assistance, excent in rare cases, seldom reonire assistance. The reallv valuable men of the race 
never do. excent in cases of accident or sudden change. Everv one has. of course.


cases of individuals brought to his own knowledge where temporary assistance can do genuine good, 
and these he will not overlook. But the amount which can be wisely given by
the individual for individuals is necessarily limited by his lack of knowledge of the circumstances 
connected with each. He is the only true reformer who is as careful and as anxious
not to aid the unworthy as he is to aid the worthy, and, perhaps, even more so, for in alms-giving 
more injury is probably done by rewarding vice than by relieving virtue.

The rich man is thus almost restricted to following the examples of Peter Cooper, Enoch Pratt of 
Baltimore, Mr. Pratt of Brooklyn, Senator Stanford, and others, who know that the
best means of benefiting the community is to place within its reach the ladders upon which the 
aspiring can risea€ “parks, and means of recreation, by which men are helped in body
and mind; works of art, certain to give pleasure and improve the public taste, and public 
institutions of various kinds, which will improve the general condition of the people ;a€“in
this manner returning their surplus wealth to the mass of their fellows in the forms best 
calculated to do them lasting good. -

Thus is the problem of Rich and Poor to be solved. The laws of accumulation will be left free; the 
laws of distribution free. Individualism will continue, but the millionaire will be
but a trustee for the poor; intrusted for a season with a great part of the increased wealth of the 
community, but administering it for the community far better than it could or would
have done for itself. The best minds will thus have reached a stage in the development of the race 
iii which it is clearly seen that there is no mode of disposing of surplus wealth
creditable to thoughtful and earnest men into whose hands it flows save by using it year by year 
for the general good. This day already dawns. But a little while, and although,
without incurring the pity of their fellows, men may die sharers in great business enterprises from 
which their capital cannot be or has not been withdrawn, and is left chiefly at
death                                                                                for public 
uses, yet the man who dies leaving behind many millions of available wealth, which was his to 
administer during life, will pass away a€oeunwept, unhonored, and
unsung,a€D no matter to what uses he leaves the dross which he cannot take with him. Of such as 
these the public verdict will then be: a€oeThe man who dies thus rich dies
disgraced.a€D

Such, in my opinion, is the true Gospel concerning Wealth, obedience to which is destined some day 
to solve the problem of the Rich and the Poor, and to bring a€oePeace on earth,
among men Good-Willa€D.

LINK: https ://www.bradford-delong .com/2018/02/andrew-carnegie-1889-wealth-an-historical-document 
.html

