Subscribe now

J. Bradford DeLong: The Strange Death of Conservative America'. American conservatives once sought 
to ride the waves of markets and innovation toward ever-greater wealth and prosperity, but now they 
cower in fear. And, as the trajectory of todaya€™ s Republican Party shows, that makes them a 
threat to democracy.
Share

BERKELEY a€“ If you are concerned about the well-being of the United States and interested in what 
the country could do to help itself, stop what you are doing and read historian Geoffrey 
Kabaservicea€™ s superb 2012 book, Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of 
the Republican Party, from Eisenhower to the Tea

Party <https://global.oup .com/academic/product/rule-and-ruin-9780199768400?cc=us&lang=en&>. To 
understand why, allow me a brief historical interlude.

Until roughly the start of the seventeenth century, people generally had to look back in time to 
find evidence of human greatness. Humanity had reached its peak in long lost golden ages of 
demigods, great thinkers, and massive construction projects. When people did look to thefuture for 
promise of a better world, it was a religious vision they conjured a€“ a city of God, not of 
man.When they
looked to their own society, they saw that it was mostly the same as in the past, with Henry VIII 
and his retinue holding court in much the same fashion as Agamemnon, or Tiberius Caesar, or Arthur.

But then, around 1600, some people in Western Europe noticed <https 
://archive.org/details/idealcommonwealt00more> that history was moving largely in one particular 
direction, owing to the expansion of humankinda€™ s technological capabilities. In response to 
seventeenth-century Europeansa€™ new doctrine of progress, conservative forces have represented one 
widely subscribed view of
how societies should respond to the political implications of technological and social change. In 
doing so, they have generally gathered themselves into four different kinds of political parties.

The first comprises reactionaries: those who simply want to stand a€oeathwart history, yelling 
a€~STOP,a€™ a€D as William F. Buckley, Jr. famously put it. Reactionaries consider themselves to be 
at war <https://claremontreviewofbooks.com/digital/the-flight-93-election/> with a 
dystopiana€oearmeddoctrinea€D with which compromise isneither possible nor desirable. In the fight 
against
this foe, no alliance should be rejected, even if it is with factions that would otherwise be 
judged evil or contemptible.

The second kind of party favors a€oeWhig measures and Tory mena€D 
<https://www.theatlantic.eom/politics/archive/2007/07/whig-measures-and-tory-men/43273/>. These 
conservatives can see that technological and social change might be turned to human advantage, 
provided that the changes are guided by leaders with a keen appreciation of the value of our 
historical patrimony and of the
dangers of destroying existing institutions before building new ones. As Tancredi explains to his 
uncle, the Prince of Salina, in Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusaa€™ s The Leopard 
<https://archive.org/details/leopard001amp>, a€oelf we want things to stay the same, things will 
have to change.a€D

The third type of conservative party is found primarily (but not exclusively) in America. It 
emerges as an adaptation to a society that sees itself as overwhelmingly new and liberal. It is not 
a party of tradition and inherited status, but rather of wealth and business. In its ranks are 
conservatives who want to remove government-imposed hurdles to technological innovation, 
entrepreneurship, and
enterprise. Confident that the free market holds the key to generating wealth and prosperity, they 
breathlessly tout the merits of surfing its waves of Schumpeterian creative destruction.

Fourth and last, there is the home of the fearful and the grifters who exploit them. This 
constituency includes all those who believe it is they who will be creatively destroyed by the 
processes of historical change. They feel (or are led to believe) that they are beset on all sides 
by internal and external enemieswho are more powerfulthan theyare and eager to a€cereplacea€D or 
a€oecancela€D
them.

What I have learned from Harvard University political scientists Steven Levitsky and Daniel 
Ziblatta€™ s 2018 bestseller, How Democracies Die 
<https://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/562246/how-democracies-die-bv-steven-levitsky-and-daniel-z
iblatt/>, is that democratic countries can be governed well only if their conservative parties fall 
into the second or third of the four
categories above. When conservatives coalesce around reaction or fear, democratic institutions come 
under threat.

Levitsky and Ziblatt offer many examples to demonstrate this, but let me add one more. A little 
over a century ago, Great Britain experienced an astonishingly rapid decline from its position as 
the worlda€™ s political and economic hyper-power. This process was accelerated significantly by 
the transformation of its Tory Party into a party combining types one and four. This was the party 
of
Mafeking Night (Boer War) celebrations and armed resistance to Irish constitutional reform. In the 
1910a€“14 period, George Dangerfield later recalled, the world witnessed the a€oeStrange Death of 
liberal Englanda€D <https://archive.org/details/strangedeathofliOOdang>.

That brings us back to Kabaservicea€™ s book, which tells the story of how the US Republican Party 
put itself on an analogous course. When I look out at the current political scene, I see very few 
elements of categories two and three in the Republican Party. And any that are left are fast 
disappearing.

Republican politicians today are desperate to pick up the mantle of Donald Trump, undoubtedly one 
of the worst presidents in American history. Obviously, this dangerous and embarrassing trend needs 
to be reversed as rapidly and as completely as possible. But I, for one, am at a loss to see how 
that might be done.
LINK: <https ://www 
.project-syndicate.org/commentary/republican-party-strange-death-american-conservatism-by-i-bradford
-delong-2021 -10>

LINK TO DRAFT:


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

DRAFT: For Project Syndicate: Please Read Geoffrey Kabaservice!

I want everybodya€2everybodya€”interested in the well-being_ofandhop_ing to assist the United 
States of America to, right now, stop what they are doing, and go and read Geoffrey Kabaservicea€™ 
s superb Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party, 
from Eisenhower to the Tea Partya€!

Read more

a vear apo A’ 3 likes A- 6 comments A- Rrad Del ona


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

DRAFT: For Project Syndicate: Please Read Geoffrey Kabaservice!

I want everybodya€’’everybodya€’’interested in the well-being of and hoping to assist the United 
States of America to, right now, stop what they are doing, and go and read Geoffrey Kabaservicea€™ 
s superb Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the Republican Party, 
from Eisenhower to the Tea Partya€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- 6 comments A- Brad DeLong
Share

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

