Subscribe now

Once people began to farm, especially farm grains, they become relatively stationary: 
Agriculturalists cannot carry their resources away with them. Their wealth is in their land and the 
crops they are growing, rather than in their heads and in the tools they carry. Thus farmers cannot 
run away when thugs-with-spears show up, and demand half their crop.

Before 1870, there was no possibility that humanity could bake an economic pie that was 
sufficiently large for everyone to potentially have enough. Slow technological progress, the 
necessity under patriarchy of trying to have more sons in the hope that at least one would survive, 
and natural resource scarcity a€’’those put mankind under the Malthusian harrow, in dire poverty. 
Thus most of governance back then, andmost social energyback then, wasdirected at
some elite's (a) running a force-and-fraud, exploitation-and-domination machine, (b) elbowing other 
potential elites out of the way, and then (c) utilizing their ill-gotten gains in building a high 
culture in which the non-A©lite were villains and churns. The pressures making for human 
inequality, and for gross human inequality, were enormous and inescapable.

Thus, for most of recorded human history, history as studied by non-"presentist" historians 
consisted of this: studying how those who benefited from the operation of the 
exploitation-and-domination machine cooperated in building and enjoying their high culture and came 
into conflict within and between civilizations, as they carried out their respective roles as 
masters, thugs-with-spears (and later thugs-with-gunpowder-weapons), order-giving bureaucrats,
record-keeping accountants, and propagandists.

Thus "modes of domination" were as important as modes of production, at least, in the old days. And 
thus there are four other dimensions of global economic history worth noting at this pointa€”all 
having to do with inequality and distribution.

• The first is the extraction-status dimension: slavery, serfdom, & lesser degrees of status 
unfreedom.

• The second is the general within-society across-household inequality dimension: plutocracy.

• The third is the gender dimension: patriarchy

• And the fourth is the cross-country inequality dimension: divergence (of national economies).

Slavery, Serfdom, & Lesser Forms of Ascribed Status-Driven Unfreedom

When economists think of inequality, they almost invariably think of it terms of incomes, spending, 
and pricesa€”all as measured by the yardstick of money and prices, and thus by what goods and 
services the rich guy can consume or command the use of. An unequal society is one in which those 
at the bottom get to make use of a small share of societya€™ s resources. It is one in which the 
work they must do to gain access to that small amount and share is
lengthy and burdensome.

Of course all of this is for males of the proper ethnicitya€’’the proper semi- or 
completely-fictional extended kin-group. They werepretty much the only people who fully counted. 
Slaves were unequal. Women were unequal. In the United States Amerindiansa€”if they had survived 
the plagues and the wars and the forced migrationsa€”were unequal. Even among American white men, 
non-slaveholders in the slave south had very little societal power: If they ran
their own farms, they had to sell their produce into a market in which slave-grown corn and 
slave-raised pigs were determining the prices that they could get. If they sought to work for 
others, they had to sell their labor into a market in which their potential employers' competitors 
would be using and driving their slaves with the whip, and thus pushing down the wages that their 
own employers could afford to pay.

Income and extraction closely interlinked with statusa€!

Once again, let us consider Aristoteles of Stageira, sometime tutor of Alexandros III a€oeThe 
Greata€D ArgeAjdai of Macedona€D. For 2000 years, from the moment he became the favored pupil of 
Plato up until call it the year 1650, and in a long arc from Ireland to India, Aristotle was THE 
Philosopher. Capital P. THE definite article. If you said a€oethe philosophera€D, you were 
referring to Aristotle. And people did. He was a€oethe master of those who
knowa€D, as Florentine poet Dante Alighieri named him.

“THE Philosopher”

For, literally, millennia...

•  “the master of those who know”, as Dante called
him...

•  Interested in everything—except economic
growth

•  Scroll I of his Politics


iivuovuviv                     — virvv iiviiivo —

economics

•  In order: bossing slaves, raising children,
directing your wife, knowing market
conditions

Aristotlea€™ s main discussion of what we callteconomics comes in the book we call the politics. 
The Politics is about how prosperous and wealthy Greek men organize themselves and their inferiors 
into city-states that provide an arena and support for life and, of course, for the practice of 
philosophy. The first booka€’’actually, for him it was the first scrolla€”Of the politics is about 
economics, or rather resources and household management, because unless
resources and the households Controlled by prosperous and wealthy Greek men Are present and well 
organized, successful organization of a city state, of a polity, will be impossible.

In the first book of his Politics, Aristotle talks about the necessity of owning slaves. It is, in 
fact, The first thing on his mind when he talks about managing resources on the part of the 
householda€’’Greek oikos, household, and Greek nomos, organization or management. Hence oiko-nomos. 
Hence economics.
THE Philosopher says:

Let us first speak of master and slavea€!.

No man can live wella€! [without] necessariesa€!. The management of a householda€! [needs] property 
as instruments for living. And... a slave is living property .a€! If every tool could accomplish 
its own work, obeying or anticipating the will of others, like the statues of Daidalos, or the 
tripods of Hephaistos, which, says the poet Homer, a€oeof their own accord entered the assembly of 
the Godsa€U; if, in like manner, the shuttle
could weave and the plectrum touch the lyre without a hand to guide them, then chief workmen would 
not need servants, nor masters slavesa€!

The tripods of Hephaistos are self-propelled catering carts, from Homera€™ s Iliad'.

Thetis of the silver feet came to the house of Hephaistos,
Imperishable, starry, and shining among the immortals,

Built in bronze for himself by the god of the dragging footsteps.
She found him sweating as he turned here and there to his bellows
Busily, since he was working on twenty tripods

Which were to stand against the wall of his strong-founded dwelling.

And he had set golden wheels underneath the base of each one
So that of their own motion they could wheel into the immortal
Gathering, and return to his house: a wonder to look at.

These were so far finished, but the elaborate ear handles

Were not yet on. He was forging these, and beating the chains out.
As he was at work on this in his craftsmanship and his cunning,

Meanwhile the goddess Thetis the silver-footed drew near hima€!

The Tripods [Self-Propelled Catering Carts] of
Hephaistos...


But, observed Aristotle, he did not live in such a Golden Age, in which music could be played and 
cloth woven without human hands. He, Aristotle, did not have robot blacksmiths or the 
self-propelled serving trays that could both keep the food warm and decide when it should be 
brought into the dining room, things that myth attributed to the lifestyles of the heroic and 
divine. Since he did not have these, Aristotle, or any other Greek man who wanted to lead a
leisurely enough life to have time to undertake philosophy, and play a proper role in the 
self-governance of the city-state, needed to own and effectively boss slaves.

And not just one or two slaves either, but household slaves, agricultural slaves, craft work or 
slaves, and perhaps more.
And also note that, once again, this is income, not status and caste.

It is, throughout human history, very important not to lose sight of status and caste.

Simple income accounts tend to record the United States on the eve of the Civil War as an 
extraordinarily equal society with its top 1% white non-Amerindian guys having 4-6 times the 
lifetime income of the average white, male, non-Amerindian.
But there were four million slaves among the 30 million inhabitants of the U.S. in 1860. They had 
the strongest possible objections to that claim that the U.S. was then significantly less unequal 
than Britain.

From their per spec tivea€’’and, I would hope, from oursa€”the fact that the richest white male 
non-Amerindian had only 5 rather than the then-European 25 times the lifetime income of the average 
white male non-Amerindian is not the most important feature of American inequality on the eve of 
the Civil War. The most important fact is, as Abraham Lincoln said in 1858 at the end of his speech 
at Ottawa, IL. He was softening his words in order to appeal to the
non-abolitionist white male electorate of Illinois. And he said that even though:

I have no purpose to introduce political and social equality between the white and the black 
racesa€L Inasmuch as it becomes a necessity that there must be a difference, I, as well as Judge 
Douglas, am in favor of the race to which I belong having the superior position. I have never said 
anything to the contrarya€!

Nevertheless:

I hold that, notwithstanding all this, there is no reason in the world why the negro is not 
entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, the right to 
life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. [Loud cheers.] I hold that he is as much entitled to 
these as the white man. I agree with Judge Douglas he is not my equal in many respects-certainly 
not in color, perhaps not in moral or intellectual endowment. But in
the right to eat the bread, without the leave of anybody else, which his own hand earns, he is my 
equal and the equal of Judge Douglas, and the equal of every living man.

No. The Pre-Civil War United States was not a low inequality society. The coming of emancipation in 
1863 and 1865 was a huge thing for economic and social equality. The coming of feminism, even early 
feminism, was a substantial thing for social equality if not for economic.

Pre-industrial northwest Europe, by contrast, was a slavery-free but an income-inequality abundant 
society. The top 1% (of males) at any point in time had 15-20 times the income of the 
averagea€’’figure 10-15 times the lifetime inequality. In both the Netherlands and Britain, figure 
that atany point in time from 1860 to1930the top1% had incomes 20-30 times the average.
A great deal of inequality, however, is not just work, income, spending, and prices. A great deal 
is simply things that you are not allowed to do, or are expected and required to do, by virtue of 
what we might as well call your status-group, your estate, your caste. Minorities. Serfs. Slaves.

This is always present as a background in economic analysis. But this is usually much more than a 
background factor in human societies. I am not a great fan of those who try to distinguish wealth 
from freedoma€’’power to command resources from autonomya€’’positive from negativelibertya€”in 
human societies. If you arelocked in a cage, it matters a little to you whether you could buy a key 
if only you had the more money which you do not. So never take
a distribution of wealth or income as in any sense a set of sufficient statistics for inequality.


Inequality & Plutocracy

How important?

Branko Milanovic, Peter Lindert, and Jeffrey Williamson have estimated some numbers and drawn some 
graphs about inequality back in the agrarian agea€”that is, from 8000 B.C.E. to 1750 or so. It 
looks as though societies were by and large about as unequal as they could possibly be. Paying 
higher taxes or higher rents or higher tithes than were levied may indeed have meant that large 
numbers of children would die. Extracting more wealth would not have
been an easy thing for an elite comprised of thugs with swords and grifters with fancy sacred 
headdresses to accomplish.

Pre-lndustrial Inequality

Branko Milanovic. Peter Under!. and Jeffrey Williamson

(2010): Pre-lnduslnaJ Inequality <http7/onlinelibrary wiley com/
dOi/10 11114.1460-0297 2010 02403 x4ult>

Our societies have much more headroom, and can sustain much more inequality than they could. 
Nevertheless, most pre-industrial societies appear to have had inequality nearly as great as could 
have possibly been sustained.

Starting in 1725 or so we begin to see, for the first time, claims that inequality is actually 
functional, and makes some sense for society as a wholea€’’rather than natural, and part of the 
right order of things. We may have seen this once or twice beforea€”Aristotlea€™ s justification of 
slavery for example. But that the industrious need to be properly incentivized to work hard by the 
prospect of the coming rich and this becoming rich redounds to the benefit of
society as a wholea€”that is something we first see in full flower in the 18th century. Probably 
the reason is that it only becomes a question in the 18th century. Before the 18th century there 
were not enough poor people who could read for inequality to need justification.

The latest historical inequality numbersa€”even more recent than those of Thomas Pikettya€’’come 
from Peter Lindert and Jeffrey Williamson. They tell us that America in the 1600s and 1700s in 
America the top 1% had 8-10 times the average income, rather than the 15-30 times average income 
found in northwest Europe. Today in the U.S., the top l%a€”roughly those households with incomes 
more than $500K/yeara€”receive (I dona€™t want to say
a€oeearna€D) 20 times the average.


Figure 3 inoxne sMre reco v«d by th# top 1%      countries over t*o cenunes

Note, however, that the top 1% are overwhelmingly 40 to 60 years old. A significant parta€”maybe 
4%-points?a€”of the greater income share of the top 1% is simply the age gradient of income. My 
household dances between the top 1% and the top 2% of the American income distribution. But in 1984 
we were at the 25%-ile of the income distribution, living on $5,000 in a studio apartment in 
Somerville, MA, across the street from a junkyard. Think of the top
1% in colonial America (of male, white, non-Amerindians) as having not 8-10 but 4-6 times average 
incomea€”and figure their counterparts in the Old World as then having 11-26 times average.

We can clearly see the post-emancipation eras of American history separating into three great 
inequality waves:

1. The first Gilded Age: rising inequality in the U.S., slightly falling in Europe.

2. The age of social democracy, the Great Compressiona€”in these data coming at the start of World 
War IIa€”and then the 40 years of the-social democratic middle-class society.

3. The Second Gilded Age: We are now in a second Gilded Age: the shift to which Bega with Ronald 
Reagana€™ s inauguration. It has seen our attainment today of previously unseen levels of American 
inequality <http://voxeu.org/article/american-growth-and-inequalitv-1700>.

Let me briefly focus on our overclass: the top 0.01%. These are 15,000 households in the United 
States of America. Their incomes average 60 million a year. Today, we pay five times as much to the 
overclass for them to perform the services for society that they do. What do the rest of us get in 
return? And how is it that it is this category of income that has been so greatly amplified in the 
Second Gilded age: the overclass share is now 2/3 greater than it was even
back in the first Gilded Age.

The Overclass


9 tOUM >

5% of national income for 0.01% of the population means that these 15,000 households collectively 
have 500 times average income. Back in 1970 their counterparts had only 100 times average income. 
What has happened to our market economy and our system of property ownership to generate this 
change?
Briefly, six factors appear to have mattered: education, finance, healthcare financing, the decline 
of the union movement, unemployment, and technology. Three factors have not: a€oebad trade 
dealsa€D, low-education immigration, and affirmative action.

Patriarchy

Agrarian-age patriarchal inequality is literally inscribed in our genes.

It is an elementary fact of our genetics that there is a small proportion of our genomea€”the 
mitochondrial DNA genomea€”that we inherit only from our mothers. Thus we can trace descent back 
through the exclusively female line, and by looking at the amount of mutations and genetic 
divergence in a human population today in that portion of the genome, determine the effective 
female population size of the human race back in the past all the way back to
mitochondrial Eve: the woman who is the mother's mother's mother's... mother's mother's mother of 
us all. And It is an elementary fact of our genetics that there is a small proportion of every 
male's genomea€”the y-chromosome genomea€”that we inherit only from our fathers. Thus we can trace 
descent of males back through the exclusively male line, and by looking at the amount of mutations 
and genetic divergence in a human population today in that portion
of    the genome, determine the effective male population size of the human race back in the past 
all the way back to y-chromosome Adam: the father who is our father's father's father's... father's 
father's father of us all.

When we do this, we find something going on between the years -8000 and -2000. The effective female 
population size becomes much much much much larger than the effective male population size in that 
era. Lots of mitochondrial lineages are coming down to us: women are having daughters who have 
daughters... whose daughters' daughters' daughters are among us. A much smaller number of 
y-chromosome lineages are being evolved and then survivinga€”
perhaps 1/20 as large. This would seem to mean that 10000 to 2000 years ago something exterminated 
most of the y-chromosome lineages, saw substantial polygyny for a few men, and non-reproduction for 
others. It also means the inheritance of male reproductive advantage: that if your 
great-grandfather had the resources to have more than one wife, the odds were higher that you were 
at the top of the inequality pyramid and had the resources more than one
wife   as well. Patriarchal reproductive inequality was in that age both substantial and inherited.

This is polygyny: one man, many wivesa€”and lots of men with no wives and little sexual access to 
women. This is the Biblical Patriarch Jacob: 13 children with two wives and two concubines. Jacob 
and Leah's children were Reuben, Simeon, Levi, Judah Issachar, Zebulun, and Dina; Jacob and 
Rachel's children were Joseph and Benjamin; Jacob and Zilpah's children were Gad and Asher, and 
Jacob and Bilhah's children were Dan and Naphtali. And
somewhere in the neighborhood there were three mena€”unnameda€”who were without wives, and without 
children. Leah, Rachel, Zilpah, and Bilhah's mitochondrial DNA lineages were passed down. The three 
nameless men's y-chromosome lineages were not: only Jacob's was.


Maintaining polygyny for a number of generations requires great social pressure and great societal 
inequality among men. It also requires a great deal of subservience among women. What was human 
life and human inequality like back in this patriarchal age? What brought it on? What made it come 
to an end?

In 1764, in Britaina€™ s Massachusetts colony, Abigail Smith was 20. She had had no formal 
education at all: girls werena€™ t worth it. She married a man she had known for five years: the 
up-and-coming 30-year-old lawyer John Adams, future President of the United States. Children 
rapidly followed their marriage: Nabby (1765), John Quincy (1767), Suky (1768, died at 2), Charles 
(1770, died at 10), Thomas (1772), probably a miscarriage or two or three
from 1774-6, then Elizabeth (1777, stillborn), then (perhaps) another miscarriagea€”but I suspect 
not. She spent five years pregnant. She was rich enough that she, probably, hired a wet-nurse for 
her children, but somebody or somebodies nursed her children for perhaps fourteen more years: some 
woman or women were thus eating for two for more than a full decade to raise the next generation of 
Adamses. In 1776 she writes a famous letter to her husband in
which she begged him to write laws providing women with legal personality in the new revolutionary 
country he was building:

Remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourablea€!. Do not put such unlimited power into 
the hands of the HusbandsaC!. Such of you as wish to be happy willingly give up the harsh title of 
Master for the more tender and endearing one of Friend. Why then, not put it out of the power of 
the vicious and the Lawless to use us with cruelty and indignity with impunity?a€! Regard us then 
as Beings placed by providence under
your protection and in immitation of the Supreem Being make use of that power only for our 
happinessa€!

Her husband John Adams thought this was a great joke:

I cannot but laugha€l. Your letter was the first intimation that another tribe, more numerous and 
powerful than all the rest, were grown discontented. This is rather too coarse a compliment, but 
you are so saucy, I won't blot it out. Depend upon it, we know better than to repeal our masculine 
systemsa€!. We have only the name of masters, and rather than give up this, which would completely 
subject us to the despotism of the petticoat, I
hope General Washington and all our brave heroes would fightaCI

Read the letter entire chttps://founders .archives .gov/documents/Adams/04-01 -02-0241>.

Why male supremacy was so firmly established is something that is not obvious to me. Yes, it was 
very important to have surviving descendants. Yes, attaining a reasonable chance of having 
surviving descendants to take care of one in onea€™ s old age meant that the typical woman spent 20 
years eating for two: pregnant and breastfeeding. Yes, eating for two is an enormous energy drain, 
especially in populations near subsistence. Yes, prolonged breastfeeding
was a substantial mobility drain kept women very close to their children, and impelled a 
concentration of female labor on activities that made that easy: gardening and other forms of 
within-and-near-the-dwelling labor, especially textiles. Yes, there were benefits to men as a group 
from oppressing womena€’’especially if women could be convinced that they deserved it:

Unto the woman he said, a€~I will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; in sorrow thou 
shalt bring forth children; and thy desire shall be to thy husband; and he shall rule over theea€™ 
a€!

But surely women as equal participants in society, rather than just chattels, classified as a 
little bit above slaves and cattle, can do a lot. Wea€”optimistica€’’economists have a strong bias 
toward believing that people in groups will find ways to become, collectively, more productive and 
then to distribute the fruits of higher productivity in a way that makes such a more productive 
social order sustainable. But apparently not.

The bio-demographic underpinnings of the cultural pattern of high male supremacy began to erode 
even before 1870. But it was over 1870-2016 that these underpinnings dissolved. Reductions in 
infant mortality, the advancing average age of marriage, and the increasing costs of child raising 
together drove a decrease in fertility. The number of years the typical woman spent eating for two 
fell from twentya€”if she survived her childbeda€”down to four, as
better sanitation, much better nutrition, and more knowledge about disease made many pregnancies 
less necessary for leaving surviving descendants, and as birth control technology made it easier to 
plan families. And, after exploding in the Industrial Age, the rate of population growth in the 
industrial core slowed drastically. The population explosion turned out to be a relatively 
short-run thing. Human population growth rapidly headed for zero long-run
population growth.

The path of within-the-household technological advance also worked to the benefit of the typical 
woman over 1870-2016: dishwashers, dryers, vacuum cleaners, improved chemical cleansing products, 
other electrical and natural gas appliances, and so on, especially clothes-washing machinesa€”all 
these made the tasks of keeping the household clean, ordered, and functioning much easier. 
Maintaining a nineteenth-century, high-fertility household was a much
more than full-time job. Maintaining a late twentieth-century household could become more like a 
part-time job. And so much female labor that had been tied to full-time work within the household 
because of the backward state of household technology became a reserve that could now be used for 
other purposes. And, as Betty Friedan wrote in the early 1960s, women who sought something like 
equal status could find it only if they found a€oeidentitya€!in
worka€! for which, usually, our society pays.a€D As long as women were confined to separate, 
domestic, occupations which the market did not reward with cash, it was easy for men to denigrate 
and minimize.

Global Divergence

In 1870, when the long twentieth century began, British industry stood at the leading edge of 
economic and technological progress, and the worlda€™ s real income per capita had reached perhaps 
$6,000 a year. However, that was already at least double what was found anywhere outside the 
400-mile radius charmed circle centered on the British port of Dover, plus Britaina€™ s overseas 
settler colonies, and the United States, its ex-colony. Outside this nascent
global north, our standard estimates show annual income per capita levels with a spread of a factor 
of five, ranging from $600 in the poorer parts of Africa to $3,000 in those European economies 
about to join the global north. The curve is heavily weighted toward the lower end, because China 
and India were then in the down-phase of the Malthusian cycle. The average per capita annual income 
level within the global south alone was perhaps $1,300.

By 1911 the world had growna€’’largely together. Global-south incomes were now spread by a factor 
of almost six, ranging from $700 to $4,000a€”with Russia, fueled by French loan capital to build 
its railways, in the lead. The global-south center of gravity had inched up to perhaps $1,500. But 
the Global North had forged ahead too.

What happened then was strikingly at variance with the expectations of neoclassical, neoliberal, 
and neoliberal-adjacent economists like myself, who hold that discovery isa€”or should bea€”more 
difficult than development, that development is more difficult than deployment, and so that the 
world economy should a€ceconvergea€D over time. Between 1911 and 1990 that did not happen. The 
opposite did: the world economy diverged to a stunning degree. The
economies of the Global South did not catch up to, or even keep pace with, the fast-runners of 
economic growth and development.

The global south did grow, by and large. But it did not catch up. Latin America lost a decade of 
development in the 1980s. As of the early 2020s, Chile and Panama are the only Latin American 
countries that are better off than China, while Mexico, Costa Rica, and Brazil are Chinaa€™ s rough 
equals. In Africa, only Botswana. In Asia, only Japan, the Four Tigersa€’’South Korea, Taiwan, Hong 
Kong, and Singaporea€”Malaysia, and Thailand. The gap between
China and the global north is still a factor of about 3.5 to 1. It was not all disappointing: 
progress in education and health was rapid and extremely heartening. But that did not hide the 
disappointing growth in material production.

And Africa has fallen way, way behind: South Africa, Kenya, Zambia, Ghana, and Nigeriaa€”all those 
for which in the 1960s there were great expectations for economic developmenta€”have fallen well 
short of their promise.

In 1950, more than half the worlda€™ s population still lived in extreme poverty: at the living 
standard of our typical pre-industrial ancestors. By 1990 it was down to a quarter. By 2010 it 
would be less than 12 percent. And in 1950, most of this extreme poverty was spread throughout the 
global south. Thereafter it would become concentrated in Africa, where, by 2010, some three-fifths 
of the worlda€™ s extreme poor would reside. This concentration came as
a surprise: there had been few signs back in the late colonial days of palm oil, groundnuts, 
cotton, and cocoa exportsa€”the days when Zambia was more industrialized than, and almost as rich 
as, Portugala€”that Africa south of the Sahara would fall further and further behind, and not just 
behind the global north, but behind the rest of the global south as well. Thinkers like Nathan Nunn 
grappled with this data and concluded that this retardation had something to
do with the massive slave trades that had afflicted Africa in previous years.


The first post-colonial African head of government to have been assassinated was Nigerian prime 
minister Abubakar Tafawa Balewa. He had been born in the north of the British colony of Nigeria in 
1912 and had been sent to boarding school at Katsina College. There, he was student number 145, to 
be slotted into the imperial bureaucracy as a teacher of English. He did very well. By 1941 he was 
a headmaster. In 1944 he was sent to University College London,

to be trained to become a schools inspector for the colonial administration.

But earlier, back when he was twenty-two, in 1934, a colonial official named Rupert East had 
commissioned five novellas, to be written in Hausa, in an attempt to spread literacy. In his short 
novel Shaihu Umar {Wise Umar), the protagonista€™ s students distract him from teaching them the 
Quran by asking him how he came to be a teacher. The story that follows is of his enslavement and 
its consequences: large-scale slave raids, kidnappings, adoptions by
childless slavers, and more kidnappings. The protagonist finally meets up with his mother (she has 
been kidnapped and enslaved too, by the guards she had hired) in Tripoli. She sees that he is pious 
and prosperous, and then she promptly dies. The vibe is that a€oepeople really will do terrible 
things for moneya€na€”and not for large amounts of money eithera€”and that a€oethe world is a 
Hobbesian war of all against all, but if you read the Quran really well,
then youa€™ 11 probably prosper, maybe .a€D

In January 1966 he was murdered in the military coup led by the Young Majorsa€”Chukwuma Kaduna 
Nzeogwu and company a€’’whose troops slaughtered senior politicians and their generals and their 
wives, and then were themselves suppressed by a countercoup led by army commander Johnson 
Aguiyi-Ironsi. Aguiyi-Ironsi was assassinated six months later in a July counter-countercoup led by 
Yakuba Gowon. A year later the Igbo people declared the
independent republic of Biafra, which was suppressed after a three-year war causing some 4 million 
deaths (out of a population of about 55 million), the overwhelming majority of them Igbo dead of 
starvation. Yakuba Gowon was overthrown by Murtala Muhammed in July 1975. And Murtala was then 
assassinated in February 19. A return to civilian rule in 1979 lasted only until 1983, when the 
next military coup took place in Nigeria.

Global Inequality: A Great Divergence

From 1800 to 2018:

• The dots start with a 3-1 spread
in incomes and a 10-year
spread in life expectancy.

• All the arrows go up.

• Some arrows—mostly those
already to the right—go right
fast.

• Other arrows go right slowly.

500          1000          2000          4000          8000          16k          32k          64k

Inromp ▼


O

32k         64k

From 1800 to 2018:

• The dots start with a 3-1 spread
in incomes and a 10-year
spread in life expectancy.

• All the arrows go up.

• Some arrows—mostly those
already to the right—go right
fast.

• Other arrows go right slowly.

Econ 135 S2023 Day 5 Inequality

39.1MB a™ PDF File
Download

Download

Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.
Share

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Inromp

Econ 135 S2023 Day 5 Inequality

39.1MB r™ PDF File
Download

Download

Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.
Share

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

