Subscribe now

FOCUS: It Is Harmful to My Psychological Health for Me to Read David Brooks:

Seeking therapy after reading a column by David Brooks, by Stable Diffusion via NightCafe

David Brooks says: I did not do my job. I have not been doing my job for twenty years. Yet I do not 
apologize for drawing my paycheck and holding onto my job:

David Brooks: The Partya€™ s Over for Us. Where Do We Go Now?: a€~By the early 2000s, I came to 
believe that the free market policies that were right to combat stagnation and sclerosis a few 
decades earlier were not right for an age of inequality and social breakdown. Then the 
congressional Republicans began to oppose almost every positive federal good, even George W. 
Busha€™ s compassionate
conservatism...

Do you think that maybe doing your job required telling your readers back at the time, in the early 
2000s, that neoliberal supply-side conservatism was played out? Do you think that maybe doing your 
job required telling your readers back at the time, in the early 2000s, that a€oecompassionate 
conservatisma€£J was very weak and unsatisfactory tea? What conception of a€oedoing your joba€D do 
you have that does not include doing those
two things in the early 2000s?

David Brooks: The Partya€™ s Over for Us. Where Do We Go Now?: a€~In the 2000 Republican primaries 
I enthusiastically supported John McCain. I believed in his approach to governance and I admired 
him enormously. But by 2008, when he got the nomination, the party had shifted and McCain had 
shifted along with it. I walked into the polling booth that November genuinely not knowing if I 
would vote for
McCain or Barack Obama. Then an optical illusion flashed across my brain. McCain and Obamaa€™ s 
names appeared to be written on the ballot in 12-point type. But Sarah Palina€™ s name looked like 
it was written in red in 24-point type. I dona€™ t think Ia€™ ve ever said this publicly before, 
but I voted for Obamaa€!

Do you think that maybe doing your job required telling your readers back at the time, in 2008, 
that Sarah Palin was a dealbreaker for you, and that you had voted for Obama-Biden? What conception 
of a€redoing your joba€D do you have?

David Brooks: The Partya€™ s Over for Us. Where Do We Go Now?: a€~I wish we had taken that Buchanan 
victory [in the 1992 Republican New Hampshire primary] more seriously, since it was a precursor of 
what was to come. I wish we had pivoted our conservatism even faster away from (sorry) Wall Street 
Journal editorial page ideas and come up with conservative approaches to inequality, to 
deindustrialization,
to racial disparities, etc. I wish, in other words, that our mentalities had shifted fastera€!

Do you think that maybe doing your job required telling your readers sometime beforfe now that you 
wish you had, back in 1993, joined with the Rubin Wing of the Democratic Party rather than the 
Gingrich Wing of the Republican Party? What conception of a€redoing your joba€D do you have that 
does not include doing those two things in the early 2000s?
In fact, why didna€™t you join with the Rubin Wing of the Democratic Party back in 1993, when you 
had some influence? We certainly could have used your influence. As it was, we were able to do 
enough to give America its best decade since 1955-1965. But we could have given much more if we had 
only been a little bit stronger.

Why didna€™t you join with and work alongside us? We had very strong technocratic, reality-based 
arguments. And it is not that you had made a strong commitment to play for Team Republican:

David Brooks: The Partya€™ s Over for Us. Where Do We Go Now?: a€~Even in my red-hot youtha€! I 
didna€™ t see myself as a Republican, just a conservative^!. Ita€™ s always wrong for a writer to 
align too closely to a partya€!. Furthermore, I belong in the American traditiona€! Hamiltona€! the 
Whig Party and Lincolna€! Theodore Roosevelt, parts of Reagan and McCain. I wasted years writing 
essays on
how Republicans could maintain this traditiona€!. I think the Democrats are a better Hamiltonian 
homea€!

When you have spent your entire career working diligently to tear down the political power of 
Democrats and build up the political power of Republicans, to now say a€reMy Bad!a€D, and to go on 
drinking cocktails and chatting as usuala€’’rather than giving all you have to the poor, shutting 
up, and taking up a life of anonymous service to othersa€! I wona€™t say that words fail me, but I 
am genuinely flummoxed.
Share


AfTTOT TIT? ATA. T          ~ XT     TATA 4 T7T — XT „ 04. 4 ^r^Z?^TT1^4

„ ~PT?~

— —I                .


iviuo        Dctiurc i^utcs ryixM.r A wr iicAi AUC^UUJ oiaii ui a^urmsivij vi ILCUIIUIIIIC 
vriuwuia^i—i cuuisc;


LECTURE NOTES: DAY 1: Introduction: Five Questions Surrounding the Identification of 1870 as the 
Hinge of History
Let me talk for a while, and then leta€™ s see if we can have a successful discussion here 
afterwardsa€!

Read more

2 months ago A- 3 likes A- Brad DeLong
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

ONE IMAGE: World Economic Hotspots:

Microregions that account for half of the GDP generated globally
from 2000 to 2019


Note: The boundaries and names shown on this map do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by 
McKinsey & Company.
Regions ranked in descending order by level increase in GDP per km2 (GDP per km2 in 2019 minus GDP 
per km2 in 2000).

Growth is defined as the net increase in GDP produced by a given region from 2000 to 2019.

Mrkincow A

Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Joe Weisenthal: a€~There's not going to be a debt ceiling negotiation because the GOP in 
Congress has zero leverage on the question. So they're gonna make Treasury switch from debt 
financing to coin financing? Big whoopaCI

•  Andrew Freedman: a€~In essence, Exxon didna€™ t just know, they knew precisely" how much the 
Earth would warm in the 20th and 21st centuries, decades ago. Interesting new study out todaya€!

•  Betony Jones: a€~It's really happening. The U.S. is rapidly growing a battery industry from 
scratch. The future is brighta€!

•  Dan Shipper: a€~GPT-3 is the best journal I've ever used. It feels like a warm and supportive 
friend who can ask the right questions, and pull out patterns in your thinking you may have missed. 
The possibilities are endless. Here's how I use ita€!

•  Eric Gilliam: A Report on Scientific Branch-Creation: a€~How the Rockefeller Foundation helped 
bootstrap the field of molecular biologya€!

•  Dan Zak: The boring journey of Matthew Yglesias: a€~The Washington ur-bloggera€™ s lightly 
contrarian, mildly annoying, somewhat influential, very lucrative path toward the political 
center...

•  No Lie with Brian Tyler Cohen: a€~Kevin McCarthy just said George Santos shouldna€™ t resign 
because a€oea lot ofa€D his colleagues also lie. He really said the quiet part out loud.

•  Oliver Willis: Nothing The Right Freaks Out About Is Real: a€~Pick a so-called controversy, any 
controversy. a€ceObama phones.a€D Critical race theory. Drag queen story hour. Iraqi weapons of 
mass destruction. The Green New Deal. Genderless potato head toys. Migrant caravans. Cities burned 
down by Antifa. M&Ma€™ s that arena€™ t sexy enough. M&Ma€™ s in a lesbian relationship. 
Transgender M&Ma€™ sa€!. None
of it is real. Not a single, solitary moment of it. It is completely fake...

•  Betsey Stevenson: a€~If we ever really get like North Korea we'll be crying about how we let the 
Kari Lakes of America dismantle our democracy. You don't know what you've got 'til it's gone, 
despite this try your hardest worry now...

• Lavie Tidhar: a€~I think I'm really beginning to lose the will to live with Twitter: a€oeThe 
a€~For youa€™ and a€~Followinga€™ tabs replace a€~Homea€™ and a€~Latesta€™ and will be pinned to 
the top of your timeline so you can easily switch between them. Swipe to switch timelines instead 
of tappinga€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Brad DeLong: Seneca vs. Posidonius on WheAMer Technology Is Philosophy: a€~Posidonius for, Seneca 
against; it is a pity that the monks erased all the surviving manuscripts of Posidonius: he sounds 
like somebody it would have been good to get to know, virtually a€”an urban Greek polymath would 
almost surely have been better company than a Roman aristocrata€!


Matt Yglesias: The most important 2016 "misinformation" came from the regular news media: a€~It 
wasna€™ t the GRU that made The New York Times run [its] front page on the weekend before Election 
Day. Reasonable people can, to an extent, disagree about the appropriateness of the coverage of the 
Clinton email story in The New York Times and on network broadcast news during the 2016 campaign. 
But what I dona€™ t think can be
seriously doubted is that this coverage was: High-profile and seen by more people than any 
information operation. Not a€oefake newsa€D in the original sense of being willfully made up. 
Damaging to ClintonaC™ s election prospectsa€!. After the election, the Times published a lot of 
great journalism about the Trump White House and also benefitted financially from a liberal 
subscriber base that saw the Times as a bastion of freedom and
enlightenment in a dark timea€!. But the fact remainsa€! blame for Trumpa€™ s narrow victory over 
Clintona€! [from those shaping the] information environmental [belongs on] the most influential 
mainstream news outlets in Americaa€!

Tyler Cowen: Dream Bureaucracy Jobs: a€~The Aztec bureaucracy before CortA©s arriveda€!. It wasn't 
a very pleasant bureaucracy, but it must have done a lot of things very wella€L The Aztec Triple 
Alliancea€! was a truly remarkable civilizationaCI canalsa€! biotechnologya€! untutored (in the 
formal sense) farmers in central Mexico playing around with plant breeding led to achievements that 
no other civilization has come close to,
including ours as far as I can tell. An extraordinarily impressive set of people and culture; the 
language, Nahuatl, is beautiful; the poetrya€”what we know about them; the quality of the fooda€! 
It all just seems incrediblea€!

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

