Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) A very nice and very fair discussion of what the risks of a medium-run inflationary spiral of 
any serious magnitude actually are:

Francesco Da€™Acunto & Michael Weber: A Temporary Increase in Inflation Is Not a Long-Run Threat to 
U.S. Economic Growth & Prosperity.
a€~ After a decade of below-target rates of inflationa€! the incipient economic recovery in the 
United States from the coronavirus recession is suddenly
turning the tables on the debatea€!. In May 2021, the Consumer Price Index registered inflation 
running at 5 percent, the highest reading in a decade for

this broad measure of pricesa€”so high that some observers worry about strong and sustained 
inflation and reference the stagflationary period of the 1970s.
At the same time, the Federal Reserve is largely downplaying these concerns, so much so that in 
late June, Fed Chair Jerome Powell argued before
Congress that a€oeit is very, very unlikelya€D that the United States will face strong inflationary 
pressures going forward. Prolonged periods of high
inflation                                                                        do have direct and 
immediate effects on the macroeconomy and also the potential for more subtle effects of further 
increasing economic inequality
and crimping more sustainable and more equitable growtha€!. What should policymakers really expect 
to happen to inflation over the next 2 to 5 years?

The answer is important, as the Biden administration and the U.S. Congress debate the merits of the 
proposed infrastructure packages to address fragilities
in the U.S. economy and move it toward more stable and sustainable economic growtha€!. We need to 
stress that the recent 5 percent inflation rate appears
much less concerning once we account fora€! the base rate effecta€!. Policymakers should expect 
more moderate Consumer Price Index inflation readings
going forward. But there still remain four very relevant potential drivers of inflation over the 
next 2 years: Demand pressures. Supply chain disruptions.

Labor market pressures. Inflation expectations. Wea€™ 11 examine in this column the extent to which 
these four factors might or might not be relevanta€!
LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/a-temporary-increase-in-inflation-is-not-a-long-run-threat-to-u-s-econo
mic-growth-and-prosperity/>

2) We are highlighting grantees as they speak at the NBER summer institute. This is the most-see 
presentation and the must-read paper of the year as far as understanding what we
know about the causes of inflation in the United States have been for the past half-century:

Equitable Growth: a€™ Today wea€™ re kicking off EG grantee presentations at the NBER Summer 
Institute! First up right now: Emi Nakamura,
Jonathon Hazell, JA3n Steinsson & Juan Herreno with aCceThe Slope of the Phillips Curvea€D. Watch: 
<https://t.co/TCXo6OrqL5>

LINK: <https://twitter.com/equitablegrowth/status/1414600575333847045>

3) It is not clear to me what a a€ce whole governmenta€D approach is, exactly. And it is not clear 
what serious impact agencies other than Justice and FTC can have. So I am
anxious to learn more, and to watch this to see how it evolves:

Michael Kades: a€™ By all accounts, the Executive Order reflects a policy decision that promoting 
competition requires a whole government approach.
This idea was one of three principles in Equitable Growtha€™ s transition report: <https://t. 
co/0grfzl9iYb https://t.co/NUEYCPEErS>

<https://equitablegrowth.org/research-paper/restoring-competition-in-the-united-states/>
LINK: <https://twitter.com/Michael_Kades/status/1413309595355947Q14>

4) Let me hoist this back from early 2019. It turns out that my feelings were more general among 
left-neoliberals and ex-left-neoliberals and quasi-left-neoliberals than I had
thoughta€”or maybe things crystalized in 2019 and 2020, with the Trumpist Cultural Revolution 
sweeping through the Republican Party:

Zach Beauchamp: A Clinton-Era Democrat Makes the Case for the Left: a€~Ita€™ s time to give 
democratic socialists a chance: a€ceThe baton rightly
passes to our colleagues on our lefta€!a€D

LINK: 
<https://www.vox.eom/policv-and-politics/2019/3/4/18246381/democrats-clinton-sanders-left-brad-delon
g>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)When there is only one institution that is even semi-competent and semi-functional, people tend 
to load all kinds of tasks onto it. On the other hand, the previous rA©gime in
which the central bank was supposed to stick to its inflation-control knitting and so make all 
other arms of government aware that doing their job was their responsibility, and that
the central bank would not life a finger to get them out of jams they had entered via incompetence 
and malfeasancea€”that has not served us well at all over the past generation:

Adam Tooz: Climate Crisis Offers Way Out of Monetary Orthodoxy. a€~0n July 8th the European Central 
Bank announced the results of the Monetary
Policy Strategy Review initiated by its president, Christine Lagardea€!. Lagarde shepherded the 
ECBa€™ s General Council into unanimous agreement on
a terse statement about the banka€™ s policy regimea€!. It is 18 years since the bank last 
conducted a strategic reviewa€!. All over the world central
bankers have been forced to become crisis-fighters. They face deflationary headwinds which invert 
the terms of the economic-policy debate that in the
1980s spawned the model of independent central banks. Whether in the advanced economies or emerging 
markets, central banks now engage in policies,
such as large-scale asset purchases, once considered anathema. On top of that, over the last ten 
years social inequality and climate change have been thrust
to the forefront of central-bank policy. Against this backdrop, in the United States the Federal 
Reserve launched a policy review which concluded in
August 2020, leading to a redefinition of its inflation target. This spring the Bank of England was 
told to focus on climate change. In 2018 the Reserve
Bank                                                                       of New Zealand, once the 
paradigm of the single-minded, inflation-targeting central bank, had full employment added to its 
objectives; in February
2021 house-price stability was also inserted. In March 2020 the Reserve Bank of Australia decided 
to follow the Bank of Japan in adopting a€~yield-curve
controla€™ , capping the growth of medium-term borrowing costs. We are in a period of unprecedented 
experimentation in central-bank policy a€!

LINK: <https://socialeurope.eu/climate-crisis-offers-wav-out-of-monetary-orthodoxv>

2) To think that we Clinton Democrats got within one vote in the Senate of starting an effective 
global warming-control initiative back in 1993. One vote. One single vote. With no
help from anybody else:

Brian K. Sullivan: Heat Scorches U.S. West as Records Fall Across the Region: a€~Las Vegas tied its 
hottest all-time temperature Saturday. Fire risk
remains high in U.S., Canada as dry air prevailsa€!. Searing heat continues to scorch the western 
U.S., with Las Vegas tying its highest temperature ever
and downtown Sacramento, California, setting a new second-highest mark on Saturday and relief at 
least a day awaya€!. Readings reached 113F in
Sacramento as heat continues to grip the western U.S. at least for a few more daysa€!. Excessive 
heat warnings and advisories reach from Oregon south to
the California-Mexico border and push east into Utah, Idaho and Arizona, affecting at least 22 
million people. In addition, the dry, hot air is keeping the fire
risk high across much of the region and straining electric grids as people crank up their air 
conditioners. Sundaya€™ s highs could reach 108F in
Sacramento, 112F in Fresno, California, and 112F in Phoenixa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2Q21-07-ll/heat-scorches-u-s-west-as-records-fall-across-th
e-region>

3) Post-World War II American business was successful because its leaders understood that they 
needed to demonstrate that the fruits of higher productivity growth were being
divided among all stakeholders, rather than being hoarded for managers and shareholders alone. A 
business class that opposes equitable growth is not likely to have a bright future,
no matter how high that makes short-term profits:


juiiamaii uti iiaiviii. 2          20 W LjUiLay 2 tctcc jut u.o. UMM/LCW. ax; ± wvuimiax^ L want tu 
uv a pvutivai OLiaivgiOL IUI v/.o. uuoinvoo iigin iivw. xnv

natural position of business in U.S. politics is to be an independent interest group, aligned with 
neither party. That allows business interests to lobby
whichever party is in officea€!. During a time of strong partisan polarization, however, thata€™ s 
a difficult stance to maintain. Unless businesses choose
sides, theya€™re apt to lose influence. Business for the last century has generally been more 
comfortable on the Republican side. But todaya€™ s
Republicans are a mess. Not only are they increasingly using anti-business rhetoric, buta€! well, 
have you looked at todaya€™ s Republicans?Business
tends    to be uncomfortable with the anti-democratic Republican agendaa€!. Even when Republicans 
arena€™ t trying to overturn elections and risk all sorts
of chaos, their opposition to pragmatic deal-making and compromise are hardly the kind of 
atmosphere thata€™ s good for business. Business leaders are
presumably even more uncomfortable with Republican policies that seem destructive for no particular 
reason at all. A botched reaction to the pandemic
was    bad, but could perhaps be written off as simply a consequence of having Donald Trump in the 
White House. But now Republican agitation (including
in Republican-aligned media) against the vaccine is both a big threat to the economy and cana€™ t 
be blamed on Trump, who more or less supports
vaccination. Trumpa€™ s erratic policy leadership on trade, immigration and more had already 
sometimes pushed business away from the Republican
Party. Thata€™ s even more true now. And with Trump as their leader, many Republicans arena€™t 
hesitant to use government power to punish those
they  feel have betrayed them. But ita€™ s not as if a move to the Democratic Party is an appealing 
option for a lot of business executives. While
Republicans have become increasingly incoherent on policy, Democrats have moved in a liberal 
direction, as demonstrated clearly by President Joe
Bidena€™    s initiative last week to increase competition and boost employee bargaining power, 
which drew prompt business oppositiona€!

LINK: <https://www.bloomberg 
.com/opinion/articles/2021-07-12/politics-is-a-lonely-place-for-u-s-business-kr0jpxeO>

4) Cutting corporate taxes did not boost investment in America. Thus there is no reason to think 
that raising them will retard investment in America:

Daniel N. Shaviro: Taxing Multinational Corporations: a€~Proponents of the 2017 Tax Cut and Jobs 
Act (TCJA) argued at the time of its enactment that
cutting the United States corporate tax rate from 35 percent to 21 percent would spur investment in 
the United States, particularly by multinational
corporationsa€!. There is an emerging consensus that the reduction of the corporate tax rate from 
35 percent to 21 percent in the 2017 Tax Cut and Jobs
Act      fell well short of raising investment to the extent the lawa€™ s proponents had advocated. 
In addition, the TCJA appears to have resulted in a
substantial reduction in government revenue. The disappointing investment and revenue response to 
the TCJA reflects some important features of the
current   tax and economic environment; among these is companiesa€™ ability to earn high profits in 
a country through valuable intellectual property (IP)
that need not be generated in that countrya€!. The Biden Administration^™ s 2021 tax proposals 
offer two main responses to the concern that increasing
taxation of the foreign source income of multinational corporations based in the United States will 
lead to a reduction in their investments. First, the Biden
Administration plan aims to strengthen the existing anti-inversion rulesa€!. Second, it aims, by 
multiple meansa€l to reduce tax competition between
countries    and increase the extent to which they instead cooperate towards ensuring that highly 
profitable multinational companies will pay significant taxes
somewherea€l

LINK: 
<https://mailchi.mp/econofact/what-are-the-lasting-effects-of-exposure-to-school-shootings-499622?e=
0c86af5cbd>

5) This is a whole set of issues with respect to Chinaa€™ s governance that I had never thought 
about. Kudos to Isabella Weber to doing the research, and thanks to Adam Tooze for
bringing it to my attention. I would point out that a€cegradualisma€D was not an option for Eastern 
Europe after 1991a€”things had been left too late, much too late:

Adam Tooze: Chartbook Newsletter #26: a€~One of the remarkable things about China under the rule of 
the Communist Party is its aversion to inflation.
Since 2020 the regime has been making a point of emphasizing its resistance to Western-style 
monetary experimentation. Fascinating background is
provided                                                                     by Isabella WeberaC™ s 
timely book about Chinaa€™ s price reform discussion of the 1980s. Weber argues that the stability 
of the CCP regime
today owes much to the rejection of shock therapy a la Russe, urged on it by Western and East 
European advisors in the 1980s. Instead China opted for a
gradualist program of price liberalization combined with the crackdown of 1989. This more cautious 
and ultimately far more successful approach was
justified in the eyes of CCP experts by concerns about inflation. And that in turn owed much to the 
lessons learned by the Communists during the period of
World War II and the civil war. One of the main forces enabling the CCPa€™ s overthrow of Chiang 
Kai-shek in 1949 was the economic disaster suffered
by the Nationalist regime. The Communists were swept to power on a tidal wave of dissatisfaction 
over a ruinous hyperinflation^!

LINK: chttps ://adamtooze .substack .com/p/chartbook-newsletter-26>

6) Consequences for productivity and for the location of economic activity from what has happened 
ina€”what will have happened by the end ofa€”the plague years will be
enormous. And we do not yet understand what they will turn out to have been:

Nick Bilon: a€cel Dona€™ t Think Ia€™ ll Ever Go Backa€E2: Return-to-Office Agita Is Sweeping 
Silicon Valley: a€~As more of America gets
vaccinated, executivesa€’’especially in techa€”are facing a conundrum: a scattered workforce, 
employees enchanted by the WFH lifestyle, and million­
dollar campuses standing vacant. a€oeThey can turn [it] into a museum as far as Ia€™ m 
concerned,a€D says one tech workera€!. Executives and
CEOsa€! worried that their employees would morph into indolence, video gaming, sleeping in, 
Netflixing and chilling. In facta€! Zoom and Airtable, and
invisible tech like automation and A.I. at work in the background, allowed people, and in turn 
businesses, to thrive in their new environs. Productivity
began   to rise, and is expected to continue to do so in the coming years, prompting the question: 
Are offices all theya€™re cracked up to be?a€! In most
instances, the people Ia€™ ve spoken to are doing everything they can to not be called back to the 
physical office. a€oela€™ ve been just as productivea€”
actually more product! vea€’’working in the middle of nowhere than I was on campus in the Bay 
Area,a€D one Google employee who moved to a remote
farm during the pandemic told me. a€oeMy teammates are strewn all over the planet, I think the last 
18 months has proven that it makes no difference if
Ia€™ m here or there.a€D A Hollywood producer told me that, at first, he dreaded the idea of not 
being able to attend meetings in person, but halfway
through the pandemic he gave up his companya€™ s office (a $500,000-a-month expense) and now hosts 
meetings by taking long walks on the beach or
hiking the trails in Malibu. a€oel dona€™ t think Ia€™ 11 ever go back to the office,a€D he told 
mea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.vanitvfair.com/news/2021/07/covid-return-to-office-agita-sweeping-silicon-valley>

7) Right-wing ex-radio talk show host Charlie Sykes watches as the conservative movement continues 
its downward spiral into aa€! I guess misinformation and death culta€”that
seems to be the only way to describe it:

Charlie Sykes: Jesus, Guns, COVID Denialism: a€~CPAC was a weekend of Deplorable Mad Libsa€!. No 
single moment fully captured the intellectual
tone of this weekend CPAC conference in Dallas, although the burst of applause for vaccination 
resistance might have come closea€!. The rest of the
weekend was a cross between a game of Deplorable Mad Libs and cray-cray Voice-in-Your-Head 
stuffa€!. This weekendaC™ s confederacy of dunces
(with apologies to John Kennedy Oa€™ Toole) wasa€! a window into what conservativism has becomeaCI 
standing up for neo-Nazis and Holocaust
deniers                                                                      on social media 
platforms, while pushing to fire school teachers and college professors who teach forbidden topics 
in schools. This is not be
confused with a€oecancel culture,a€D which is now exclusively deployed to refer to virtually any 
criticism aimed at right wing figures. They a€oeback the
bluea€D except, of course, for the jack-booted thugs who assaulted the brave patriots of l/6a€!

LINK: <https://morningshots.thebulwark.eom/p/jesus-guns-covid-denialism>

8) And the Republican Party continues its downward spiral into aa€”I do not know what. We think and 
think about what we can do to try to help them. And I, at least, keep coming
up with nothing. A political party without a trace of a spine is a bizarre thing indeed:

David Atkins: Trump Praises the Capitol Insurrection. Will the GOP Dare to Follow?: a€~Most 
Republicans in leaderships “and most Republican
votersa€“would like nothing more than to move on and pretend the insurrection never took placea€!. 
At the same time, they themselves pretend to talk
about    Scereal issuesSD facing todaya€™ s voters. But Donald Trump cana€™ t let it goa€!. 
Speaking on a€ceSunday Morning Futures with Maria
BartiromoSn on the Fox News Channel, he also said the rally participants were patriots, that some 
of them were unjustly arrested and jailed, and that a
woman                                                                     who was shot and killed 
by law enforcement during the insurrection was a great hero: a€™ a€oeThe crowd was unbelievable and 
I mentioned the
word a€~love,a€™ the love in the air, Ia€™ ve never seen anything like it,a€D he said of his rally 
on the Ellipse. a€oeThata€™ s why they went to
Washington.a€D He added: a€oeToo much spirit and faith and love, there was such love at that rally, 
you had over a million people,a€D inflating the size
of his rally crowd. He also reiterated the conservative movementa€™ s obsession with identifying 
the law enforcement officer who shot Ashli Babbitt, the


violent insurrectionist who first jumped through the final flimsy barrier between the murderous mob 
and members of Congress just yards awaya€.

LINK: 
<https://washingtonmonthly.com/2021/07/12/trump-praises-the-capitol-insurrection-will-the-gop-dare-t
o-follow/>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

