Subscribe now

FIRST: I Really Like Oded Galora€™s Very Good and Very Brand-New The Journey of Humanity: The 
Origins of Wealth and Inequality

And it gets a very nice review <https 
://www.amazon.com/Journey-Humanity-Origins-Wealth-Inequality/dp/0593185994/>:

Simon Kuper: Oded Galor Explores the Ancient Roots of Modern Life: a€~The plough versus the hoe is 
one of many fascinating examples in Oded Galora€™ s booka€! The Journey of Humanity 
<https://www.amazon.com/Journev-Humanity-Origins-Wealth-Inequality/dp/Q593185994/>a€!. Before the 
19th century, a family that had advanced beyond subsistence was incentivised to have more 
childrena€!. When modern factories
emerged and the service economy began to develop, a familya€™ s calculations changeda€!. Instead of 
having lots of children and sending them out to work, parents began to have fewer, and to spend 
money educating them, so that the kids could earn more over their careers. This was a particularly 
good investment once improved medical knowledge extended lifespansa€!. The worlda€™ s most advanced 
countries thus began to escape
the Malthusian trapa€!. Eventually the whole world lurched forwarda€!.

People from regions with high crop yields are rewarded for being future-orienteda€!. What has 
madea€! exchange of ideas particularly productive, argues Galor, is that Europeans are divided into 
different national traditions, each with its own knowledge and mindseta€!. In what feels like one 
of the booka€™ s moments of overreach, Galor tries to quantify the contribution of underlying 
factors to todaya€™ s a€oevariation in prosperity
between nationsa€D. He concludes that a€oegeoclimatic characteristics account for about 
two-fifthsa€D, a€oethe disease environment for about one-seventha€D, while a€oeethnocultural 
factors account for one-fiftha€Da€!.

Galora€! estimates that perhaps a quarter of the differences in prosperity between nations are due 
to human diversitya€!. a€oecultural, linguistic, behavioural and physical diversitya€Da€l. Homo 
sapiens arose in East Africaa€! and so that region is today the worlda€™ s most diverse; Galor 
deems Ethiopia the apogeea€!. The further humans strayed from East Africa, the smaller and less 
diverse were the travelling groups. He cites
Bolivia as one of the worlda€™ s least diverse countries. Now comes his claim: too much diversity 
is bad for prosperity, but so is too little diversity. Highly diverse societies are prone to 
conflict but homogeneous societies tend to be less innovativea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.newstatesman.com/culture/books/2022/04/oded-galor-explores-the-ancient-roots-of-modern-
life>

I remember showing up at the Clinton administration treasury department in the spring of 1993, and 
having coffee with one of the CEA senior staff economists, and asking him what he thought of 
Clintons CEA membersa€’’Laura Tyson, Joe Stiglitz, and Alan Blinder. He said Laura was absolutely 
first-class, wonderfula€”on everything except trade issues, where she was a little weird and had a 
few hobbyhorses of her own to ride. He said Alan Blinder was truly
greata€’’except that on macro issues he expected the government to be able to successfully 
fine-tune the economy more than was reasonable. And he said that Joe Stiglitz was superba€’’except 
that wherever there was some micro issue that hinged on market structure, he had a proposal for a 
crazy restructuring to rejigger peoplea€™ s information and decision sets to make everything much 
better. In short: they were wise where they were drawing on and
applying the near-consensus of the profession, and unreliable in their particular areas of 
expertise where they thought they new better than the profession.

I have a somewhat similar feeling about Oded Galora€™ s truly wonderfully written The Journey of 
Humanitya€”: it is greata€”where Oded to laying out the near-consensus of the profession. It is 
very interesting, but unreliable, where Oded differs from the average of the rest of us because he 
thinks he knows better.

Take Odeda€™ s belief that we can and should account for the demographic transitiona€”the reduction 
in fertility that has liberated us from the spell of the Devil of Malthusa€”to the coming of 
industrial- and service-sector technologies that raised the return to education and a€oehuman 
capitala€D, and thus induced parents to seek to have fewer children so that they could devote more 
resources to getting each of their children an education and so get them

well-launched into life. Well, yes, to some degree. But the fertility transition starts in France, 
in the 1700s. And its pattern really does not seem to fit times and places where formal literacy 
and numeracy give you a big leg up in the job market as an adult. Rather, when I look at the 
pattern of the fertility transition, I see places where, secondarily, inheritance customs make it 
dangerous to have too many sons survive to adulthood because then each will be left with
a farm too small to survive on. And I see places where, primarily, falling infant and childhood 
mortality makes it unlikely that you will be left without surviving sons.


1851-1855               1871-1875               1891-1895               1911-1915

Year


---- France

— — Norway

Netherlands

.     Sweden

---- England

.   Germany

Figure 8. Children per Woman in Western European Nations, 1850-1920141

Think about it: for most of agrarian age history, middle-aged females only have any social power at 
all if they have surviving sons. Outliving your husband and your sons is a true catastrophe. Yet 
under Malthusian conditions, about 1/3 of mothers will be left without surviving sons. In my view 
this leads mothers to care little about the value of giving each of their sons (and perhaps 
daughters) more of a leg-up by reducing the division of family resources among
many children. It leads mothers to care much about striving for yet another pregnancy as insurance 
in the hope of avoiding winding-up in the son-less 30%. Thus it is the prosperity and resulting 
improved public heath that diminishes early mortality rather than any sectoral change-generated 
shift in the returns to formal literacy and numeracy that is the principal driver here.

In an analogous quibble, I see the association between high crop yields and a€oefuture 
orientationa€D to be dubious, in large part because I do not believe in a€oefuture orientationa€D 
as a psychological mindset passed down through generations. I see institutions that keep people 
from being able to get their hands on the capital and eat the seed corn when they think it is 
desirable to do so. And I see such institutions as very contingent.

Plus I do not think that Oded pays enough attention to the fact that Britain was an island, in the 
Atlantic Ocean, with glaciers that had scraped off all the rock above the coal, and with a central 
government given uniquely broad powers because the landlord class thought that they were 
existentially threatened by the possibility that the loss of a war might lead to the downfall of 
the Protestant religion. I see our escape from Malthus as much more contingent than he
does.

And I do not know what to make of Odeda€™ s a€oeoptimum diversitya€U stuff. I think what is going 
on is that Africa is relatively poor; and that Latin America is relatively less poor; and that the 
computer is grabbing whatever right hand-side variable helps it account for that.
But these are quibbles: The book is great!


Log GDP per capita, 2010-2018

Control variables held at zero

Log population density in 1

Control variables held at ze

i

o
s

o


S'

Log luminosity per capita, 1992-2013

Control variables held at zero

Log urbanisation in 150(

Control variables held at ze

i

o

o

CD

a*

3

CD


Figure 21. The Impact of Human Diversity on Economic
Development across Countries: Past and Presents71

The top panels depict the impact of predicted population homogeneity on ecor

development in 1500 ce, as reflected by either population density (Panel A) •
urbanisation rate (Panel B). The bottom panels depict the impact of predicts
ancestry-adjusted homogeneity on economic development in the contempor.
era, as reflected by either income per capita during the 2010-18 time period (P

C) or luminosity per capita during the 1992-2013 time period (Panel D).

Figure 19. The Impact of the Migration Out of Africa on Human Diversity


The dashed arrows represent approximate migration paths, and the small circles represent
variants of a hypothetical societal trait. With each outward migration event, the departing

population carries with it only a subset of the diversity of its parental colony.

Migratory Distance from East Africa (in 10,000 km)

O Africa O Europe • Asia • Oceania                    • N. America • S. America

Figure 20. Migratory Distance from East Africa and Diversity
among Geographically Indigenous Ethnic Groups^11!

Share


One Audio:

Adam Ozimek & Cardiff Garcia: The Hopeful, Undetermined Future of Remote Work 
<https://shows.acast.com/the-new-bazaar/episodes/the-hopeful-undetermined-future-of-remote-work>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Image:

Population Density Around The World Shown In A
Single Map


NASA's Earth Observatory

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Zanny Minton Beddoes: The Economist: a€~Ukraine won the short wara€!. Now comes the long wara€!. 
[which] does not have to be fought on Mr Putina€™ s termsa€!. [But] Ukrainea€! needs enduring 
support and that, alas, is still in doubta€! <https://view.e .economist .com/?
qs=c9f32bcb4c30570fad3fbf5343068d5d52b4464bba7793df5d5bel31fel061aecce4ec778e410f5cfca8933e0254d34f6
0aa0789e654549cbll830a848a0c646771f874d6cb3f80bd80fl98cllca7971>

•  John Timmer: Wolves Survived the Ice Age as a Single, Global Population: a€~How did these 
animals retain genetic continuity over the huge distances that separated them? Apparently, by 
repeated expansions of the population in Siberiaa€!. Data favors a model where dogs were first 
domesticated in Eastern Asiaa€!. But as our best friend spread around Asia with us, it came into 
contact with another population, likely near the Middle Easta€! could
have been wolves, could have been a dog population that had been domesticated separatelya€! 
<https://arstechnica.com/science/2022/06/ancient-wolf-genomes-indicate-an-east-asian-origin-for-dogs
/>

•  Doug Irwin: Globalization Enabled Nearly All Countries to Grow Richer in Recent Decades: a€~It 
has been a race to the top. Almost every country is richer today, some substantially so, than three 
or four decades ago when the globalization era gained steama€! 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/globalization-enabled-nearlv-all-countrie
s-grow-richer-recent>

• Topo Swope Talent Agency: Allan Aquino <https://toposwopetalent.com/talent/747/allan-aquino/>

• Ben Thompson: Passport Update, Independence & Interoperability, Web3 Use Cases 
<https://stratecherv.com/2022/passport-update-independence-and-interoperabilitv-web3-use-cases/>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Richard Hanania: Passing the Bechdel Test

Richard Hanania's Newsletter

Passing the Bechdel Test

Listen now (75 min) 11 spoke to Rob Henderson about Yellowjackets, Season 1, Episodes 1-6. Wea€™ 11 
release a discussion of Episodes 7-10 in the coming weeks. Usually we do an entire season of a show 
at once, but this time we thought it would be better to split things up. Those of you who havena€™ 
t watched the show but want to follow along can therefore go back, watch the first a€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 3 likes A- Richard Hanania

• James Fallows: A Lucky Country, on Thin Ice



Breaking the News

A Lucky Country, on Thin Ice

America prides itself on being a a€ceyounga€D country, which it certainly is in cultural terms and 
in demographics. The median age in the U.S, is now just over 38a€”about a decade younger than Japan 
or Germany, many yeara€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 25 likes A- 9 comments A- James Fallows
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

The very sharp Ben Thompson makes the case for the usefulness of a€oeWeb3a€na€”but not of this 
generation of grifter-crypto-Web3, but rather of some future version that will be built out over a 
decade, and will be focused on providing useful community resources rather than the creation of 
a€oetokens that mostly serve to make the issuers and their financiers richa€D:

Ben Thompson: Passport Update, Independence & Interoperability, Web3 Use Cases: a€~Suppose that a 
platform like Passporta€! very mucha€! a€ceWeb2a€Da€l had some meaningful number of creators using 
it. Passporta€! would service those creators and their users using traditional server technologies, 
because that is the only way an application can actually functiona€!. At the same time, user 
identifiers and their associated
entitlements could also be written to a blockchain. This would enable three things: First, creators 
would have full independence from any one centralized platform; their record of subscribers would 
be permanent and immutable. Second, subscribers would have full independence from creators; their 
record of entitlements would similarly be permanent and immutable. Third, anyone, from big 
platforms to other creators, could access those
subscription records, and offer whatever benefits they choose. These features could unlocka€! 
creators would be fully independent^! subscribers could build their own communitiesa€! platformsa€! 
could service cross-platform creators, even those who are a€oeat homea€D on would-be competitors. 
This was a benefit I talked about with Head of Instagram Adam Mosseri earlier this yeara€!. AM: 
Because ita€™ s built on-chain, no
company  could ever take that community away from you. We could go under, someone else could come 
up and you would still maintain your relationship with your subscribers and that income. "a€! If 
there is ever going to be a way for the big platforms to effectively work together to the benefit 
of individual creators, it will have to brokered by some sort of neutral entitya€!. Neutrality and 
independence is exactly what blockchains are
uniquely suited to provide. There still is, to be fair, a bit of hand-waving herea€! privacy, 
performance, anda€! ita€™ s always difficult to herd cats, particularly when those cats are 
world-devouring lionsa€!. It also wona€™ t entaila€! tokens that mostly serve to make the issuers 
and their financiers rich, the underlying tech will be another tool to make the technologies we 
have been building for the last 50 years a bit better and more
useful  (this is also why I cana€™ t say Ia€™ m particularly broken up about either the ongoing 
crypto crash or the backlash to Web3: there is a ton of cruft that needs to get swept away and crap 
that needs to be refuted before actually useful stuff can be built)a€!

LINK: 
<https://stratecherv.com/2022/passport-update-independence-and-interoperability-web3-use-cases/>

I confess I am finding Richard Hanania a very powerful challenge to Darwinism.

At the very basic level, Richard Hananiaa€™ s brain opt to have evolved to like to be in a place 
where it can see womena€”just as the wild rooster like to hang out around my fathers hen coop. At a 
more sophisticated level, Richard Hananiaa€™ s brain ought to have evolved to find a€oestor[ies] 
witha€! female cast[s]a€D very relatable. Brains that did not would have been very bad at 
convincing women who interacted with it that the organism that surrounded
them was a nice guy likely to be a good family partner, and so they would have told their friends 
to stay away from that brain and its surrounding organism. You can say that the really-existing 
tropisms we see in Richard Hananiaa€™ s brain must have been genetically linked in the evolutionary 
past with one countervailing advantages, and that evolution is slowly working to eliminate his 
genes from the gene pool. But I do not find that satisfactory.

Someone, please spin me a just-so evopsych story of how, in a species in which successful 
reproduction overwhelmingly requires convincing one single female that you are a reliable partner 
(as opposed to driving other males away by winning locked-horn battles), such High-Bro thought 
patterns can e adaptive and evolve, either genetically or mimetically:

Richard Hanania: Passing the Bechdel Test: a€~Yellowjacketsa€!. A story with a mostly female cast 
can for me be interesting anthropologicallya€! but is also usually not very relatable. Having what 
could be a male story with a female cast most of the time doesna€™t worka€!. [There are] reasons 
for thinking that we are past the peak of wokeness in TV and moviesa€!
LINK:

Ri nil a rd Hanonia'c NPWSI A ft AT


Passing the Bechdel Test

Listen now (75 min) 11 spoke to Rob Henderson about Yellowjackets, Season 1, Episodes 1-6. Wea€™ 11 
release a discussion of Episodes 7-10 in the coming weeks. Usually we do an entire season of a show 
at once, but this time we thought it would be better to split things up. Those of you who havena€™ 
t watched the show but want to follow along can therefore go back, watch the first a€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 3 likes A- Richard Hanania

The only benefit I can see from the age of Trump is that now we know from the inside what the 
Italian right was thinking in 1922 and what the German right was thinking in 1932-1933.1 think the 
most we can say is that we were a lucky country. But we are no longer one such:

James Fallows: A Lucky Country, on Thin Ice: a€~By intention, and by luck, June 30,2022, brings the 
U.S. to a moment when all three branches of its now-antique governing system are under exceptional 
straina€!. The executive branch has until recently been under control of a man actively plotting to 
overturn election results by forcea€L The Supreme Court has a new majority arising in circumstances 
that to anyone with a judicial
temperament would have dictated restrainta€!. They have instead swung for the fences. They have 
overturned whatever they felt like, based on a high-school-debate level selective rummaging through 
a€oehistorya€D (I speak from experience) and a radio-talk-show hosta€™ s glee in a€oeowning the 
libs.a€da€! Anyone who in 2022 still respects Donald Trump, can in 2022 still respect this radical 
court. These rest of us shouldna€™t.
I  dona€™ ta€!. I disagree with Liz Cheney on virtually every point of policy. I agree entirely 
with what she said there a€”and admire her lethally calm presentations during committee hearings. 
But the number of Republican Senators and Representatives who have spoken up for the working of 
democracy isa€! anyone? I hope to be corrected, and to learn that the number of patriots is more 
than zero. I will collect any of their names
herea€!. We are on thin icea€!. I ama€l counting on continued luck, while hearing the ice cracka€!

LINK:


Breaking the News

A Lucky Country, on Thin Ice

America prides itself on being a a€ceyounga€D country, which it certainly is in cultural terms and 
in demographics. The median age in the U.S, is now just over 38a€”about a decade younger than Japan 
or Germany, many yeara€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 25 likes A- 9 comments A- James Fallows

SUBJECT: The Latest Collection of Blurbs for a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€d:

Preorder: <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

a€oeHistory provides the only data we have for charting a course forward in these turbulent times. 
I have not seen a more revealing and illuminating book about economics and what it means in a very 
long time. It should be required reading for anybody who cares about the future of the global 
system, and that should be everyonea€!a€da€’’Larry Summers, President Emeritus, Harvard University, 
Secretary of the Treasury under President
Clinton

a€oeBrad DeLong learnedly and grippingly tells the story of how all the economic growth since 1870 
has created a global economy that today satisfies no one's ideas of fairness. The long journey 
toward economic justice and more equal rights and opportunities for all shall and will 
continuea€!a€Da€’’Thomas Piketty, Professor of Economics, EHESS &     la€™ Ecole da€™ A©conomie de 
Paris, author of Le Capital au 21e SiA'cle.

"Brilliant, important. A tour de force, DeLong grabs political economic history and wrestles it to 
the ground. You may disagree (I dona€™t buy all of it) but you wona€™t be able to let go."a€”Robert 
B. Reich, Professor of Public Policy, U.C. Berkeley, Secretary of Labor under President Clinton

a€oeA magisterial history of what DeLong calls the a€oelong 20th century^€D running from 1870 to 
2010, an era... shaped overwhelmingly by the economic consequences of technological progress. [The] 
book definitely asks the right questions and teaches us a lot of crucial history along the 
way.a€Da€”Paul Krugman, Nobel Memorial Prize Laureate

d€o?What a joy to finally have Brad DeLong's masterful interpretation of twentieth-century economic 
history down on paper. Slouching Towards Utopia is engaging, important, and awe-inspiring in its 
breadth and creativity.a€da€’’Christina Romer, Professor of Economics, U.C. Berkeley, Chair of the 
Council of Economic Advisers under President Obama

a€oeBrad: You have a distinct angle of vision, encyclopedic knowledge, and wonderful facility with 
the languages!. Appreciate [the bookS ™s] audacity and reach .S! Let it go [to the publisher] with 
confidence and joySISdS’’Fred Block, Professor of History, U.C. Davis

SoeBrad: I remember reading an earlier draft 30 years ago. You haven't wasted the 30 years. This 
book is vastly improved. It is, in my view, an amazing accomplishments!SdS’’Robert Waldmann, 
Professor of Economics, U. of Rome SoeTor Vergata"

SoeBrad: I love it. The grand story you are looking to tell makes a lot of sense to me, and it is 
very engagingly toldS!SdS”Tim OS™ Reilly, Founder & President, O'Reilly Media

"Look at what was waiting for me at the office! Congratulations DeLong! (I just finished the 
introduction and itS™s amazing !)"S”Tre von Logan, Associate Dean of Arts & Sciences, The Ohio 
State University

"I feel like IS™ve been waiting for BradS™s big economic history opus for a long time now. So I 
will agree that IS™m very excited for that one to hit my desk."S”Ezra Klein, The Ezra Klein Show


Breaking the News

A Lucky Country, on Thin Ice

America prides itself on being a a€ceyounga€D country, which it certainly is in cultural terms and 
in demographics. The median age in the U.S, is now just over 38a€”about a decade younger than Japan 
or Germany, many yeara€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 25 likes A- 9 comments A- James Fallows

SUBJECT: The Latest Collection of Blurbs for a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€d:

Preorder: <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

a€oeHistory provides the only data we have for charting a course forward in these turbulent times. 
I have not seen a more revealing and illuminating book about economics and what it means in a very 
long time. It should be required reading for anybody who cares about the future of the global 
system, and that should be everyonea€!a€da€’’Larry Summers, President Emeritus, Harvard University, 
Secretary of the Treasury under President
Clinton

a€oeBrad DeLong learnedly and grippingly tells the story of how all the economic growth since 1870 
has created a global economy that today satisfies no one's ideas of fairness. The long journey 
toward economic justice and more equal rights and opportunities for all shall and will 
continuea€!a€Da€’’Thomas Piketty, Professor of Economics, EHESS & la€™ Ecole da€™ A©conomie de 
Paris, author of Le Capital au 21e SiA'cle.

"Brilliant, important. A tour de force, DeLong grabs political economic history and wrestles it to 
the ground. You may disagree (I dona€™t buy all of it) but you wona€™t be able to let go."a€”Robert 
B. Reich, Professor of Public Policy, U.C. Berkeley, Secretary of Labor under President Clinton

a€oeA magisterial history of what DeLong calls the a€oelong 20th century^€D running from 1870 to 
2010, an era... shaped overwhelmingly by the economic consequences of technological progress. [The] 
book definitely asks the right questions and teaches us a lot of crucial history along the 
way.a€Da€”Paul Krugman, Nobel Memorial Prize Laureate

d€o?What a joy to finally have Brad DeLong's masterful interpretation of twentieth-century economic 
history down on paper. Slouching Towards Utopia is engaging, important, and awe-inspiring in its 
breadth and creativity.a€da€’’Christina Romer, Professor of Economics, U.C. Berkeley, Chair of the 
Council of Economic Advisers under President Obama

a€oeBrad: You have a distinct angle of vision, encyclopedic knowledge, and wonderful facility with 
the languagea€!. Appreciate [the booka€™s] audacity and reach.a€! Let it go [to the publisher] with 
confidence and joya€!a€da€’’Fred Block, Professor of History, U.C. Davis

a€oeBrad: I remember reading an earlier draft 30 years ago. You haven't wasted the 30 years. This 
book is vastly improved. It is, in my view, an amazing accomplishments!a€da€’’Robert Waldmann, 
Professor of Economics, U. of Rome a€oeTor Vergata"

a€oeBrad: I love it. The grand story you are looking to tell makes a lot of sense to me, and it is 
very engagingly tolda€!a€da€”Tim Oa€™ Reilly, Founder & President, O'Reilly Media

"Look at what was waiting for me at the office! Congratulations DeLong! (I just finished the 
introduction and ita€™s amazing !)"a€”Tre von Logan, Associate Dean of Arts & Sciences, The Ohio 
State University

"I feel like Ia€™ve been waiting for Brada€™s big economic history opus for a long time now. So I 
will agree that Ia€™m very excited for that one to hit my desk."a€”Ezra Klein, The Ezra Klein Show

a€oeBrad: Reading Slouching Towards Utopia, I am struck again at what a lovely writer you are. I 
find myself just marveling at how well you express things and how alive your prose feels. I am 
having trouble putting it down (even though I need to be preparing for Econ 2!)a€!a€da€’’Christina 
Romer, Professor of Economics, U.C. Berkeley, Chair of the Council of Economic Advisers under 
President Obama
Subscribe now

