Subscribe now

It was an error in the First Edition to leave this now-durable productivity slowdown largely 
unaddressed. It is not just something that happened to semiconductors, but much
broader. A good source is Bill Janeway: a€oeThe Rise and Fall of the Socially Beneficial 
Corporation^ □, Project Syndicate (Nov. 11,2022) <https://www.project-
syndicate.org/commentary/us-corporate-profits-from-rd-social-welfare-to-buybacks-by-william-h-janewa
y-2022-ll>:

The Rise and Fall of the Socially Beneficial Corporation

Nov 11,2022 WILLIAM H. JANEWAY

The rise of the neoliberal order in the 1970s and 1980s coincided with the demise of the socially 
beneficial corporation. Since then, the US federal
government and other institutions have managed to offset the loss of only part of the broader 
contributions that big business once made.

CAMBRIDGE a€“ In his new book Slouching towards Utopia, the economist J. Bradford DeLong points 
out, correctly, that the a€oeindustrial research
laboratory and the modern corporationa€D were the keys to unleashing a radical increase in the rate 
of scientific and technological innovation, and thus
economic growth, from 1870 onward. DeLong also identifies the Treaty of Detroit, a landmark 1950 
settlement between General Motors and the United
Auto Workers, as a linchpin of American-style post-World War II social democracy. But what ever 
happened to the behemoth corporations that unlocked
decades of growth while sponsoring health insurance and pensions for their employees?

As scientific discovery supplanted mechanical tinkering as the basis for economically meaningful 
innovation in the late nineteenth century, the required
research funding was supplied by the corporations that the Second Industrial Revolution (steel, 
railroads, mass production) had spawned. a€oeln firms such
as American Telephone & Telegraph, General Electric, U.S. Steel or DuPont,a€D write David Mowery 
and Nathan Rosenberg in Technology and the
Pursuit of Economic Growth, a€oethe development of a strong central office was closely associated 
with the establishment or significant expansion of a
central research facility.a€D

By allocating their monopoly profits to scientific research and development of technological 
applications, these corporations extended their market power
while also serving a larger, social purpose. Before World War II, this purpose was not being met by 
the US government, which, starting in the Lincoln
administration, had provided federal research support only for the agriculture sector. By 1940, the 
US government was allocating more research funding to
agriculture than to all the constituent agencies that would make up the post-war Department of 
Defense.

Whether they owed their positions to formal agreements with the federal government (AT&T), patent 
monopolies (RCA and Xerox), or a combination of
innovative research and commercial dominance (DuPont and IBM), the leading research laboratories 
could afford to invest upstream in the basic science
from which technological innovations of commercial significance might evolve.

Then came WWII. Unemployment fell to 1%, and major US employers, restricted by wage controls, had 
to compete fiercely for labor. Thanks to a
pragmatic compromise with the government, they were allowed to offer fringe benefits, such as 
health insurance and defined-benefit private pensions. This
was made possible by asymmetric tax treatment for these benefits: employers could deduct the costs, 
and employees did not have to include them as
income.

The Treaty of Detroit was both a peacetime validation of the compromise and a broad signal to the 
private sector, where union membership peaked in the
1950s at about one-third of the labor force. It radically extended the role that dominant companies 
had come to play in the communities where they were
based a€“ this being the era before shareholder primacy came to dominate corporate management 
thinking.

Within the space of a generation, however, the monopoly profits available for funding R&D and 
social benefits had come under growing pressure. One
after another, the great tech companies of the WWII era succumbed to the forces of Schumpeterian 
creative destruction and federal antitrust enforcement.

AT&T and IBM were repeat targets of the Department of Justicea€™ s antitrust division; but it bears 
mentioning that each case of state intervention proved
directly beneficial to the broader enterprise of American innovation. In a 1956 consent decree, 
AT&T agreed to license freely all of its patents that were not
directly relating to communications. And in a pre-emptive response to the DOJa€™ s third assault on 
it, in 1969, IBM a€oeunbundleda€n software from
its computers, thereby creating an independent software industry.

Other corporate giants failed on their own. US Steel was run over by a combination of more 
efficient foreign producers and the emergence of domestic
a€cemini-millsa€D that thrived on scrap metal. RCA and Westinghouse fell victim to short-sighted 
financial engineering that traded strategic technical
capability                                                                     for instant 
stock-market gratification in the conglomerate mania of the 1980s. DuPonta€™ s key patents expired, 
and the productivity of its R&D
investments declined in the face of ferocious international competition.

Even as the twentieth centurya€™ s private-sector champions withdrew from the scientific and 
technological frontier, their absence was more than offset
by the US federal government, which came to be the leading funder of R&D. With its roots in the 
WWII Office of Scientific Research and Development,
the Department of Defense funded development across all the technologies that combined to make the 
digital revolution a€“ from silicon to software. And
to exploit the new downstream commercial opportunities, the professional venture capital industry 
emerged, first to fund digital innovation and then,
following President Richard Nixona€™ s a€oeWar on Cancer,a€D to launch biotech startups.

But major corporationsa€™ role in providing for their employeesa€™ social welfare was not offset 
after their decline. Worse yet, the 1947 Taft-Hartley
Act opened the door to state-level a€oeright to worka€D laws that proved highly effective in 
reducing union membership in the private sector over the
course of the post-war decades.

By then, after President Harry Trumana€™ s effort in 1949 to establish universal health care as a 
federal entitlement was defeated, President Lyndon B.
Johnsona€™ s passage of Medicare and Medicaid marked the limits of publicly underwritten health 
care in America. In parallel, a systemic shift from
defined-benefit to defined-contribution pensions moved the burden of investment risk from the 
employer to the employee. Today, the great corporations that
catalyzed innovation and sponsored social welfare have come and gone, but market power persists, 
raising the question of where those monopoly profits

are going.

During the neoliberal era that is now ending, a new target of opportunity for the application of 
excess cash flow emerged in the form of corporate stock
repurchases. Previously, regulators barred this practice as a form of market manipulation. But the 
Securities and Exchange Commission changed the rule in
1982. Now over 60% of US companies buy back their own stock each year, and the annual amounts of 
these purchases typically exceed the payment of
cash dividends (which is unsurprising, given the more favorable treatment afforded to capital 
gains).

The rise of the neoliberal order, so richly documented and analyzed in a recent book by the 
University of Cambridgea€™ s Gary Gerstle, coincided with

the demise of the socially beneficial corporation. Todaya€™ s digital tech giants are neither 
motivated nor equipped to play such a role, which is one reason
why they have been struggling for legitimacy. Looking ahead, enhanced investment in technological 
dynamism and social welfare, under the stress of
climate change, will come predominantly from the public sector, if at all. Can the new US CHIPS and 
Science Act and Inflation Reduction Act kick-start a
new era of innovation? We can hope so, but hope is not an active verb.

Share

And the learned Fred Block writes in email:

There is a lot of evidence that the corporate research labs have declined dramatically in 
significance over the last half century.

Some of this is short-termism where corporations dona€™ t want to spend on anything that will not 
improve the bottom line in the next two or three
quarters.


nut icu iiiuic        is uic     icciiuuiugicai cumpicAiiy wi uiuicui uiuuvciuuu. i>cvciupiug new 
piuuucis ui new piuucsscs nuw icquncs live, SIA,

seven, or more different scientific specialties. Not even the big monopolies can afford to create 
career lines for technologists in more than three or four
fields. So the current pattern is that they have experts in two or three fields and they link up 
with outside experts either at federal laboratories or
universities or the new larger research institutes that the government is busy creatinga€”such as 
the advanced manufacturing institutes.

Moreover, the public sites are the place where the actual innovating occurs rather than back home 
at the corporate lab that probably lacks all the high tech
equipment that the public sector provides. Nobody talks about this because it undermines the case 
for privatizing the profits rather than gainsharing that
acknowledges the federal contribution.

To which I responded:

Re: a€oecorporate research labs have declined dramatically in significance over the last half 
century.a€D

No, that is not a quibblea€”that is, I think, a very important point and a key part of how the 
neoliberal era has been such a disappointment to all in the Global North save the
plutocrats. The Fordist-R&D structures of Bell Labs, Xerox PARC, and such were of immense value for 
human society, and you are right to note their sharp decline over the past
half century.

And I do think you are right in extending Gerschenkrona€™ s a€oeEconomic Backwardnessa€D argument 
from finance and investment to research and development.

Gerschenkron claimed that while the individual entrepreneur could do the job of finance and 
investment in the first generation of industrializers, you needed the support of universal
banks for the second and of the state for the third. But the scale-of-R&D dimension may well be 
more important. And just how have Apple and TSMC managed ita€’’financing the
hardware node construction, gaining the engineering knowledge, and also writing the software to 
take advantage of what they make? I thought I understood Intel-Microsoft back in
The Day. But I do not understand TSMC-Apple today.

Subscribe now
Leave a comment

