Subscribe now
The passage:

Being subjected to millennium-spanning slave raiding as a major part of life created a long-lasting 
durable culture of social distrust. In a well-functioning
market economy you begin nearly every meeting you have with a stranger thinking that this person 
might become a counterpart in some form of win-win
economic, social, or cultural exchange. This is not the case if you think there is even a small 
chance that the stranger is in fact a scout for people with
weapons  over the next hill who will seek to enslave you, and perhaps kill you or your family in 
the process. This background assumption of distrust did not
matter much as long as the trading and commercial infrastructure of the colonizers governed 
economic activity. But after the colonizers left, the distrust
came  to the forefront, and it led people to grab for weapons more quickly and more often than they 
would have in a more trusting society.

This point is of much broader applicability than to post-colonial sub-Saharan Africa before 2000.1 
should have but did not make this cleara€”and so Anne McCants makes a valid
critique of the book:

I find statements such as this one on development in the global south to be really misleading. You 
ascribe the reason that the global south did not catch up
or even keep pace (p. 341) as: a€oeThe pre-World War II colonial masters did next to nothing to 
prepare the colonized nations of Asia and Africa for
independent prosperity.a€D

The lack of effort on the part of former colonizers may well be true (although material and advice 
aid to the global south has been a very big industry for a
long time a€“ simultaneously accused of being patronizing and not enough). But that is only one 
hypothesis among many possible. And it overlooks the
role                                                                      of 
trust-supporting-exchange entirely. I think it is possible to a€~teacha€™ people not to trust, but 
much more difficult to teach them to trust. So, it is
not unreasonable to go next to the African slave trades of 1600-1900 period as a teacher of 
not-trust. This too is a testable hypothesis, but I suspect many of
the standard tests are post hoc. As you point out yourself, there have been many massive slave 
trades through history a€“ indeed, it seems safe to venture
that the majority of all people who have lived (certainly before 1900, but plenty remain today, and 
disproportionately in the global south even without an
oceanic trade) have been enslaved or in forced labor arrangements of varying kinds.

This is, sadly, the human condition.

It is not enough to cite the absolute number of the Atlantic trade (truly horrific of course) as 
bigger, because we dona€™ t have a clear sense of the relative
size (to population for example) of earlier, or parallel but less well documented, cases. It seems 
also that it might matter that external slave trades are only
possible where local slaving is already commonplace, as we know it was in much of world history, 
the exceptions being the rare case. If we start with the
presumption, as I think we should, that slavery is lamentably the normal condition, then what is 
really worth explaining is why it becomes abhorrent in
some  contexts.

[I believe you have heard my co-author Dan and I say something similar about polygamy and monogamy 
a€“ in the contemporary west we feel a need to
explain the former, but in fact the condition that is odd in world history is the latter. And ita€™ 
s not an accident that Marx drew the parallel between
polygamy and slavery.]

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


