Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) The labor market is actually starting to look not completely horrible:

Equitable Growth: d€™For the week ending June 5, 367,117 workers filed for regular unemployment 
benefits. After robust employment gains in May,
regular initial claims are approaching their pre-pandemic levels. States reported that another 
71,292 workers filed for initial PUA, which extended UI to
some workers who are not eligible for regular benefits. In total, 438,409 workers filed initial PUA 
or regular unemployment benefits last week. Regular
continued claims, also referred to as insured unemployment, was 3.3 million the week ending May 29. 
Adding all Unemployment Insurance programsa€”
including PUA, PEUC, and Extended Benefitsa€”a total of 15.3 million workers claimed benefits the 
week ending May 22. Although the U.S. economy
continues to be 7.6 million jobs down with respect to February 2020, starting this week, many 
states are prematurely cutting federal UIa€”a policy choice
that  is estimated to affect almost 4 million workersa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/equitablegrowth/status/1402967367089594370>

2) Equitable Growth grantee and stalwart has been on this issue his entire career and gives the 
best capsule summary of what the Biden administration is trying to do that I have
seen:

Gabriel Zucman: d€™ Ok what, exactly, is this global deal on corporate taxation about? The most 
important component is the minimum tax of 15%.
This does NOT mean that all countries must increase their corporate tax rate to 15%. It means that 
multinational profits will be subject to a 15% minimum
effective ratea€!

LINK: <https ://twitter.com/gabriel_zucman/status/1401193407742189572>

3) Forthcoming Tuesday June 15 at 2:00 PM EDT. This should be extremely good:

Equitable Growth: Data Infrastructure for the 21st Century: A Focus on Racial Equity. a€~Largea€! 
racial divides in income, wealth, employment, and
other markers of economic well-beingS! have a tragic human costa€!. Pay discrimination, barriers to 
wealth accumulation, and other forms of systemic
racism prevent people from developing and fully deploying their human capital. The Biden 
administration hasa€! an Equitable Data Working Group.

Across many domains, federal data collection and reporting can be improved to better reflect the 
diversity of our economy. These improvements could then
guide policymakers in implementing more finely tuned policies to address the legacy of systemic 
racism and the differential impacts of recessions and other
economic shocks on communities of color. This event will convene a panel of academics to discuss 
some actionable areas of policy where the Biden
administration could take steps to increase the quality and utility of economic data disaggregation 
and how these steps will lead to better policy outcomes.
Please  direct questions related to event content to Computational Social Scientist, Austin 
Clemensa€!

LINK: <https://web.cvent.com/event/443b4018-f6b5-49c5-8ec9-37389d827977/summary>

4) The best thing I have done this past week is this podcast, which I did with Bloomberg Opinions™ 
s Noah smith and with Warburg-PincusS™ s Bill Janeway. Janeway is
always worth listening to: either a paleo- or a post-Keynesian economist who spent his career in 
finance funding innovation and Silicon Valley:

Bill Janeway, Noah Smith, & Brad DeLong: The Ecology of Innovation'. S~Key insights: When 
industrial policy in America has been successful, it has
always had a profound political driving motive: maintaining independence, manifest destiny, 
Sputnik, and so on. The only such driver todayS”and it is
urgentS”is green energy to fight global warming. The U.S. used to be excellent not just on the 
ScenoveltySD prong of [Dan] BreznitzS™ s prosperity-
in-an-unforgiving-world quadent, but also on the Soeengineering designSD, Soesecond-generation 
innovationSD, and Sceproduction-assemblySD
prongs       as well. We threw that away in the era Reagan beganS”the era of neoliberalism, 
financialization-driven short-termism, and tax cut-driven
exchange overvaluation. We need to get those other three prongs back, lest we become a country of 
technoprinces and dopamine-loop brain-hacked
technoserfs. When you do industrial policy, you need to think very carefully about what kind of 
economy you want to create. A better retranslation of the
Arkhilokhos-Isaiah Berlin SoeFox & HedgehogSD tag line is: SoeThe fox knows many tricks; the 
hedgehog knows one good onea€Da€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/podcast-hexapodia-is-the-kev-insight>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)The extremely sharp Martin Sandbu over at the Financial Times tells people to calm down about 
inflation. The inflation we would worry about would be broad-based, inertial,
and present in wage expectations and wage increases. That is definitely not what we have now. The 
intelligent course is to prioritize recovery to full employment and then see where
we are in early 2023. The unintelligent course is to raise alarm and try to get people to take 
actions that would slow recovery over the next year and a half:

Martin Sandbu: Whod€™ s Afraid of Labour Shortages?: S~A lack of workers would be a nice problem 
for us to haveS”but we donS™ tS!. Reams
of reports are coming in that businesses are struggling to recruit as economies reopenS!. Some, it 
appears, are even taking the unheard-of step of raising
pay in order to find staff. That should be good news. But such stories are feeding the bigger 
debate on whether the risk of overheating is starting to overtake
the risks of stalling growthS”at least in the USS!. Free Lunch says donS™ t panicS!. You can see 
shortages everywhere except in the dataS!. The US
economy is still 10m jobs short from the pre-pandemic trendS!. But isnS™t inflation suddenly 
accelerating? Sort ofS”but not in any way that indicates
broad price pressuresS!. There are certainly dizzying price rises in some sectors, such as lumber, 
where US prices have more than quadrupled. ButS!
these  are exceptionsS!. The prices of most things are behaving in a benign wayS!. And this is even 
more true for wagesS!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/8d47ac74-cf0d-40cb-92df-8d8bf4c7d895>

2) A very nice introduction to a very interesting and useful way of thinking about income 
distribution as a process:

Yonatan Berman: Reallocating Geometric Brownian Motion

LINK: <https ://www.youtube .com/watch?v=V7j4eO4Kbls>

2) We economists observe the very broad sweeps of data generated by firms and governments 
accounting systems arising out of human propensity to cement social bonds and
deepen our societal division of labor by entering into reciprocal gift-exchange relationships. We 
have both extraordinarily amplified yet also narrowly focused these by mediating
them  via through the social fiction of SoemoneySoe. Thus gift-exchange gets divided into one-shot 
cash-on-the-barrelhead quantified discrete episodes. And from the counted-up
totals and subtotals we economists can see, plus economistsS™ present and past introspection into 
our motives and behavior, we then guess at what human reality is signalled by
those particular patterns. We count, and our counts tell us what interactions are typical and 
representative. But then we rely on introspection to help us turn our numbers into ideas of
what these patterns really mean. That is not good enough. What we really, really need is for 
somebody who can dive deep into an individual case studyS’’someone very sensitive

to human psychology, to how it signifies itself in human actions, and how human actions combine 
with the actions of others to generate human group behavior. We need
anthropologists. Gillian Tett is an anthropologist:

Gillian Tett: Anthro-Vision: A New Way to See in Business & Life: S~Because SoegiftsSD are usually 
considered to be the mirror of marketS”or
commercials’’behavior, they tend to be excluded from economistsS™ modelsS!. Anthropologists have 
always had a much broader vision of

SceeconomicsSDS! study how exchanges bind societies together in the widest possible senseS!. Mauss 
argued that gift-giving is endemic to societies
around the world, and has three narts: an obligation to pive. to receive, and most cniciallv. to 
recinrocateS! usuallv delaved, creating a social


a€cedebta€Da€!.a€oeGiftsa€n create trailing debts that bind people togethera€!. Just think of how 
the gigantic student loan industry in America, say, is
embedded in family obligations and relations which cannot be captured just by a trillion-dollar 
numbera€! financial flows are about money but they also
involve far more than finance, since they are rooted in kinship structures and trailing 
patternsa€!. [Thus] talking about a€oebartera€D in the twenty-first
century might not be as odd as it seemsa€!. Communities without money often have extensive and 
complex a€cecredita€D systems since households
create social and economic debtsa€!. In Silicon Valley information is constantly being a€oegiven 
upa€D in exchange for the a€cegifta€D of free
servicesa€!. Many of the participants in this a€oebartera€n are not explicitly aware that they are 
involved in a barter at all. Howevera€! there is no other
readily available word in Englisha€!

LINK: <https://www.google.com/books/edition/Anthro Vision/upOtEAAAQBAJ>

4) Three days a weeka€”or twoa€’’interacting in-person and two days a weeka€”or threea€”holed up 
and focusing in our offices, our homes, or the library sub-basement,
communicating asynchronously, is how we academic types have been trying to structure our worklife 
for a century. It works well. One long-lasting effect of the COVID-19 plague
may    be to kick a critical mass of other forms of white-collar employment into this pattern, with 
far-reaching ramifications for workplace functioning and economic geography

Stephen Loynd: aS."Amazon, a€oewhich has allowed its corporate employees to work entirely from home 
for over a yr due to the pandemica€”said in an
internal memo on Thurs that its new policy will be to allow those employees to indefinitely work 3 
days a week in the office & 2 days a week

remotely a€Da€!

LINK: <https://twitter. com/loyndsview/status/1403346603147157506>

5) The shift of macroeconomics to a€oeRBC modelsa€na€”and the fact that a good and very vocal 1/3 
of the economics profession went the full Herbert Hoover during the Great
Recession of 2008-2010a€”should make every economist in the world embarrassed for the profession. 
Paul Krugman has a theory about why this happened, with which I think I
agree:

Paul Krugman (2010): The Instability of Moderation: a€~We used to pity our grandfathers, who lacked 
both the knowledge and the compassion to fight
the Great Depression effectively; now we see ourselves repeating all the old mistakesa€!. The kind 
of moderate economic policy regime Brad and I both
supporta€”a regime that by and large lets markets work, but in which the government is ready both 
to rein in excesses and fight slumpsa€”is inherently
unstable  .a€! Conservatives have always tended to view the assertion that government has any 
useful role in the economy as the thin edge of a socialist
wedgea€! William Buckleya€! one of his key complaints was that the Yale faculty 
taughta€’’horrors!a€’’Keynesian economicsa€!. Last but not least, the
very success of central-bank-led stabilization, combined with financial deregulation^’’itself a 
by-product of the revival of free-market fundamentalisma€”
set the stage for a crisis too big for the central bankers to handle. This is Minskyism: the long 
period of relative stability led to greater risk-taking, greater
leverage, and, finally, a huge deleveraging shock. And Milton Friedman was wrong: in the face of a 
really big shock, which pushes the economy into a
liquidity trap, the central bank cana€™ t prevent a depression^!. The era of the Samuelsonian 
synthesis was, I fear, doomed to come to a nasty end. And
the  result is the wreckage we see all around usa€!

LINK: <https://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/201Q/ll/26/the-instability-of-moderation/>

6) Moving out of my comfort zone again. But this is very important: Jim Crow was the law. That was 
the point:

Jamelle Bouie: a€™Ifind myself referencing Jim Crow again and again. The whole trick of Jim Crow 
was that it had a veneer of legality. It was a
a€celawfula€D means to keep blacks out of the electorate, as opposed to the violence of the 1870s 
and 1880s. Many people act like as long as things are
following  rules, and as long as the rules are passed legally, then things are proceeding in order. 
If a state passed drastically suppressive laws, keeping many
out, then thata€™ s what the legal and legitimate system isa€”why be alarmed? Even if, in practice, 
Jim Crow was utterly lawless, the appearance of law
allowed its defenders to attack critics and dissenters as lawless threats themselvesa€!

LINK: <https://twitter .com/ibouie/status/1403333146297483264>

7) Still out of my comfort zone, but it does seem worth noting this quote from Josef Stalin, as 
reported by his former secretary: a€oel consider it completely unimportant who in the
party will vote, or how; but what is extraordinarily important is thisa€”who will count the votes, 
and howa€D:

Jeet Heer: The Coup Next Time: a€~Trump is a sinister buffoon and his attempts at subverting 
democracy are farcical but also threateningly persistent. His
failure to pull off a coup was due to no lack of trying. Rather, he was foiled by the reluctance of 
the permanent bureaucracya€! to carry out absurd and
sometimes illegal demands, along with the a similar crucial reluctance among state level Republican 
elected officialsa€!. Buta€! Republicans who stood up
to   him are being marginalizeda€!. This continued Trumpification of the GOP opens the way for the 
most likely path for a repeat of 2020 that ends with a
successful coupa€!. the Democrats win an electoral college victory and the popular vote but the 
Republicans have control of the House, the Senate, and
state legislatures in crucial swing statesa€! [and] override of the votea€!

LINK: <https://jeetheer.substack.eom/p/the-coup-next-time>

8) Those who say that the lab-leak hypothesis is probable or likely or even a substantial 
probability are seeking to herd you like cattle. They strike me as the kind of people who said
that Iraq had a rapidly progressing and active nuclear weapons program back in 2002. Do not assume 
they are your friends:

Michael Hiltzik: Why the COVID Lab-Leak Hypothesis Is Quackery: a€~the virological community 
believes that ita€™ s vastly more likely that
COVIDa€“19 spilled over from an animal host to humansa€!. "Both scenarios are possible, they are 
not equally likely,a€D [Kristen] Andersen said.
a€oePrecedence, data, and other evidence strongly favor natural emergence as a highly likely 
scientific theory for the emergence of SARS-CoVa€“2, while
the     lab leak remains a speculative incomplete hypothesis with no credible evidence.a€da€! What 
remains of the lab-leak theory is half-truths,
misrepresentations, and tendentious conjecturea€!. A May 23 article in the Wall Street Journal 
reporting that three researchersa€! became sicka€!.

Virologists point out, moreover, that it would be unlikely for COVID to affect only three people 
seriously enough to warrant hospital care without infecting
hundreds of others in the lab or their householdsa€!. Their goal in signing the letter, they said, 
was not to point fingers at the Wuhan lab, but to urge WHO
to devote more effort to determining the origin, whatever it might be, before expressing a 
categorical opiniona€!

LINK: <https://www.latimes.com/business/story/2021-06-03/lab-leak-covid-origin>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

