Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: I Have COVID Symptoms!

Mild, so far, but not improving, accompanied by severe lethargy a€’’but no positive test results, 
at least as of yeta€!

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!
Share

First: The Slouching Towards Utopia Slow-Motion Tweetstorm



J. BRADFORD DELONG

Last November 25 I began tweeting out one sentence a day, with assorted commentary, from the 
manuscript of my forthcoming Slouching Towards Utopia chttps://bit.ly/3pP3Krk>, appearing from 
Basic Books on September 6. As of now I have tweeted out the first 2600 or so words of the 
manuscript, up to about page 7 of 624, and the thread has 310 tweets in it. I have reached the 
first natural stopping point in the manuscript with the sentence: a€oeAnd we are
still, at best, slouching towards utopia.a€D

Up until this point the tweetsa€”and the manuscripta€”have been laying out what my Grand Narrative 
Framework is: the sea-change around 1870, as technological and economic progress shifts into high 
gear; the doubling of human technological capabilities every generation after 1870; economic 
creative destruction at an unprecedented pace over and over and over again; political and 
sociological consequences; gross failure to manage the process; and so our
failure to build a utopia, even though today our powers to manipulate nature and organize one 
another are so great relative to those of all previous human civilizations that it is not even 
funny.

The manuscript now shifts gears, to a defense of my decision to write an economic (rather than a 
political or a cultural or a sociological) history of the 20th century, to write a history of the 
long rather than a short 20th century, and to die on the hill that this economic history is by far 
the most important one.
Should I simply continue on through the manuscript, tweeting out a sentence every day or two, as 
September 6 approaches? Should I switch and start tweeting out the concluding chapter? Should I do 
something else?

The principal purpose of this a€~Stack for the rest of the year is, after all, to market this 
forthcoming book. I do want this book to be a treasure for all time, rather than a composition of 
the moment that makes a splash, wins at best a few prizes, and is then forgotten:

As a further taste, some elevator pitches:

30 words: Only when Keynes blessed the shotgun marriage of von Hayeka€™ s market and Polanyia€™ s 
society did 20th-century humanity even slouch towards utopia. Remember that, and material El 
Dorado, at least, is at hand.

140 words: Before 1870, humanity lived in dire poverty, with a slow crawl of invention offset by a 
growing population. Then came a great shift: invention sprinted forward, doubling our technological 
capabilities each generation and utterly transforming the economy again and again. Our ancestors 
would have presumed we would have used such powers to build utopia. But it was not so. When 
1870A-2010 ended, the world instead saw global warming;
economic depression, uncertainty, and inequality; and broad rejection of the status quo. Economist 
Brad DeLonga€™ s Slouching Towards Utopia tells the story of how this unprecedented explosion of 
material wealth occurred, how it transformed the globea€”and why it failed to deliver us to utopia. 
Of remarkable breadth and ambition, it uncovers the last century to have been less a march of 
progress than a slouch, albeit broadly in a good direction.

300 words: The long 20th centurya€”the first whose history was primarily economic, with the economy 
not painted scene-backdrop but rather revolutionizing humanity's life every single generation 
taught humanity expensive lessons. The most important of them is this: Only a shotgun marriage of 
Friedrich von Hayek to Karl Polanyi, a marriage blessed by John Maynard Keynesa€”a marriage that 
itself has failed its own sustainability testsa€”has humanity
been able to even slouch towards the utopia that the explosion of our science and technological 
competence ought to have made our birthright. Whether we ever justify the full bill run-up over the 
140 years from 1870 to 2010 will likely depend on whether we remember that lesson.

Friedrich von Hayeka€”a geniusa€”was the one who most keen-sightedly observed that the market 
economy is tremendously effective at crowdsourcing solutions. The market economy, plus industrial 
research labs, modern corporations, and globalization, were keys to the cage keeping humanity 
desperately poor. Hayek drew from this the conclusion: a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh 
away: blessed be the name of the market.a€D Humans disagreed. As
genius Karl Polanyi saw, humans needed more rights than just property rights. The marketa€™ s 
treating those whom society saw as equals unequally, or unequals equally, brought social explosion 
after explosion, blocking the road to utopia.

Not a€oeblessed be the name of the marketa€D but a€oethe market was made for man, not man for the 
marketa€D was required if humanity was to even slouch towards utopia that technology and potential 
material abundance ought to have made straightforward to reach. But how? Since 1870 humansa€”John 
Maynard Keynes, Benito Mussolini, Vladimir Lenin, and othersa€”have tried solutions, demanding that 
the market do less, or different, and other
institutions do more. Only government, tamed government, focusing and rebalancing things to secure 
more and different rights for more citizens have brought the El Dorado of a truly human world into 
view.

650 words: The theme of Jared Diamonda€™ s Guns, Germs, & Steela€”a brilliant book, if not without 
its major flaws (and what things in this fallen sublunary sphere do not have their major 
flaws?)a€”is: Civilizations in different places had access to different plant and animal resources, 
and for developing bio and other technologies two heads are better than one. Within Eurasia, at the 
last the Atlantic Seaboard led in agricultural wealth and hence first
developed the steel and the guns. Plus Eurasians gained immunity to all the germs that jumped from 
Eurasian animals into humans. And everything else follows from those Atlantic-Seaboard differential 
advantages with respect to guns, germs, and steel.

The theme of Thomas Pikettya€™ s Capital in the 21st Centurya€.”a brilliant book, if not without 
its major flaws (and what things in this fallen sublunary sphere do not have their major 
flaws?)a€”is: Capitalists control enough political levers to keep the profit rate around 5%, faster 
than economies grow. Only in exceptional eras of wars, revolutions, deep depressions, and the short 
post-WWII social-democratic age of very rapid growth will wealth at the top fail
to outpace wealth in general. Hence in normal times income and wealth inequality is either already 
very high already or is rising fast. And everything else follows from that tendency toward high 
inequality.

The theme of Brad DeLonga€™ s Slouching Towards Utopiaa^'a brilliant book, if not without its major 
flaws (and what things in this fallen sublunary sphere do not have their major flaws?)a€”is:

The long 20th centurya€”the first whose history was primarily economic, with the economy not 
painted scene-backdrop but rather revolutionizing humanity's life every single generationa€” taught 
humanity expensive lessons. In 1870 industrial research labs, modern corporations, globalization, 
and the market economya€’’which, as that genius Friedrich von Hayek most keen-sightedly observed, 
is tremendously effective at crowdsourcing solutionsa€’’proved
keys to the lock that had kept humanity in its desperately poor iron cage, with the only 
comfortable ones being the thugs with spears who took from the near-subsistence farmers, and those 
with whom they shared their extractions. And previously unimaginable economic growth revolutionized 
human life over and over, generation by generation.


One Image:

The internet will make those bad words go away


Es$e^1


Googling the
Error Message

O RLY?                          I be Practical Developer
(<i IbePracticalDev

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Antonio Regalado: How Pfizer Made an Effective Anti-Covid Pill: a€~A covid pill could cut 
serious illnesses and help prevent the next pandemic. But ita€™ s expensive and in short supplya€! 
<https://www.technologvreview.com/2022/02/04/1044714/pfizer-covid-pill-paxlovid-pandemic/>

•  Matt Simon: Is This a Fossilized Lair of the Dreaded Bobbit Worm? I WIRED: a€~Scientists say 
theya€™ ve got 20-million-year-old evidence of giant worms that hunted in pretty much the most 
nightmarish way possiblea€l 
<https://www.wired.com/story/is-this-a-fossilized-lair-of-the-dreaded-bobbit-worm/>

•  Amanda Terkel: Bidena€™ s Federal Reserve Nominee Lisa Cook Is Facing a Racist Smear Campaign: 
a€~If confirmed by the Senate, Cook would be the first Black woman on the Feda€™ s board of 
governorsa€! 
<https://www.huffpost.com/entrv/lisa-cook-federal-reserve-nominee-racist-criticism_n_61 
f367eee4b02de5f516fa2a?nb>

•  Lyman Stone: _a€™ Huge swathes of the Alexandrian empire did Hellenize, and archeological and 
genetic evidence suggests it was largely because there were heaps and heaps of Greeks" a€!


Lyman Stone cY3a34tas°‘ dYHdYHdYH @lymanstoneky

@ delong Whereas huge swathes of the Alexandrian empire *did* Hellenize, and archeological and 
genetic evidence suggests it was largely *because there were heaps and heaps of Greeks*
3:38 PM a~™ Jan 26,2022

•  Matthew: a€™ In literature there is a paranoid form of reading to resolve contradiction and a 
reparative form of reading a text. (Likewise a dozen other forms I am not mentioning here such as 
Lacana€™ s four discourses)a€!

Matthew @Roland00 Address

@delong is not to be trusted, you precisely manifest and bring present these forms of paranoia and 
distrust that requires a reparative reading or the alternative which is madness / absurdity. One 
must imagine Sisyphus happy in other words.
8:40 PM a~™ Jan 13,2022 ’

1 Like 1 Retweet

• Ryan Avent: The End of Two Globalizations: a€~What will future historians say that we did 
wrong?a€!

The Bellows

The end of two globalizations

It seems increasingly possible that the curtain is coming down on the great age of global economic 
integration which began in the decades following the second world war and then accelerated 
dramatically in the 1990s. It remains to be seen just how deep and long-lasting a retreat is on the 
cards. Whether wea€™re in for more of a gentle retrenchment or a dra€!

Read more

a year ago A- Ryan Avent

Paragraphs:

David E. Rovella: Is This the Beginning of Facebooka€™ s Fadeout?: a€~Facebook co-founder Mark 
Zuckerberg sought to rally his employees on Thursday in the face of a calamitous drop in the share 
price of Metaa€! [a] historic $250 billion crasha€!. The bad news comes at a critical juncturea€! 
the companya€! is fighting regulatory battlesa€! has been a prominent medium for hate speech and a 
critical component of foreign misinformation efforts aimed at
tilting the last two U.S. presidential electionsa€!. What does Zuckerberg do now?a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-02-03/bloomberg-evening-briefing-is-this-the-beginn
ing-of-facebook-s-fadeout>

David Pierce: Meta Earnings Show Facebook Users Drop for the First Time: a€~The signs have been out 
there for a while, but Facebook users have now declined for the first time evera€!. A hard pivot 
toward the metaverse, including a whole-ass name change so that Metaa€™ s potential might not be 
brought down by Facebook. But all we saw until now was slow growth, not declinea€!
LINK: <https://www.protocol .com/meta-facebook-users-drop>

Debby Wu: Chipmakers Are Outspending Governments: a€~In early January, Florida unveiled a $9.7 
million program to boost state infrastructure and train future semiconductor engineersa€!. The 
laudable initiative was off by a few orders of magnitudea€!. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. 
is set to spend over $40 billion on capex this year alone. Intela€! more than $25 billion in 
2022a€!. Samsunga€! is on a multiyear spending spree totaling more
than $100 billiona€!. If Florida really wants in on that hotly contested action, ita€™ 11 have to 
be significantly more generousa€!. Japan is offering $6.8 billion in incentives to lure global 
chipmakers to the country and India is allocating $10 billion over six years for the development of 
a local semiconductor industrya€!

LINK: <https://www.bloomberg 
.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-18/chipmakers-are-outspending-governments-fullv-charged?cmpid=BBD01182
2 TECH>

Carey Goldberg: U.S. Hospitals Cope with Fatal Overcrowding: a€~Whata€™ s the top worry?a€! a€oeTte 
strain on our infrastructure, on the health-care system,a€D virologist Jeremy Luban said 
recentlya€! unprecedented staff shortages. a€oelta€™ s a dumpster fire,a€D says Lisa Abbott, senior 
vice president of Lifespan, a Rhode Island health system with over 1,200 beds. a€oelta€™ s a 
pandemic wrapped in a labor crisis. Omicron is the accelerant on the
dumpster firea€Da€!

LINK: <https://www.bloomberg .com/news/newsletters/2022-01 
-26/u-s-hospitals-cope-with-fatal-overcrowding>

Malcolm Schofield: The Noble Lie: a€~Socratesa€!. a€ceGrand lie? Noble lie? G. R. F. Ferrari has a 
good note on the issue: a€ceThe lie is grand or noble (gennaios) by virtue of its civic purpose, 
but the Greek word can also be used colloquially, giving the meaninga€! a massive, 
no-doubt-about-it liea€!. Some prefer to a€celiea€D the more neutral a€cefalsehooda€D (which need 
not imply deliberate deception), others a€cefictiona€Da€!. Cornford had
a€oebold flight of invention.&€□... The noble lie is to serve as charter mytha€! or rather, two 
related mythsa€! the natural brotherhood of thea€! populationa€! alla€! born from the eartha€! 
[and] the citya€™ s differentiated class structure a matter of divine dispensation^!

LINK: 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/abs/cambridge-companion-to-platos-republic/noble-lie/F04B78C55
46C7FB5E331248F35068F76>

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

A Draft of My a€oeClassical Greek a€~Efflorescencesa€ ™ Lecture for the a€oeHistory of Economic 
Growtha€C Course I Have Appropriated from Melissa Della€!

Not yet in the shape that I wish it were in, howevera€!

3.2.2. Classical Greece


3.2.2.  The Classical Greek Efflorescence


Table 1

Standard Periodization of Ancient Greek History

Houses got Bigger

Figure 7

Median Houw Size*. 8OO-3(X) BC (n — 406)


Name

Bronze Age

Dates

H200 BC


Late Bronze Age
Early Iron Age
Archaic
Classical
Hellenistic

Early Empire

Late Empire
Early Byzantine

c. 1600-1200 BC (also known as Mycenaean period)

c. 1200-700 BC (also known as Dark Age)

c. 700-480 BC

480-323 BC

323-30 BC

30 BC-AD 284

AD 284-526

AD 526-1081

Mediterranean). 800-300 BC

Source: Morris, lan (2004) “Economic Growth in Ancient Greece,” Journal of Institutional
And Theoretical Economics, 160,709-742.

Source: Morris, Ian (2004) “Economic Growth in Ancient Greece/* Journal of Institutional
And Theoretical Economics, 160, 709-742.

From 300,000 Greeks in the year -800 to 4 million in the year -300. And that was only the 
appetizer. Thereafter, following in the wake of the armies of Alexander the Great, and then the 
expansion of the Roman Empire to the Danube River, Greeks colonized city after city and spread out 
into the countryside from the Al-Fayyum oasis in Egypt to the Punjab, and from Alexandria Eschate 
near modern-day Tashkent to Marseilles in France. Houses got biggera€”a
lot bigger. Trade and the division of labor flourished.

3.2.2.1. Institutions & Peace


3.2.2.1.  Peace, Order, & Long Life


Adults have already
survived horrific infant
mortality:

•  Yet your typical adult female skeleton
found in the Bronze Age is 27, and in the
early Iron Age is 26

•  Ditto for males: 33 and 31.

•  By the year -400, however, the typical
adult-male skeleton is of a 40-year old,
and      the typical adult-female skeleton is of
a 37 year old.

•  These are differences that I find
astonishing!

Slide taken from Melissa Dell

Life Expectancy Increased

Figure 2

Average Adult Ages at Death, 1600-300 BC

The solid lines represent Angel’s results, collected in the 1930s-1970s (n = 433

, 294 females), and the broken lines results collected with new techniques in the
(n = 357 males, 416 females).


Alongside the extraordinary growth of the Greek population is a remarkable increase in the average 
age of death among adults. There appears to be much less violence inflicted upon adultsa€’’either 
through violence directly applied, or through violence depriving adults of the resources that they 
need to keep living.
What do I mean by a€oeless violence a€D? Consider what Odysseus says about what he did after the 
Trojan War was over, immediately after he and the twelve ships of Ithaka departed the shore:

What of my sailing, then, from Troy?

What of those years of rough adventure, weathered under Zeus?

The wind that carried west from Ilion
brought me to ADsmaros, on the far shore,
a strongpoint on the coast of the KikonAas.

I stormed that place and killed the men who fought.
Plunder we took, and we enslaved the women,

to make division, equal shares to alla€”

but on the spot I told them: a€~Back, and quickly!
Out to sea again !a€™ My men were mutinous,
fools, on stores of wine. Sheep after sheep

they butchered by the surf, and shambling cattle,
feasting,a€’’while fugitives went inland, running
to call to arms the main force of KikonAas.

This was an army, trained to fight on horseback
or, where the ground required, on foot. They came
with dawn over that terrain like the leaves

and blades of spring. So doom appeared to us,
dark word of Zeus for us, our evil days.

My men stood up and made a fight of it
backed on the ships, with lances kept in play,

from bright morning through the blaze of noon
holding our beach, although so far outnumbered;
but when the sun passed toward unyoking time,
then the Akhaians, one by one, gave way.

Six benches were left empty in every ship

that evening when we pulled away from death.
And this new grief we bore with us to sea:

our precious lives we had, but not our friends.
No ship made sail next day until some shipmate
had raised a cry, three times, for each poor ghost
unfleshed by the KikonAas on that fielda€!

Odysseus Describes His Departure from Troy


What of my sailing, then, from Troy?
What of those years of rough adventure,
weathered under Zeus?

The wind that c*arried west from Ilion
brought me to Ismaros, on the far shore,

a strongpoint on the coast of the Kikones.

I stormed that place and killed the men who
fought.

Plunder we took, and we enslaved the
women,

to make division, equal shares to all—
but on the spot I told them: ‘Back, and
quickly!

and blades of spring. So doom appeared to
us,

dark word of Zeus for us, our evil days.

My men stood up and made a fight of it
backed on the ships, with lances kept in

play.

from bright morning through the blaze of

noon

holding our beach, although so far
outnumbered;

but when the sun passed toward unyoking
time,

then the Akhaians, one by one, gave way.


Out to sea again!’ My men were mutinous,

fools, on stores of wine. Sheep after sheep
they butchered by the surf, and shambling
cattle,

feasting,—while fugitives went inland,
running

to call to arms the main force of Kikones.
This was an army, trained to fight on
horseback

or, where the ground required, on foot.

They came

with dawn over that terrain like the leaves

Six benches were left empty in every ship
that evening when we pulled away from
death.

And this new grief we bore with us to sea:
our precious lives we had, but not our
friends.

No ship made sail next day until some
shipmate

had raised a cry, three times, for each poor
ghost

unfleshed by the Kikones on that field.

At the moment when he says this, Odysseus has just been washed up, a castaway, in the land of the 
Phaiakia. They ask him how he got there. And the story he tells them is that he is a pirate. It is, 
moreover, a pirate who keeps pirating. When Odysseus leaves Troy, he has just finished fighting the 
long and brutal Trojan War. He and his crew have their plunder from Troy. Yet the first thing they 
do is pirate. Plus they are rather stupid and undisciplined about
pirating. In such an environment, is anybody going to save and invest a lot? Or, rather, is anybody 
going to save and invest in anything other than weapons and weapons training both to (a) make you 
and yours a hard and difficult target for the pirates, and (b) make yourself more effective when 
you go pirate? The economya€™ s ratio of savings to depreciation s/I' is surely going to be low, 
depressing the population.

The salience of                   The extent to


The  ratio  of

capital   in   determining
productivity

which population

depresses
productivity

knowledge   to
subsistence
income



The Malthusian
equilibrium
population

The ratio of
savings to
depreciation

The inverse of
the taste for
luxury

Moreover, the risk that, as you mind your own business, Odysseus and company, well-trained, 
well-equipped, battle-hardened, will come along and, just because they can, a€oestormed that place 
and killed the men who fought. Plunder we took, and we enslaved the womena€!a€Da€”such high risks 
of violent death must, in Malthusian equilibrium, be offset by reduced mortality risk from disease 
and such. Hence the economya€™ s level of subsistence­
necessities consumption will also be high. That also depresses the population.


The  ratio  of

The  salience  of

capital   in   determining
productivity

The extent to
which population
depresses
productivity


knowledge   to
subsistence
income

Nuisance

_ (1 +yh/3y (1 +Yhl^


The Malthusian
equilibrium
population

The ratio of
savings to
depreciation

The inverse of
the taste for
luxury

Not in the model, but potentially very real: A low population density means that ideas that are 
known and deployed somewhere will have a difficult time diffusing throughout a civilization. A low 
population density means that the a€ceSmithiana€D productivity gains from using those ideas to 
build an extensive and highly productive division of labor will be difficult to attain.
Yet from this Early Iron-Age Dark-Age beginning after the collapse of the high Mycenaean 
civilization of the Late Bronze Age, the Greek peoples built a civilization.

As Josiah Ober has written, the Greeks moved out of:

the violence and gift-exchange economy that characterized what Finley (1965) famously called 
a€oethe world of Odysseusa€Da€l. There was in fact sustained and substantial growth in the Greek 
economy between the ages of Homer and of Plato and Aristotlea€! driven by (1) efficient methods of 
production, predicated on relative advantage and aimed at increasing the quantity as well the 
quality of goods produced, and (2) by market
exchanges based on voluntary contracts. Moreover, the rational Greek state (notably, but not 
exclusively Athens) was increasingly cognizanta€’’through its legislative judicial, and 
administrative functions (ch. 5)a€”of the social (and taxable) value of providing rules and 
infrastructure aimed at facilitating the profitable production and exchange of goodsa€!. Ancient 
Greeks, as individuals and collectives, frequently employed economic
rationality, i.e. rationally instrumental reasoning in economic contextsa€!.

All-in-all, this appears to be a remarkable civilizational accomplishment, and not one limited to 
the enrichment of a luxurious predatory upper class. There is a reason that the Greeks have a 
predominant place in our cultural memory. That reason is not that they are "our" ancestors, whoever 
"we" happened to be. The people who decided that universities should study the Greeks lived on the 
island of Britain, in the upper Thames river valley near Oxford and in the
fins of Norfolk near Cambridge. They were in nowise descendants, biologically or culturally, of the 
ancient Greeks. Nobody in England in 1450 could speak or read Greek. Yet the inhabitants of the 
valley and the fens adopted them as their predecessors in what they decided to call a€oewestern 
civilizationa€D.

3.2.2.2. The City-State

Emerging out of the Iron a€oeDark Agea€D of -1200 to -800, the Greeks built a unique institutional 
framework: the city-state. It emerged with functional systems of governance which provided public 
goodsa€’’security, boundary stones, marketplaces, mediators, dispute resolution. This initiated a 
period of sustained increases in living standards.

3.2.2.2. The Greek City-State

Emerging out of the Iron “Dark Age” of

-1200 to -800:

•  When the Greek city states emerged they did so with functional
systems of governance which provided public goods—security,
boundary stones, marketplaces, mediators, dispute resolution.

•  This initiated a period of sustained increases in living standards.


•  While Ancient Greece did have a period of democracy, it was relative

short (less than 200 years) compared to the duration of the polity

• Remember! Most citizens—slaves, poor citizens who couldn’t
afford their tax bill, women—could not participate even in
smallholder democracy

• Many poleis oligarchies...

•  Greek institutions (rules according to which the society was organized)
tended to be “extractive”—at least if you were not one of the equals:

• Economy largely based upon slavery.

Slide taken from Melissa Dell

Now do not overstate the accomplishment. While Ancient Greece did have a period of democracy, it 
was relative short (less than 200 years) compared to the duration of the polities. Even during 
Greecea€™ s Democratic Age, most poleis remained oligarchies. And remember! Most 
citizensa€’’slaves, poor citizens who couldna€™ t afford their tax bill, womena€”could not 
participate even in smallholder democracy. The Greek rules according to which the
society was organized tended to be a€ceextractivea€Da€”at least if you were not one of the equals 
who were full citizens. And the economy was largely based upon slavery. (Do note, however, that 
with some notable exceptions like the Spartan helots and the Athenian and Syracusan mines), this 
slavery was small-scale rather than plantation slavery: it was ripping somebody out of their social 
context and placing them in a position in which they had no family or
other trusted companions to provide them with any social power.)

At and near its peak, the civilization had astonishing creative achievements. Look at the people of 
ancient classical civilization. In rhetoric and politics, we have Perikles and Cicero. In 
generalship, should we have CAisar and Alexander. In governance? We have Augustus and Trajan. In 
philosophy we have Aristotle and Plato. In sculpture and literature we have Praxiteles and 
Sophokles. They are our equal, even though they knew much less and did not stand on
the shoulders of giants, as we do.

Supermodel Mnesarete of Thespiai ("Phryne", Toad) as a
Model for Aphrodite, & Other Greek & Roman Worthies...


jupci iiiuuci iviiicoaicic ui inc3piai\ rniync, iuau/a9a

Model for Aphrodite, & Other Greek & Roman Worthies...

Even in something like making a good living through mass media via presenting yourself as a 
celebrity there were equivalents then who are our equals now. Consider Mnesarete of Thespiai. Her 
name means a€oeRemembrance of Excellencea€Q. But she was called Phryne: toad. Why? Because people 
thought her skin color, yellow, was like that of a toad. That was thought very very attractive in 
the Athens of the -300s. Phryne was the favorite model for
Aphrodite of the sculptors of her day. And I do not think she would have had anything to learn from 
Kim Kardashian about how to manage your celebrity. After all, 2000s years after her death people 
were still writing poems about and marveling at statues of her as Aphrodite.

The ancients werea€”at least those who were not protein-deprived in utero from malnutritiona€”our 
equals in intelligence, cultural sophistication, mechanical ingenuity, intellectual creativity, 
and, in short, in the ability to think and do.


Even in something like making a good living through mass media via presenting yourself as a 
celebrity there were equivalents then who are our equals now. Consider Mnesarete of Thespiai. Her 
name means a€oeRemembrance of Excellencea€D. But she was called Phryne: toad. Why? Because people 
thought her skin color, yellow, was like that of a toad. That was thought very very attractive in 
the Athens of the -300s. Phryne was the favorite model for
Aphrodite of the sculptors of her day. And I do not think she would have had anything to learn from 
Kim Kardashian about how to manage your celebrity. After all, 2000s years after her death people 
were still writing poems about and marveling at statues of her as Aphrodite.

The ancients werea€”at least those who were not protein-deprived in utero from malnutritiona€”our 
equals in intelligence, cultural sophistication, mechanical ingenuity, intellectual creativity, 
and, in short, in the ability to think and do.

