Subscribe now

David Abernethy (2000): The Dynamics of Global Dominance: European Overseas Empires 1415a€“1980'. 
a€~Beijinga€! was the capital city of a powerful state lacking both an expansionist foreign policy 
and an expansionist religion. Mecca was the central city of an expansionist religion but not of a 
state. Lisbon was the capital city of a state with an expansionist foreign policy and a strong 
commitment to spread an expansionist religion.


Share

As Muslim merchants predicted, the Portuguese launched a triple assault on Malacca. The city was 
captured in 1511 by an armada of ships carrying fifteen hundred soldiers whose commander, Vicery 
Afonso da€™ Albuquerque, saw himself as an extension agent of the Portuguese state. That the 
invaders intended to assert permanent political control soon became clear. Albuquereue allegedly 
cried out to his men in the heat of battle that:
We [should] build fortress iin this citya€! and sustain it, anda€! this land [should] be brought 
under the dominion of the Portuguese, and the King D[om] Manuel be styled true king thereof.

Construction of a stone fortress was begun as soon as the battle was won, and it was kept well 
supplied with soldiers and cannon. The city was a Portuguese possession until the Dutch took it in 
the seventeenth century. Once secured, Malacca became a vital outpost used to establish other 
Portuguese enclaves in the Moluccas and on the China coast.

The conquest of Malacca, in turn, was an integral part of a grand scheme to capture gains from 
Indian Ocean trade. Political control of enclaves throughout the ocean basin was considered a 
necessary as well as desirable mans to an economic end. Albuquerque appealed to the profit motive 
as explicitly as one could: a€oelf we take this trade of Malacca out of [the Moorsa€™ ] hands, 
Cairo and Mecca are entirely ruined, and to Venice will no spiceries go except
that which her merchants go and buy in Portugal .a€D

Portuguese actions also reveal the religious dimension of their drive for dominance. Albuquerque 
waited to launch his attack until the day of Saint James, the patron saint of the Iberian 
crusaders. That the crusading mentality was alive and well can be seen in his reference to a€oethe 
great service which we shall perform to our Lord in casting the Moors out of the country, and 
quenching the fire of this sect of Mohamed so that it may never burst out again
hereafter.a€D Non-Muslims were spared following the battle. But a€oeof the Moors, [including] women 
and children, there died by the sword an infinite number, for no quarter was given to any of 
them.a€D A church was constructed, and in 1557 it became the Cathedral of the Bishop of Malacca. 
Priests working among non-Muslims in the local fishing community made many converts. The famous 
Jesuit missionary Francis Xavier visited the city in 1545 on his
way   from India to Japan.

By one estimate between half a million and a million people, from Mozambique to Japan, converted to 
Roman Catholicism by the end of the sixteenth century. Malaccaa€™ s history and its role as 
missionary way station to other parts of Asia illustrate the strong expansionist impulses of 
Euro-Christianity.

By examining actions, motivations, and institutions at a critical juncture of world history when 
representatives of the three leading candidates for global dominance were present at the same place 
and time, the case study of Malacca in 1511 testsa€”and supportsa€”the booka€™ s central 
proposition. The Portuguese were unlike the Chinese and Arabs in the number and variety of sectoral 
institutions at their dsposal, in the stretch of these institutions far from
their home base, and in the way agents of different sectors worked together for mutually beneficial 
ends. The Malaccan case highlights not only the contrast between Europeans and others who might 
have formed equivalent empires, but also the empowering effects when cross-sectoral coalitions were 
assembleda€!.

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

The case study also helps answer a secondary questiona€!. why Europeans concentrated phase 1 
settlement and conquest activities on the New Worlda€!. Portugala€™ s grand strategy in the Indian 
Ocean was to capture gains from a lucrative seaborne trade that had functioned for a long time. 
Malacca was valued as an enclavea€! profits literally floated past in the form of ships carrying 
spices, precious stones, textiles, chinaware, carvings, and so on through a
narrow strait. There was no economic or strategic reason for Albuquerque to invade the Malayan 
interiora€!.

In contrast, the Spaniards in the New World encountered no preexisting maritime trade. The wealth 
they sought would have to be captured at its source, deep in central and south American 
hinterlands. Vera Cruza€! was seen not as an enclave facing the sea but as the staging area for an 
arduous march inlanda€!. Spain could attain wealth in the New World only by conquering and 
settlinga€! revolutionize the New World economiesa€!.

Portugal, having an essentially conservative economic agenda, felt no need to send settlers to 
Malacca or to set up plantations or prospect for mineralsa€!. Spain, facing both the necessity and 
the opportunity in the Americas to design radically new patterns of extraction, production, and 
trade, exported its peoplea€! fostered large-scale, labor-intensive agricultural and mining 
operationsa€!. Portuguese in Malaccaa€! could prosper without altering indigenous
political structures in the citya€™ s immediate environs. Not so Cortesa€! who could not prosper 
unless state structures run by Europeans were in place to coerce indigenous peoples to labor long 
and hard for minimal rewarda€!. A minimalist colonial strategy that worked well in phase 1 Malaya 
was not sufficient for New Spain.

Not until the nineteenth century did Europeans consider the Malayan interior worthy of their 
attention. Under British direction, exports from rich tin mines were increased and rubber 
plantations laid outa€! a plant Europeans had found in the New [World]a€! a mode of production 
perfected earlier in the Americasa€!. Europea€™ s concentration on transforming the New World in 
[European imperalism] phase 1 facilitated conquest and transformation of much of
the Old World in [European imperalism] phase 3a€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2008/03/the-european—l.html>

Leave a comment

