Subscribe now

First: Question: How a€oeClefta€D Is Ukraine TODAY?

The standard historical a€oeDark Continenta€D European logic of partitioning-&-ethnic-cleansing as 
the only way to keep large-scale trouble away. But while that might have made sense back in 2004, 
with the partition running along the historic Borderland-New Russia line, does anybody think it 
would make any sense today? Does anybody in the region not actively occupied by the military or in 
the pay of Muscovy a€~Rus really want to be ruled from
Moscowa€™ s Kremlin?


31 October 2004 (first round)

♦- 1999     21 November 2004 (second round) 2010 -*

26 December 2004 (second round re-run)

*- 2004      17 January 2010 (first round)

7 February 2010 (second round)

2014


Nominee
Party

Viktor Yushchenko

Independent

Viktor Yanukovych
Party of Regions

Nominee
Party

Viktor Yanukovych

Party of Regions

Yulia Tymoshenko
Batkivshchyna


Popular vote

15,115,712

12,848,528

Popular vote 12,481,266

11,593,357


Percentage

51.99%           44.20%

1 2004

Percentage        48.95%            45.47%


Matthew Yglesias: Ukraine & the End of History. a€~For the clearest depiction of Ukraine as a 
a€ceclefta€D country, look at the voting maps of the two elections that featured pro-Russian Viktor 
Yanukovych as a candidates^!. Ukraine was sufficiently a€ceclefta€D that Putin could achieve his 
core goals essentially within the confines of Ukrainian electoral politics. But herea€™ s where 
things went off the rails for Putina€!.
Peoplea€! dona€™t like being poora€!. The path to riches for Ukraine was really clear: try to 
follow Poland, Romania, Hungary, and Slovakia into a closer trading relationship with Germanya€!.

Ukraine has become steadily less cleft. The pro-Russian faction lost power in 2014 when it became 
clear that the bar for being pro-Russian was a€oevoluntarily abandon your best chance for economic 
developments□ rather than Soehave a lot of Russian-language shows on TV.a€D And thata€™ s because 
the pro-Russian faction was ultimately controlled by Moscow and did not reflect the interests and 
aspirations of Russophone
Ukrainiansa€!. Zelenskyya€™ s landslide win in 2019a€!. He did much better in the eastern parts of 
the country than the west. Zelenskyy is a native Russian speaker, and part of his platform was to 
be more open to negotiating with Russia to end the conflict in Donbas. This did not work 
(obviously), but its very failure successfully consolidated Ukrainian identity precisely because 
Zelenskyya€™ s policy initially was not seen as coming
from    a place of hardcore Ukrainian nationalism.

What Zelensky was trying to give people was the basic ingredients of [Fukuyamaa€™ s] End of 
History: good government, autonomy, and prosperity through integration with the richer parts of the 
world. In his own mind, Putin is surely waging some kind of battle for Russian civilization. But by 
shelling the cities of eastern Ukraine, hea€™ s just confirmed to everyone that he doesna€™ t care 
about thema€”or really anyonea€”and that
the way forward is to have an independent country on the road to EU membershipa€!. This all 
essentially reflects the basic logic of the end of history, which is simply that the prospect of 
economic and political integration with an ever-growing West is very compelling. People in Romania 
and Bulgaria dona€™ t want to be part of an Orthodox bloc; they want to be rich. People in 
Russophone Ukraine dona€™ t want Ukrainian economic
policy to be made for the convenience of the Russian governmenta€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

Ukraine and the end of history

Francis Fukuyamaa€™ s a€oeThe End of History and the Last Mana€D and Samuel Huntingtona€™ s a€oeThe 
Clash of Civilizations and the Remaking of the World Ordera€D annoyed seemingly everyone when they 
came out in the early a€~90s. And yet, something about their core arguments was compelling enough 
that people still reference them both decades latera€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 39 likes A- 29 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

As I see it, if you are nearby to Muscovy a€~Rus, you have four choices as to your status:

1. Satellitea€”your government does what Grand Prince of Muscovy a€~Rus wants in everything, and 
even so they might overthrow throw it and replace it with someone he likes more. Why?Jjust because 
that is what the Grand Prince of Muscovy a€~Rus does.

2. Finlandizationa€”in international security policy your government does what Grand Prince of 
Muscovy a€~Rus wants in everything, and otherwise he leaves you alone.

3. NATOa€”you get strong security guarantees from someone Muscovy a€~Rus does not want to tangle 
with.

4. Partitiona€”so that part of you becomes a satellite (or worse), and part becomes (2) or (3).

Ukraine thought that it had struck a deal in Budapest in 1994 to be Finlandized 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Budapest_Memorandum_on_Security_Assurances>. Putin thought it was 
time to demonstrate that that was not soa€”that Ukraine was a satellite; with perhaps a fallback 
position of partition along the historic Borderland-New Russia line, with the western half of 
Ukraine Finlandized.

As I see it, Finlandization went off the table with Putina€™ s conquest of Crimea. The past two 
months have shown that Muscovy a€~Rus does not have the power to turn Kyiv a€~Rus into an obedient 
satellite. So we are now talking about (3) and (4) only. If Muscovy a€~Rus is smart, it will 
guarantee Ukraine territorial integrity in return for a consultative dual-sovereignty 
Northern-Ireland role as the protector of and advocate for people in Crimea and Donbass
(and perhaps elsewhere) who feel like they are members of Muscovy a€~Rus. If Muscovy a€~Rus is 
dumb, it will insist on partition, and so further poison its forthcoming relationship with Kyiv 
a€~Rus.

Share

Condition: MO AR Thoughts on Americaa€™s Macroeconomic Outlook:



PROJECT SYNDICATE: America's Macroeconomic Outlook

America's Macroeconomic Outlook Mar 25,2022 J. BRADFORD DELONG Given the depth of the recession 
caused by COVID-19 in early 2020, the current state of the US economy and labor market is nothing 
short of spectacular. And though an inevitable increase in inflation has rained on the parade, 
there is still good reason to think that it will subside in the media€l


PODCAST: "Hexapodia" is AMe Key Insight! XXXVII: A Meta-Podcast on the Ezra Klein Show, Larry 
Summers Edition; or, The Inflation Outlook Again
Listen now (51 min) I a€!

Read more

10 months ago A- 2 likes A- Brad DeLong



One Picture:


Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Adam Tooze & Robert Armstrong: China Under Pressure'. a€~Can China make the adjustments 
necessary to sustain growth, and should global investors go along for the ride? Adam thinksa€! yes. 
Ethan and I thinka€! noa€! L<https://www.ft.com/content/068fabc7-5455-43c4-a512-fcdd3514alcc>

• Faustine Perrin: On the Origins of the Demographic Transition. Rethinking the European Marriage 
Pattern<hWp://w w w.ehes .org/EHES 202,pdf>

• Megan McArdle: The key Question Raised by Lia ThomasaC™ s Swimming Success: What Is the Purpose 
ofWomena€™s Sports 
.?<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2022/03/23/lia-thomas-trans-swimmer-ncaas-fairness-inclus
ion/>

•  David Silver & Jonathan Zhang: Impacts of Basic Income on Health & Economic Well-Being: Evidence 
from the VAa€™ s Disability Compensation Program'. a€~An additional $1,000 per year in transfers 
decreases food insecurity and homelessness by 4.1% and 1.3% over five years, while the number of 
collections on VA debts declines by 6.4%a€! <https: //w ww.nber.org/papers/w29877>

•  Neal Templin: Investors Are Irrational by Nature. They Can Be Trained to Be More Rational'. 
a€~Dan Arielya€!. a€oeSometimes the best way to get us to act in our long-term best interest is to 
not let our short-term interest participated Da€! <https ://ww 
w.barrons.com/articlesinvestors-irrational-nature-training-51648029602?tesla=y>

•  Ben Smith & Jensen Huang: Manufacturing Intelligence'. a€~Sped up computing by a million-xa€! 
enabled revolutionary AI modelsa€!. Now AI will revolutionize all industriesa€! 
<https://stratecherv.com/2022/an-interview-with-nvidia-ceo-iensen-huang-about-manufacturing-intellig
ence/>

• Sam Winter-Levy: A Proxy War in Ukraine Is the Worst Possible OutcomeaC "Except For All the 
6Mers<https://warontherocks.com/2022/03/a-proxv-war-in-ukraine-is-the-worst-possible-outcome-except-
for-all-the-others/>

• Andrew Lohsen: Will Russia Create New a€cePeoplea€™ s Republic sa€L2in Ukraine?'. a€~So far, 
Russia has adhered to its 2014 playbooka€!. If it continues to follow that playbook, Russia might 
establish new pseudo-states similar to the separatist Donetsk and Luhansk a€oepeoplea€™ s 
republicsa€Da€!. Russiaa€™ s problems in finding suitable proxiesa€! 
<https://warontherocks.com/2Q22/Q3/will-russia-create-new-peoples-republics-in-
ukraine/>

• David Leonhardt: Reducing Covida€™ s Toll 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nvtimes.com/template/oakv2>

•  Pauline Grosjean: Conflict, Empires, & Political Preferences: a€~More than 35,000 individuals in 
35 countries to show how conflict victimisation in WWII left a negative imprint on levels of 
political trust throughout Europe and Central Asia that has persisteda€! 
<https://voxeu.org/article/conflict-empires-and-political-preferences>

•  Tommaso Porzio & Federico Rossi: Measuring the Role of Human Capital for Structural 
Transformation: a€~From farms to officesa€!. 52 countriesa€! an increase in schooling led to a 
sharp reduction in the agricultural labour supplya€! <https: //voxeu 
.org/article/measuring-role-human-capital- structural-transformation>

• Sean Illing: How Vladimir Putin Became the Victim of His Own Lies: a€~Vladimir Putin and the 
dangers of yes-mena€! 
<https://www.vox.eom/policy-and-politics/2022/3/24/22982864/vladimir-putin-russia-ukraine-war-brian-
klaas>

• AndrA©s Velasco: Democracy Is the Next Identity Politics 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/putin-war-in-ukraine-liberal-democratic-reaction-by-an
dres-velasco-2022-03>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Ezra Klein: a€™No one wants Larry Summers to be right about where the economy is goinga€! not 
even Larry Summers. But so far, hea€™ s been a lot closer to the mark than his critics. So what if 
what hea€™ s saying now is true, too?a€!

Ezra Klein @ezraklein

No one wants Larry Summers to be right about where the economy is going a€” perhaps not even Larry 
Summers. But so far, he's been a lot closer to the mark than his critics. So what if what he's 
saying now is true, too?


nytimes.comOpinion 11 Keep Hoping Larry Summers Is Wrong. What if Hea€™ s Not?The former Treasury 
secretary discusses inflation, a possible recession and how the Russia-Ukraine war might exacerbate 
both.
2:13 PM r™ Mar 29,2022

28Likes8Retweets

• Jomini of the West: a€™ Russian forces will continue to tie down Ukrainian forces before Kyiv, in 
NE Ukraine, and before Kharkiv, however the focus of major offensive action will be in the Donetsk, 
Luhansk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhiaa€! <

Jomini of the West @JominiW

20/ Russian forces will continue to tie down Ukrainian forces before Kyiv, in NE Ukraine, and 
before Kharkiv, however the focus of major offensive action will be in the Donetsk, Luhansk, 
Kherson, and Zaporizhzhia. I will expand more on this soon.
2:58 AMT™ Mar28,2022

398Likes35Retweets

• Noah Smith: Give Us All the Refugees, Dammit!'. a€™ America used to open our arms to people 
fleeing war and tyranny. We need to get back to thata€! <


Noahpinion

Give us all the refugees, dammit!

My great-aunt Edith (actually my grandmothera€™ s first cousin, but thata€™ s clunkier to say, so 
we always called her my a€cegreat-aunta€D) was born in a region thata€™ s now part of western 
Ukraine. Sometime in the middle of World War 2, she found herself on a cattle train, being taken 
from Auschwitz to another concentration camp. Everyone on the train knew they wea€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 57 likes A- 55 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Addison Del Mastro: The Car & Car Dependence'. a€~We were solda€”and to our discredit, we 
boughta€’’gridlock and rush hour and ten-minute trips for a half-gallon of milka€!

The Car and Car Dependence

I sometimes wonder how my personal enjoyment of driving, and my reliance on a car for much of my 
work, lines up with what I write here. I take transit when it fits my schedule and when it drops me 
where I need to be, but I do rather enjoy a long drive, and transit often fails to meet those 
criteria anywaya€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 3 likes A- 5 comments A- Addison Del Mastro

•  Timothy Snyder: The Kremlina€™ s Formula for Failure: a€~Putina€™ s notion was that Russia would 
be negotiating with a puppet Ukrainian government on the third day of the invasiona€!


Thinking about...

The Kremlin's formula for failure

1. Putin is responsible for the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and as a tyrant must redistribute 
blame for its failures. For the tyranny to continue functioning, other individuals and institutions 
must accept the blame, while avoiding any talk of failure. This is difficulta€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 55 likes A- 12 comments A- Timothy Snyder

•  Matthew Yglesias: Ia€™ m an Optimist About Higher Education'. a€~A rough few years for 
collegesa€™ business model is going to make things better than evera€! <


Slow Boring

Ia€™ m an optimist about higher education

Sam Altman from OpenAI recently did a thread about how a€oeUS college education is nearer to 
collapsing than it appears .a€D I have no idea how close to collapsing people think American higher 
education is, so ita€™ s difficult for me to offer a clear view on that. But I think the whole 
thread is emblematic of a tendency among successful technology executives to understate the 
resilience of thea€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 86 likes A- 143 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

• Robert Reich: Why do Putin, Trump, Tucker Carlson, & the GOP sound so much alike?

Robert Reich

Why do Putin, Trump, Tucker Carlson, and the GOP sound so much alike?

Listen now I In a speech on Friday delivered from his office in the Kremlin, Putin criticized the 
Westa€™ s a€oecancel culturea€D which, he charged, is a€cecancelinga€D Russia — a€oean entire 
thousand-year-old country, our people.a€D It was the third time in recent months Putin has blasted 
the so-called a€oecancel culturea€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 273 likes A- 195 comments A- Robert Reich

•  David Rothkopf: a€™ The Russian invasion of Ukraine has revealed a geopolitical landscape quite 
different from that officials and many experts thought was in placea€!. We should be more careful 
in our language. Allies are different from partners, partners are different from friends, friends 
are different from fair-weather friends, the non-aligned are different from rivals and rivals are 
different from enemiesa€!

David Rothkopf @djrothkopf

The Russian invasion of Ukraine has revealed a geopolitical landscape quite different from that 
officials and many experts thought was in place. On the one hand, as many have noted, the Atlantic 
alliance has come together and is now more unified than in decades.


Andres Oppenheimer @oppenheimera

The leaders of Mexico, Brazil, Argentina refuse to join the democratic worlda€™ s economic 
sanctions against Putin. In some cases, they are even allowing groups within their own ruling 
parties to support Russia publicly. Read: https ://t.co/Jlb81XSh IK @miamiherald @qtf @beltrandelrio
12:47 PM r™ Mar 26,2022

668Likes239Retweets

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:
Paragraphs:

Wonderful paper. Brilliant paper. Important lessons on how a bureaucracy focused on keeping people 
from cheating and mooching causes enormous harm. Plus, of course, the inescapable truth that 
anything, anything at all is very much worth doing that takes even a small step toward fixing the 
fact that poor people have much less social power than any sensible societal well-being function 
would allocate to them:

David Silver & Jonathan Zhang: Impacts of Basic Income on Health & Economic Well-Being: Evidence 
from the VAa€™ s Disability Compensation Program'. a€~Quasi-random assignment of veterans claiming 
mental disorder disability to examiners who vary in their assessing tendencies. We find that an 
additional $1,000 per year in transfers decreases food insecurity and homelessness by 4.1% and 1.3% 
over five years, while the
number of collections on VA debts declines by 6.4%. Despite facing virtually no direct monetary 
costs, healthcare utilization increases by 2.5% over the first five years, with greater engagement 
in preventive care and improved medication adherencea€! in part explained by the ability to 
overcome indirect costs of accessing care (a€ceordealsa€D)a€! transfers improve communication and 
trust between veterans and VA cliniciansa€!

LINK: <https://www.nber.org/papers/w29877>

I feel a huge gap in my knowledge that is keeping me from understanding the world I am going to 
live in. I really do not think I have a proper gasp of what a "graphics processing unit" or a 
a€oeneural engine" really is and does:

Ben Smith & Jensen Huang: Manufacturing Intelligence'. a€~The theme of Huanga€™ s keynote was the 
idea of AI creating AI via machine learning; he called the idea a€oeintelligence manufacturinga€D: 
"Accelerated computing, at data center scale, and combined with machine learning, has sped up 
computing by a million-xa€! enabled revolutionary AI modelsa€! made self-supervised learning 
possiblea€! fundamentally changed
what software can make, and how you make softwarea€!. Over the past decade, Nvidia-accelerated 
computing delivered a million-x speed-up in AI, and started the modern AI revolution. Now AI will 
revolutionize all industries. The CUDA libraries, the Nvidia SDKs, are at the heart of accelerated 
computinga€!. The core idea behind machine learning is that computers, presented with massive 
amounts of data, can extract insights and
ideas from that data that no human ever could; to put it another way, the development of not just 
insights but, going forward, software itself, is an emergent process. Nvidiaa€™ s role is making 
massively parallel computing platforms that do the calculations necessary for this emergent process 
far more quickly than was ever possible with general purpose computing platformsa€!

LINK: 
<https://stratechery.com/2022/an-interview-with-nvidia-ceo-jensen-huang-about-manufacturing-intellig
ence/>

The A.C. Pigou in me says: heavy, heavy taxes on commuting auto mileage, funneled into mass transit 
as the obvious solution:

Addison Del Mastro: The Car & Car Dependence'. a€~I take transit when it fits my schedule and when 
it drops me where I need to be, but I do rather enjoy a long drive, and transit often fails to meet 
those criteria anywaya€!. Cars are great for leisure and exploration and sport, but not so great 
for commuting, running errands, and other everyday tasks, at least in areas that were already 
substantially built out before widespread car
ownership. It was once common, for example, to own a car for weekend drives, but commute on the 
trolley. But we were solda€”and to our discredit, we boughta€’’gridlock and rush hour and 
ten-minute trips for a half-gallon of milk and 30,000 Americans violently killed each year under 
the banner of exploration, freedom, and the open roada€!

LINK:

msouTi

.The Deleted Scenes

The Car and Car Dependence

I sometimes wonder how my personal enjoyment of driving, and my reliance on a car for much of my 
work, lines up with what I write here. I take transit when it fits my schedule and when it drops me 
where I need to be, but I do rather enjoy a long drive, and transit often fails to meet those 
criteria anywaya€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 3 likes A- 5 comments A- Addison Del Mastro

I concur that the future of higher education is very bright, if^t figure out how to do our jobs 
better. Where we are needed is as motivators and knowledge coaches: finding for each individual 
student the set of reading, writing, listening, watching, questioning, answering, and debating that 
works best for them, and providing a motivational strueturea€’’which requires not just 
grading-and-assessment, but also East African Plains Ape doing-things-in-teamsa€”to
get people over the actually-do-the-work hump.

We have formal systems that accomplish a bunch of this, for many people at least. But that is not 
what we are focused on. And so we do a job that is both incredibly effective and yet half assed 
compared to what we might be able to do:

Matthew Yglesias: Ia€™man Optimist About Higher Education'. a€~A rough few years for collegesa€™ 
business model is going to make things better than evera€!. The thing about college is a lot of 
people like it! Not just because college is fun and has parties and stuff, but because a lot of 
people learn a lot of interesting things at college. I think Ia€™ m pretty decent at learning 
things on my own. But I took plenty of classes in
college that involved close readings of dense texts or detailed technical matters, and Ia€™ m very 
bad at studying that kind of thing independently. Without the formal structure of a technical logic 
class, Ia€™ d never have been able to get through the proof of the diagonal lemma or all the 
technical aspects of Tarskia€™ s undefinability theorem or GAJdela€™ s incompleteness theorem. Some 
people absolutely could do that. But I
couldna€™t. The discipline of formal learning helped a lot with that. And with reading a€oeAnna 
Karenina.a€D And with understanding David Lewisa€™ arguments about causation and possibilitya€!. 
The nice thing about a world in which colleges need to compete harder for the patronage of a 
dwindling population of 18-year-olds is that the schools themselves need to try to raise their 
gamea€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

Ia€™ m an optimist about higher education

Sam Altman from OpenAI recently did a thread about how a€oeUS college education is nearer to 
collapsing than it appears ,a€D I have no idea how close to collapsing people think American higher 
education is, so ita€™ s difficult for me to offer a clear view on that. But I think the whole 
thread is emblematic of a tendency among successful technology executives to understate the 
resilience of thea€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 86 likes A- 143 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

Chad Orzel: Imminent Death of the Academy Predicted'. a€~The usual a€oeYou can learn what you need 
to be a successful tech person without all the expensive ancillary nonsense that comes with modern 
higher educationa€Da€! is true in a narrowly literal sensea€!. [But] the number of people who think 
theya€™ re the right sort of highly motivated autodidact to bypass academia is at least one and 
probably more like two orders of
magnitude larger than the number of people who really area€!. You absolutely do not need the 
assistance of a tenured faculty membera€L The motivation to work out all the end-of-chapter 
problems in the textbook without peeking at the solutions online is a lot harder to come bya€!


LINK:

AW A</>

Counting Atoms

Imminent Death of the Academy Predicted

Back when I was a sophomore at Williams, the sticker price broke twenty thousand dollars for the 
first time, and some angry person spray-painted the columns of Chapin Hall with the digits: 
$20,760.1 remember a lot of agitated thinkpieces about the unsustainable trajectory of higher 
education in the US, and predicting that some sort of reckoning would na€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 3 comments A- Chad Orzel

With respect to David Leonhardt: Yes, but having people wear indoor masks in the presence of the 
immunocompromised, or those who might come in contact with the immunocompromised, is a no-brainer 
as well. That the Republican Party has decided that its peoplea€™ s CORE FREEDOM is the right not 
to have to take even a small step to avoid being Typhoid Mary for CO VID shows its moral 
bankruptcy. David Leonhardt should not be pretending that that


Counting Atoms

Imminent Death of the Academy Predicted

Back when I was a sophomore at Williams, the sticker price broke twenty thousand dollars for the 
first time, and some angry person spray-painted the columns of Chapin Hall with the digits: 
$20,760.1 remember a lot of agitated thinkpieces about the unsustainable trajectory of higher 
education in the US, and predicting that some sort of reckoning would na€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 3 comments A- Chad Orzel

With respect to David Leonhardt: Yes, but having people wear indoor masks in the presence of the 
immunocompromised, or those who might come in contact with the immunocompromised, is a no-brainer 
as well. That the Republican Party has decided that its peoplea€™ s CORE FREEDOM is the right not 
to have to take even a small step to avoid being Typhoid Mary for CO VID shows its moral 
bankruptcy. David Leonhardt should not be pretending that that
is an OK thing:

David Leonhardt: Reducing Covida€™ s Toll: a€~l. More boostersa€!. 2. The immunocompromiseda€! 
Evushelda€!. 3. Post-infection treatmentsa€! Paxlovida€!. 4. Masksa€!. A high-quality mask will 
protect the wearer even if others nearby are maskless. The bottom line: All four of these steps 
have small costs and large benefitsa€!

LINK: 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nytimes■com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit_nn_2022Q32
8&instance 
id=56905&nl=the-morning&productCode=NN&regi_id=64675225&segment_id=86760&te=l&uri=nyt%3A%2F%2Fnewsle
tter%2F339b49f9-3aad-5880-ae26-lecbce0e2666&user id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>


Counting Atoms

Imminent Death of the Academy Predicted

Back when I was a sophomore at Williams, the sticker price broke twenty thousand dollars for the 
first time, and some angry person spray-painted the columns of Chapin Hall with the digits: 
$20,760.1 remember a lot of agitated thinkpieces about the unsustainable trajectory of higher 
education in the US, and predicting that some sort of reckoning would na€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 3 comments A- Chad Orzel

With respect to David Leonhardt: Yes, but having people wear indoor masks in the presence of the 
immunocompromised, or those who might come in contact with the immunocompromised, is a no-brainer 
as well. That the Republican Party has decided that its peoplea€™ s CORE FREEDOM is the right not 
to have to take even a small step to avoid being Typhoid Mary for CO VID shows its moral 
bankruptcy. David Leonhardt should not be pretending that that
is an OK thing:

David Leonhardt: Reducing Covida€™ s Toll'. a€~l. More boostersa€!. 2. The immunocompromiseda€! 
Evushelda€!. 3. Post-infection treatmentsa€! Paxlovida€!. 4. Masksa€!. A high-quality mask will 
protect the wearer even if others nearby are maskless. The bottom line: All four of these steps 
have small costs and large benefitsa€!

LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nytimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit nn 
20220328&instance. id=56905&nl=the-morning&productCode=NN&regi id=64675225&segment 
id=86760&te=l&uri=nyt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2F339b49f9-3aad-5880-ae26-lecbce0e2666&user 
id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

