Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth <http ;//eq uitablegrowth .org>:

1)When you do the welfare economics, one of the most immediate an obvious conclusion is that a good 
society will need an extremely robust income support program. But the
problem has always been that enough voters would rather see ten people who would be appropriate 
users not get social insurance than to see one person among the
a€oeundeservinga€n actually receive benefits. Curiously, however, this set of judgments is 
nevera€”or rarely a€’’applied to systems that reward the undeserving rich. Their
comeuppance is limited to entertainment fantasiesa€’’episodes of Columbo, for example:

Liz Hippie & Alix Gould-Werth: Weak Income Support Infrastructure Harms U.S. Workers And Their 
Families & Constrains Economic Growth'.
a€~Economists Jesse Rothsteina€! and Sandra Blacka€! argue it is inefficient to have families 
self-insure against unpredictable risks they cannot
reasonably  calculatedL Black and Rothstein explain, a€oeThe federal government can provide social 
insurance protections at a much lower overall cost,
anda€! enable families to stretch their market earnings further.a€Da€ I Most people will need 
income support at some point in their livesa€!. In any given
month, nearly 1 in 5 people benefit from SNAP, Supplemental Security Income, TANF, public or 
subsidized housing, the Women, Infants, and Children, or
WIC, program, or the Child Care and Development Funda€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/weak-income-support-infrastructure-harms-u-s-workers-and-their-families
-and-constrains-economic-growth/>

2) Our President & CEO Emeritus Heather Boushey is doing a good job from her perch in the Executive 
Office Building, I think:

Heather Boushey: Ia€™ m One ofBidena€™ s Advisers. Herea€™ s How I Think About His Economic 
Agenda'. a€~In the early 1980sa€! my father was
a€oepink slippeda€D from his machinist job building 747s at Boeing, an event that upended our 
family financesaC!. We were lucky; the recession was
relatively short, and between my moma€™ s pay check and my dada€™ s benefits, we got by until the 
orders for planes resumeda€L I recall being shocked
by                                                                     how much power Boeing had 
over our lives. When my dad was laid off, the economic security my parents had long worked for 
disappeared
overnighta€!. It got me thinking abouta€! how cana€! things like unions and democratic governments 
that respond to crisesa€! cushion individual families
against the whims of the marketplace?a€! Biden has set out to mend broken supply chains as 
aggressively as he tackled other challenges with the American
Rescue Plan. But getting back to where we were is not enough. We need to emerge stronger and more 
resilient. And thata€™ s why we need a more robust
government^!. Congress has a choice to make. Does it want to grow our economy by investing in the 
middle class and the public sector, and
fundamentally recalibrating the relationship between government and the people it represents, or 
continue giving billions in tax handouts to the wealthiest
Americans and multinational corporations? Ita€™ s time to build back better a€ I

LINK: <https ://www.nytimes .com/2021/09/29/opinion/government-biden-families .html>

3) I wonder if the government can be flexible enough to handle this problem, and I certainly doubt 
the ability of our current legal system to handle it. So I would rather focus on (a)
mechanisms to give more workers more bargaining power, and (b) more channels and intermediary 
institutions through which they can bargain and to bargain on their behalf:

Kathryn Zickuhr: Workplace Surveillance Is Becoming the New Normal for U.S. Workers: a€~Invasive 
and exploitative workplace surveillance in the
United States is now growing largely unchecked due to weak worker power and a lack of legal 
protections or regulatory restrictionsa€!. Workplace
surveillancea€! enables illegal discrimination, hampers worker organizinga€! is part of a cycle of 
fractured work arrangements through which firms de­
skill    work and misclassify employeesa€!. The dangers posed by workplace surveillance fall most 
heavily on the most vulnerablea€!. Policy and regulatory
solutionsa€! should addressa€! also the structural causes that fissure employments!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.Org/research-paper/workplace-surveillance-is-becoming-the-new-normal-for-u-
s-workers/#citation-114>

4) From two years ago, in the Before Times. I have been handing out these charts for what seems to 
me now to have been a very long time:

Austin Clemens: Eight Graphs that Tell the Story of U.S. Economic Inequality : a€~Rising economic 
inequality over the past 40 years has redrawn the

U.S. wealth and income landscape, shifting many of the gains of prosperity into the hands of a 
smaller and smaller group of people and marginalizing
members of vulnerable communities. This transformation is in turn reducing income mobility and 
opening gulfs in educational achievement and health
outcomes between different levels of income. The eight graphs in the three sections below visually 
illustrate these findingsa€!. The first graphic tracks the
share                                                                       of all earned income 
accrued by the top 1 percent of earners, along with the next 9 percent, the upper 40 percent (from 
the 50th percentile to the 90th)
and the bottom 50 percent. The share of income controlled by the top 10 percent bottomed out in the 
1970s but has reached new highsa€”the top 10
percent of all income earners now control around 38 percent of national incomea€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/eight-graphs-that-tell-the-storv-of-u-s-economic-inequalitv/>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Thisa€”Odd Lotsa€”has become my second-favorite podcast recently. This was a very good 
conversation on supply disruptions, and whether they are guiding investment
spending into the right sectors and industries:

Joe Weisenthal: Transcript: How to Understand the Inflation Wea€™ re Seeing Right Now: a€™ On this 
Odd Lots, we speak with Julia Coronado and
Laura Rosner-Warburton, the co-founders of MacroPolicy Perspectives to get a greater handle on 
whata€™ s going on right nowa€!. Youa€™re talking
about  it a little bit with semiconductors and, you know, we might see some greater investment and 
I think therea€™ s some hope that this with tightness in
the labor market, with tightness in supply chains, that we may see, supplies had expansion or a 
capital-deepening of some sort that companies will invest
more. And that we will just have a more productive supply side sector than we would have had 
otherwise because tightness in various markets will result in
greater building of factories; higher, more aggressive training of workers so that they are more 
productive; greater investment in automation and so
fortha€!. Then maybe things wona€™ t be so tight in six months. And then maybe some of that 
investment will have proven to be unnecessary. What is
your outlook for a sort of sustained change? I guess I would say a sustained change in the CapEx 
trajectorya€! LINK:

<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/articles/2021-09-24/transcript-how-to-understand-the-inflation-we-re
-seeing-right-now?srnd=oddlots>

2) I confess that the correlation between political polarization and COVID denialism at the state 
level makes me significantly more depressed about the way back than I believe
Bradley and Trevon are:

Bradley L. Hardy & Trevon D. Logan: The Way Back: Assessing Economic Recovery Among Black Americans 
During COVIDa€ “19: a€~Varying state
and local public health and economic policy choices could present clear challenges to the speed and 
persistence of a broader national economic
recoverya€L Recent federal policies will mandate that employers require employees to either be 
vaccinated or submit to weekly testing. Economic policy
evidence  and theory show that businesses value and benefit from a consistent application of 
regulatory policies. Federal policy is converging with a private
sector that is increasingly adopting a more consistent, aggressive stance on mask-wearing and 
vaccination policy for employees as a mechanism to avoid
another large-scale shutdown of economic activity. Black Americans have experienced an especially 
large, harmful public health and economic shock from
COVIDa€“19. The consequences from historically high job loss and CO- VIDa€“19 mortality and 
morbidity, along with Ka€“12 learning loss, will likely
transmit   a substantial intra- and intergenerational consequence onto Black families and their 
communities. These communities will benefit from sustained
public health, economic policy, and educational interventions to moderate the effects of 
COVIDa€“19a€!


LIINix; <.iiiips;//www.iianimonproieci.org/asseis/ines/k vj v m_is.ecovery.pai>

3) Yes, Eric Morath does a good job in letting Michelle Holder rebut Isabel Soto. And he does put 
his thumb on the scale in the appropriate way. But surely he should not have
given her a platforma€’’surely there are other places to find conservatives voices who are more 
sensible and more reality-driven? People who are willing to claim that ending UI
was  a big deal because a bunch of Republican politicians glommed onto it as a cause six months ago 
are not people who deserve a larger megaphone in any sensible public sphere:

Eric Morath: U.S. Jobless Claims Have Remained Near Pandemic Lows in September. a€~a€oeThe ending 
of these programs is realigning incentives in a
way thata€™ s much more pro-work,a€D said Isabel Soto, director of labor market policy at American 
Action Foruma€!. Ms. Soto estimated that 37% of
recipients were paid more on benefits than at prior jobs when receiving the $300 supplement. She 
also said she found that new applications for
unemployment aid fell 14% in states that ended the programs early, while continuing claims fell 5%. 
aCceThe expiration of the pandemic unemployment
insurance programs should produce a boost in job creation ,a€D she said. Labor Department data 
showed that states that ended benefits early had about the
same level of job growth as other states this summeraC!. Michelle Holder, an economist and chief 
executive of the Washington Center for Equitable
Growth, a liberal-leaning think tank [said:] aCceThe economy remains in recovery mode, and there is 
still a deadly virus out there,a€D she said. a€ceThe
thought that unemployment benefits were the primary reason people werenaC™ t taking jobs was not 
correct, and now wea€™ ve seen that.a€D Dr.

Holdera€! expects the broader economic recovery to continue, [but] the strength of the expansion 
could lose steama€!
LINK: <https://www.wsj .com/articles/weekly-jobless-claims-09-30-2021-11632938796>

4) Some very high quality thoughts about how to do good statistical empirical work in economics:

Michael Roberts: a€™ Many papers I see^\ are not clear about the source of identificationa€!. I 
will try to explaina€!. Identification comes from
comparing outcomes (Y) that face different treatments (X). Old school econometrics uses theory 
about Y and what determines it, and then calibrates with
data. New school econometrics focuses on what drives variation in X. David Card (maybe others) 
called these the a€oemodel baseda€D and a€oedesign
baseda€D approaches. There is a video online, and slides. Ita€™ s very gooda€!. The crux of the new 
school is to think like experimentalist, even if you
have observational dataa€!. Can you defend the idea that variation in X is a€oeas ifa€D random, 
like an experiment? We use fixed effects and other tools
to pinpoint a particular part of the variation in X, variation that we can EXPLAIN, and 
persuasively ARGUE is a€oeas ifa€D randomly assigned. Thus,
having lots of fixed effects, or using any particular technique, is not what makes your paper 
compelling. You need to know and explain the circumstances
that give rise to variation in your key X variable, and use that to develop a compelling comparison 
of outcomes. If youa€™re doing difference in
differences, you need to be clear about the events that drive changes in X for treatment group and 
not for the control group. The fundamental comparison
should  be clear. Then worry about parallel pre-trendsa€!. You need to make the comparison groups 
and times, and events driving treatment very clear for
the broadest possible audience. This clarity will provoke the kinds of scrutiny from identification 
police that every paper really needs. You will need to
answer all the questions that arisea€!. a€oeMystery meataCD identification^’’variation in X left 
over after all the a€cecontrolsa€D you can think of, is
dubiousa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/mikejrob/status/1443366871948955651>

5) Remember, Lehman should not have been a Lehman moment. There is no good reason that Evergrande 
should be. Whether what I now tend to think of as the safe-asset-shortage
problem is about to come to China bigtime, and trigger an example of the middle-income trapa€”that 
is a very interesting idea that I think I need to spend significant amounts of
time trying to assess:

Paul Krugman: Wonking Out: This Might Be Chinaa€™ s a€~Babarua€™ Moment. a€~Suppose that the 
conventional wisdom is right and that
Evergrande isna€™ t another Lehman moment. That still wona€™ t mean that things are OK. For it 
seems quite possible, at least to me, that China is
having     a a€oebabarua€n momenta€l the Japanese bubble economya€”or as the Japanese themselves 
called it, the a€oebabaru economya€Da€”of the late
1980s, when prices of many assets, above all commercial real estate, went completely crazy. At one 
point it was widely claimed that the land under the
Imperial Palace was worth more than the whole state of California. Then everything crasheda€!. The 
bursting of the Japanese bubble didna€™ t lead to a
financial meltdown. But it was followed by a prolonged period of economic weakness. At first many 
observers attributed that weakness to a hangover from
previous financial excess: Japanese corporations had too much debt, they argued, or Japanese banks 
had too many nonperforming loans. But the weakness
went                                                                      on and on, and indeed in 
some ways continues to this daya€!. Japan has been able to maintain more or less full employment 
only through constant
economic stimulus: ultralow interest rates and persistent budget deficits that have pushed the 
national debt above 200 percent of G.D.P. True, that debt
hasna€™ t posed any problems so far, and the Japanese arguably deserve praise for managing a 
difficult economic situation with relatively little mass
sufferinga€!. Herea€™ s the thing: While China is vastly different from Japan in many ways, 
ChinaaC™ s macroeconomic situation bears a striking
resemblance to that of Japan around the time the Japanese bubble bursta€!

LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2?
CCPAOptOut=true&campaign id=116&emc=edit _pk 20210924&instance id=41281&nl=paul-

krugman&productCode=PK&regi id=64675225&segment 
id=69865&te=l&uri=nyt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2F134b2fe6-1968-5d03-a98a-
f!20947ff55e&user id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

6) It is hard to believe that this book is now a decade old. It seems to me to become more and more 
relevant with each passing day:

Geoffrey Kabaservice: Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction of the 
Republican Party. a€~Moderate Republicansa€™
downfall began not with the rise of the Tea Party but about the time of President Dwight 
EisenhoweraC™ s farewell address. Even in the 1960s, when left­
wing radicalism and right-wing backlash commanded headlines, Republican moderates and progressives 
formed a powerful movement, supporting pro-
civil rights politicians like Nelson Rockefeller and William Scranton, battling big-government 
liberals and conservative extremists alike. But the
Republican civil war ended with the overthrow of the moderate ideas, heroes, and causes that had 
comprised the core of the GOP since its formation. In
hindsight,  it is todayaC™ s conservatives who are a€oeRepublicans in Name Only.a€D Writing with 
passionate sympathy for a bygone tradition of
moderation, Kabaservice recaptures a time when fiscal restraint was matched with social engagement; 
when a cohort of leading Republicans opposed the
Vietnam war; when George Romneya€“father of Mitt Romneya€“conducted a nationwide tour of American 
poverty, from Appalachia to Watts, calling on
society to a€ce listen to the voices from the ghetto.a€D Rule and Ruin is an epic, deeply 
researched history that reorients our understanding of our political
past and presenta€!

LINK: <https://www.amazon.com/Rule-Ruin-Moderation-Destruction-Development-ebook/dp/B005UFCPHG>

7) I am not sure that this is Galbraith so much as Keynes himself: he did call his theory 
"moderately conservative". The question is whether he understood how radical he was being,
and was just trolling the conservative elements of his audiencea€”the a€oel9th century publicists 
in American financiersa€Da€”or whether he is deadly in earnest. And there are
not enough clues left in the historical record for us to judge this for certainty. It depends on 
what imaginative gestalt you impose on his character as you try to reconstruct the man
and his mind:

Zach Carter: Why Are Moderates Trying to Blow Up Bidend€™s Centrist Economic Plan?'. a€~John 
Kenneth Galbraith, the great liberal economist, once
referred to his hero Keynes as an avatar of a€oeenlightened conservatism.a€D In Galbraitha€™ s 
telling, Keynes so revered the institutions around
hima€”the British Empire, the Bank of England, the operaa€”that he was willing to break with 
economic orthodoxy to defend them. Mr. Bidena€™ s
agenda   does represent a break with the policy agenda of the past 30 years, just as KeynesaC™ s 
and Roosevelta€™ s did nearly 90 years ago. But it
ultimately demands very little from those in power. They need only act according to their own best 
interests, supporting a program that already conforms to
their ideological predilections. Trimming Mr. BidenaC™ s agenda for the sake of trimming it is 
neither enlightened nor conservative; ita€™ s just a waste
of time and democracya€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/09/22/opinion/biden-moderate-democrats.html>

8) Outside of my wheelhouse, but I think that this is exactly right. What I do not understand is 
how Trump has escaped the a€celosera€D classification that all previous


unsuccessful Republican candidates have suffered froma€”and why Republicans in the party 
establishment, whatever remains of it, have not done more to pin that label on him.

That they have not means that the next four years are a very dangerous time indeed for America:

Robert Kagan: Our Constitutional Crisis Is Already Here. a€~Trump came close to bringing off a coup 
earlier this year. All that prevented it was a handful of state officials with
notable courage and integrity, and the reluctance of two attorneys general and a vice president to 
obey orders they deemed inappropriate. These were not the checks and balances the
Framers had in mind when they designed the Constitution, of course, but Trump has exposed the 
inadequacy of those protections. The Foundersa€! anticipated the threat of a
demagogue, but not of a national cult of personalitya€!. a€cePettya€D demagogues might sway their 
own states, where they were known and had influence, but not the whole
nation    with its diverse populations and divergent interestsa€!. The Framers put in placea€! the 
separation of the three branches of government, each of which, they believed, would
zealously guard its own power and prerogatives. The Framers did not establish safeguards against 
the possibility that national-party solidarity would transcend state boundaries
because  they did not imagine such a thing was possible. Nor did they foresee that members of 
Congress, and perhaps members of the judicial branch, too, would refuse to check the
power of a president from their own partya€!

LINK: <https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/2021/09/23/robert-kagan-constitutional-crisis/>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

