Subscribe now

The China Lab newsletter

Slouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (of Neoliberalism)

Brad Delong writes a lot, he writes well, and he writes on the internet. And so offering a snippet 
review of one slice of his magnum opus Slouching Towards Utopia, an undoubtedly impressive and 
absolutely engaging piece of scholarship of the long 20th century, feels a bit like picking a fight 
with a person who buys (interneta€!
Read more

3 months ago A- 1 like A- Jeremy Wallace

Slouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon (of Neoliberalism)

A China-centric poke at Brad Delong’s Slouching Towards Utopia


Jeremy Wallace

Brad Delong writes a lot, he writes well, and he writes on the internet. And so offering a snippet 
review of one slice of his magnum opus Slouching Towards Utopia, an undoubtedly impressive and 
absolutely engaging piece of scholarship of the long 20th century, feels a bit like picking a fight 
with a person who buys (internet) ink by the barrel. 1

JON,


^JUBpS^GY, &
AUTHORITARIANISM

IN CHINA

\

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY

lb

OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

-------------- —

—

J. BRADItORD DELONG

I want to preface this provocation as distinct from Toozea€™ s a€” though, like Tooze, I also have 
a hard time reading a history of the long twentieth century while ensconced in my position well 
into a 21st century where it seems increasingly clear that climate and China are central if not the 
main characters. But also as different from Delonga€™ s colleague Yingyi Qian who similarly wants 
more China (and India) in the book so that it will appeal in the long
durA©e going forward as well as noting that the a€oeGlobal South neoliberal turna€D was much more 
successful than that of the Global North.

No, my concern is related but distinct. Delong, who has energetically and honestly asked for 
criticisms for months, has posted numerous reviews and his commentary on them, many of which lament 
that the turn to neoliberalism is less clearly, confidently, and coherently accounted for in his 
model than earlier pieces of the narrative. And while there is perhaps something interesting to 
plumb therea€”do we always see more clearly the worlds we emerge into than
the worlds we live through and shape ourselvesa€”my intent is different here as well .2

I argue that taking China more seriously as not just a major player in the world going forward but 
as a causal force in the global turn towards neoliberalism as well as its current demise (?) is a 
missed opportunity .3 Ita€™ s something that I write about briefly in my new book, Seeking Truth 
and Hiding Facts: Information, Ideology, and Authoritarianism in China A

Ia€™ m not going to offer a full summary of the book when the author literally has a menu of 
elevator pitches of different lengths available to you on his substack.



Slouching Towards Utopia: Elevator Pitches & Potential Op-Eds

FIRST: My Basic 675-Word Elevator Pitch for a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong

Ia€™ m fond of his 100 word version (ita€™ s 99 words).

The long 20th centurya€”the first whose history was primarily economic, with the economy not 
painted scene-backdrop but rather revolutionizing humanity's life every single generation^’’taught 
humanity expensive lessons. The most important of them is this: Only a shotgun marriage of 
Friedrich von Hayek to Karl Polanyi, a marriage blessed by John Maynard Keynesa€”a marriage that 
itself has failed its own sustainability testsa€”
have we been able to even slouch towards utopia. Whether we ever justify the full bill run up over 
the 140 years from 1870 to 2010 will likely depend on whether we remember that lesson.

So, for the a€oeThirty Glorious Years of Social Democracya€D following the end of World War II, 
a€oenear-utopia came nearer, rapidly .a€D This phrasing is very common and, in some ways, not 
wrong. From the depths of destruction wrought by World War II, things got better for most of planet 
earth. Certainly if one weights significance by economic size, then this was a period of vast 
improvement, relatively well-distributed. On the other hand, different
perspectives (*cough* China *cough*) might view this time period as less congenial.

One could argue that the famine of Chinaa€™ s Great Leap Forward is, next to World War II itself, 
the second greatest devastation humanity has suffered since the Black Death. Forty million Chinese 
are killed. Delong obviously does not ignore this momentous event, but it is not his focus nor does 
it fall neatly into the grand narrative either, and so it is mentioned and then passes quickly. One 
worries that someone scanning the 600 page tome without an
awareness of this moment might miss it altogether. On the other hand, therea€™ s a reference at the 
start of chapter 13 about aCcetechnology and organization^□ in the 1914-1949 period acting not as 
a€oeforces to free and enricha€O but a€oeto kill and oppress,a€D but somehow what I can only 
imagine is supposed to be the global death toll of 50-100 million seems to be attributed to China 
alone.

Similarly, a not-ignored-but-quickly-glossed discussion of the possibility of global thermonuclear 
war, with the explosive power that could destroy human civilization in a single round of attack and 
counter-attack is mentioned but not dwelled upon. And, in the end, this is a work of economic 
history not counterfactuals, so the non-detonation of such chances in the aCceCold Wara€D is hardly 
something that can be stared at productively for too long, or perhaps
more directly, is something that can be squeezed when taking a 1000 page draft into a more 
manageable 600 pages.

Ok, China. Delong writes a€oeOnly two things ultimately rescued China and its economya€D a€” (1) 
not conquering Taiwan and Hong Kong and (2) Deng Xiaoping. Interestingly, the non-conquest of 
Taiwan and Hong Kong are causally significant for Delong because they are key sources of early 
investment into the mainland and help catalyze the rapid industrialization; they help rural China 
take off, as Jean Oi put it. Presumably, having linguistically and
culturally attuned investors aids in smoothing misunderstandings and fostering the trust necessary 
for individuals with capital to put it at risk in the hopes that the investment will produce 
returns. However, this perspective is distinct from the role that Hong Kong plays in Huang 
Yashenga€™ s book, Capitalism with Chinese Characteristics. For Huang, it is the legal protections 
afforded by an independent judiciary that make Hong Kong crucial. If Hong Kong
had fallen, then access to English common law would have been much harder to come by. The broader 
Chinese diaspora could have served as the seeds of initial capital and so is less crucial, perhaps.

As for Deng, well, ita€™ s a bit more complicated than Mao = {Communist, bad}, Deng = {capitalist, 
good}. In my new Seeking Truth and Hiding Facts: Information, Ideology, and Authoritarianism in 
China, most of two chapters are devoted to this transformation of the regimea€™ s political economy 
and its aftershocks. Herea€™ s a taste of the argumentation and how these political fights worked 
out in practice:

By choosing to focus on practice and the concrete results of modernizing agriculture, industry, 
national defense, and science and technologya€” the aCcefour modernizationsa€na€” as core to its 
justification, the regimeaC™ s center regained its footing. But coming to a broad agreement on the 
regimea€™ s purpose did not end contestation over its identity. Indeed, conflicts raged over who 
should rule, how, and why.

But this still slides China into ita€™ s own narrative, a sideshow of the great forces of economics 
and politics reshaping the world and pushing forward neoliberalism from the social democracy that 
came before it. And I think more could be done to acknowledge China as an agent in that story with 
particularly underexamined power.

Herea€™ s one statement of Delonga€™ s key claim (one of the joys for me although I understand that 
it might be frustrating to others is Delonga€™ s strong stylea€’’repetitious, loving of 
tangentsa€”but also often incredibly direct and channeling the readeraC™ s own likely monologue as 
if he is explicitly having a conversation with you despite the fact that ita€™ s a pulped dead tree 
with some splotches on it):

Why? In my view, the greatest cause was the extraordinary pace of rising prosperity during the 
Thirty Glorious Years, which raised the bar that a political-economic order had to surpass in order 
to generate broad acceptance. People in the global north had come to expect to see incomes 
relatively equally distributed (for white guys at least), doubling every generation, and they 
expected economic uncertainty to be very low, particularly
with respect to prices and employmenta€’’except on the upside. And people then for some reason 
required that growth in their incomes be at least as fast as they had expected and that it be 
stable, or else they would seek reform.

So leta€™ s zoom in a bit. The a€ce30 glorious yearsa€D actually end in 1973 in the precise 
telling, with the oil shock of 1973 being a core piece of the narrative of the need for reform (in 
the West/Japan). But even before the oil shocks, Delong sneaks in a very interesting couple of 
sentences on p. 431.

One very powerful factor contributing to this consensus was that after 1973, in Europe and in the 
United States and in Japan, there was a very sharp slowdown in the rate of productivity and real 
income growth. Some of it was a consequence of the decision to shift from an economy that polluted 
more to an economy that attempted to begin the process of environmental cleanup. Cleanup, however, 
would take decades to make a real
difference in peoplea€™ s lives. Energy diverted away from producing more and into producing 
cleaner would quickly show up in lower wage increases and profits.

I think this gets some things wrong, some things right, and points to some economistic blind spots. 
First, democratic societies freely choosing to shift priorities to focus less on a€oethe economya€D 
and more on pollution suggests that those societies valued these harder to quantify negative 
externalities of industrialized growth than their downsides. Second, a€cecleanupa€D does not take 
decades to make a real difference in peoplea€™ s lives. Take, for
example, urban air pollution, which I wrote about in a prior post.

Study in Contrasts — Last Winter. This Winter

From Madrigal 2013.

Policies, whether they be in London following the 1952 smog that killed over 100,000 people or 
Beijing in 2012 following a€oeairpocalypsesa€n can make immense differences in people experiences 
and their health. What I think Delong means here is something else, that a€cecleanupa€D takes 
decades to make a real difference in economic aggregates and incomes statistics. Whereas the 
negative effects of this shift show up more quickly and obviously in the
balance sheets of companies and the reporting that shapes the worldviews of economically-minded 
thinkers, policymakers, and the broader population. Again, for me (and perhaps me alone), this 
resonates completely with the Chinese reform era experience.

To navigate the political difficulties of transitioning from a set of ideas connected with Maoist 
utopian communism as the regimea€™ s justification to something that had not just failed, Deng and 
his compatriots suggested that everyone should a€oeseek truth from facts,a€D a deft use of a 
classical Chinese expression that Mao had uttered to undermine Maoism. It would not matter if a 
particular technique reeked of capitalism if it produced good outcomes. The
center instituted a a€oelimited quantified visionaCD into localities, allowing those who wished to 
seize their initiative to do so. Some grabbed, some invested, others waited. But overall, as it so 
often does, rewarding personnel based on a few particular statistics produced excellent performance 
on them. Over time, again, as it so often does, these quantified systems became gamed and failed to 
capture the whole story; their negative externalities engulfed them like
flames on the Cayuhoga River.


But thata€™ s perhaps too much to lay at the foot of a couple of sentences before the core 
explanation that is offered. That account a€” Yom Kippur War a€”> oil shock 1 and eventually oil 
shock 2 with lots of fascinating messy politics of expectations in between a€” is fascinating but 
does go a bit thin on Chinaa€™ s role.

The left had little to offer at the moment that expectations were high and calls for reform were 
ringing. But even that is too kind. China, at the precise moment when neoliberalism is rising, 
doesna€™ t just signify failure, it is explicitly seen as tossing away fetters keeping itself down.
I take up these arguments at the end of Seeking Truth.

[N]ews trickling out of some of Chinaa€™ s early Reform Era actions supported arguments that giving 
a greater role to markets was a recipe for growth. In February 1978, the New York Times headlined a 
piece a€oeChinaa€™ s New Dialectic: Growtha€D and stated that a€oethe leaderships™ s pragmatic 
program of more worker discipline, better management, higher production, and tighter accounting 
proceduresa€D would have
been SoelaAbeled capitalisma€D a year before. The a€ceascendancea€D of Hua Guofeng and Deng 
Xiaoping had, the Times journalist Fox Butterfield wrote, a€cerekindled visions American 
businessmen have had since the days of the Yankee clippers: millions of Chinese customers for 
American products.a€D On December 27,1979, a story on provinces opening up for foreign business was 
titled a€oeChinaa€™ s Trade Plan Has a
Capitalist Tingea€D; by August 14,1980, a blunter headline had appeared: SoeChina Tries Capitalism, 
and It Works.a€D

These early shifts away from Maoist planning helped to cement hegemonic beliefs in markets in the 
field of economics. The (Chinese) left wasna€™t just devoid of ideas, it was actively switching 
sides.
While I have many issues with David HarveyS™ s neoliberalism book, the fact that Deng Xiaoping is 
on the cover is not one of them.5

A BRIEF HISTORY OF


Because just as they were keen to see Chinese consumers as a vast market for their goods, 
capitalists in the West quickly came to see Chinese workers as a tool to control their own workers. 
With an open China, the profit possibilities of offshoring production became increasingly difficult 
to argue against, helping to inculcate the dominance of the narrow view of the corporation^™ s 
purpose being maximizing shareholder value.

That rapid development in China was seen by modernization theorists and Western politicians as 
likely to produce shifts in Chinese political dynamics towards greater freedoms helped provide 
cover for investments that could have been more tarred as disloyal to the home country. The idea 
that these investments might have positive political externalities smoothed them individually as 
well as moves to institutionalize their possibility such as ChinaaC™ s
accession to the WTO.

After serving as an example that giving ballast for the intellectual movement of neoliberalism at 
the moment of its rising hegemony and then giving leverage for the deepening of neoliberalism in 
corporate worlds, China became a political liability and undermining force for neoliberalism.

To be clear, Delong argues against a simple a€ceChina shocka€D understanding of this dynamic where 
China stole American jobs leading to backlash: a€oeHyperglobalizationa€™ s principal effect was to 
cause not a decline in blue-collar jobs but a roll of the wheel from one type of blue-collar job to 
anothera€”from assembly-line production to truck-driving and pallet-moving distribution, plus, for 
a while, construction.a€D Instead, he agrees with Dani

Rodrik, arguing a€oeTo those groups whose jobs were closing down or who were seeing gates slam shut 
for paths that previous generations had used for upward mobility, ita€™ s no wonder that 
globalization seemed like a plausible explanation for their misfortune.a€D I concur, trade with 
China generated broad but diffuse benefits, principally through cheaper goods to consumers across a 
range of products, while the costs of the trade remained relatively narrow
but deep, as individual factories shuttered and moved abroad, desolating the towns and rural areas 
they had supported (a€oechurna€n in Delong-speak) even if they did not decimate the working class 
in aggregate.

ChinaaC™ s undercutting of neoliberalism also comes from its presentation of an alternative system 
of political economy with substantially more state involvement in the economy, particularly in the 
form of Keynesian stimulus in dangerous moments (i.e. Global Financial Crisis) and, more generally, 
of industrial policy for favored firms and sectors. Trends of deglobalization, regional blocs, 
petro-politics, climate change (and the failure of carbon taxes), and
pandemic all seem to be nudging us away from the neoliberalism (certainly of the neoliberalism of 
the 1980s). Perhaps Delong simply respects his foe of the past four/five decades enough to not 
count it out just because some punches are beginning to land and it is staggering.

Perhaps Ia€™ m over interpreting trends based on my Sino-centric perspective. To be clear, Ia€™ m 
not suggesting that a world shifting away from neoliberalism will be moving more quickly to utopia. 
While hazy the future remains, it seems as likely as not that wea€™ 11 fall deeper into morasses of 
identity-based violence, isolationism, beggar thy neighbor policies, and war. Perhaps he needed to 
end it here so that we could still be seen as at least seeking
utopia, rather than something darker.

1. [As I was finishing this I started listening to Delong on the Ezra Klein podcast where they 
apparently spend the whole time talking about the inflation of the 70s and what it might mean. I 
cana€™ t listen to that and then edit this in response because when Ia€™ m done with that I promise 
you there will be even more Delong content.]

2. Perhaps not unsurprisingly for such a dense manuscript, Delong explicitly mentions this idea as 
well: a€oeHere I need to issue a warning: The time since the beginning of the neoliberal turn 
overlaps my career. In it I have played, in a very small way, the roles of intellectual, 
commentator, thought leader, technocrat, functionary, and Cassandra. I have been deeply and 
emotionally engaged throughout, as I have worked to advance policies for good and

•frw ill nnrl ac            line olQt^lxr cViornpnnJ anJ             mxr mrlom^nt Pmm fPnc nmnt nn 
tPnc knnV                 m noW on ormimanf T om hainnn uzitTi miz xzrxnnc^lxr^c anJ                
   izarmiic       m miz Ti4>orl rTl^^ hictnriana^TM o i/^^ol ic fry anrl nnrlorctanJ nnt 
orlxrr\r*of^ on/T ni/Trr^ Tn rlpalmo iwifTi nnct_lOQO T fvxz hut T rln nnt fTnnl?' T ■Fnllxz        
                             o^J I


OXFORD

Because just as they were keen to see Chinese consumers as a vast market for their goods, 
capitalists in the West quickly came to see Chinese workers as a tool to control their own workers. 
With an open China, the profit possibilities of offshoring production became increasingly difficult 
to argue against, helping to inculcate the dominance of the narrow view of the corporation^™ s 
purpose being maximizing shareholder value.

That rapid development in China was seen by modernization theorists and Western politicians as 
likely to produce shifts in Chinese political dynamics towards greater freedoms helped provide 
cover for investments that could have been more tarred as disloyal to the home country. The idea 
that these investments might have positive political externalities smoothed them individually as 
well as moves to institutionalize their possibility such as ChinaaC™ s
accession to the WTO.

After serving as an example that giving ballast for the intellectual movement of neoliberalism at 
the moment of its rising hegemony and then giving leverage for the deepening of neoliberalism in 
corporate worlds, China became a political liability and undermining force for neoliberalism.

To be clear, Delong argues against a simple a€ceChina shocka€D understanding of this dynamic where 
China stole American jobs leading to backlash: a€oeHyperglobalizationa€™ s principal effect was to 
cause not a decline in blue-collar jobs but a roll of the wheel from one type of blue-collar job to 
anothera€”from assembly-line production to truck-driving and pallet-moving distribution, plus, for 
a while, construction.a€D Instead, he agrees with Dani

Rodrik, arguing a€oeTo those groups whose jobs were closing down or who were seeing gates slam shut 
for paths that previous generations had used for upward mobility, ita€™ s no wonder that 
globalization seemed like a plausible explanation for their misfortune.a€D I concur, trade with 
China generated broad but diffuse benefits, principally through cheaper goods to consumers across a 
range of products, while the costs of the trade remained relatively narrow
but deep, as individual factories shuttered and moved abroad, desolating the towns and rural areas 
they had supported (a€oechurna€D in Delong-speak) even if they did not decimate the working class 
in aggregate.

ChinaaC™ s undercutting of neoliberalism also comes from its presentation of an alternative system 
of political economy with substantially more state involvement in the economy, particularly in the 
form of Keynesian stimulus in dangerous moments (i.e. Global Financial Crisis) and, more generally, 
of industrial policy for favored firms and sectors. Trends of deglobalization, regional blocs, 
petro-politics, climate change (and the failure of carbon taxes), and
pandemic all seem to be nudging us away from the neoliberalism (certainly of the neoliberalism of 
the 1980s). Perhaps Delong simply respects his foe of the past four/five decades enough to not 
count it out just because some punches are beginning to land and it is staggering.

Perhaps Ia€™ m over interpreting trends based on my Sino-centric perspective. To be clear, Ia€™ m 
not suggesting that a world shifting away from neoliberalism will be moving more quickly to utopia. 
While hazy the future remains, it seems as likely as not that wea€™ 11 fall deeper into morasses of 
identity-based violence, isolationism, beggar thy neighbor policies, and war. Perhaps he needed to 
end it here so that we could still be seen as at least seeking
utopia, rather than something darker.

1. [As I was finishing this I started listening to Delong on the Ezra Klein podcast where they 
apparently spend the whole time talking about the inflation of the 70s and what it might mean. I 
cana€™ t listen to that and then edit this in response because when Ia€™ m done with that I promise 
you there will be even more Delong content.]

2. Perhaps not unsurprisingly for such a dense manuscript, Delong explicitly mentions this idea as 
well: a€oeHere I need to issue a warning: The time since the beginning of the neoliberal turn 
overlaps my career. In it I have played, in a very small way, the roles of intellectual, 
commentator, thought leader, technocrat, functionary, and Cassandra. I have been deeply and 
emotionally engaged throughout, as I have worked to advance policies for good and
for ill, and as my engagement has alternately sharpened and blurred my judgment. From this point on 
this book becomes, in part, an argument I am having with my younger selves and with various voices 
in my head. The historiana€™ s ideal is to see and understand, not advocate and judge. In dealing 
with post-1980,1 try but I do not think I fully succeed.a€D

3. I am not debating Delonga€™ s characterization of China in the late nineteenth century here but 
imagine that some of my colleagues might.

4. Wait is this review of an actually popular book or a secret advertisement for my book? Ia€™ 11 
never tell.

5. Youa€™ 11 have to buy my book to find them out.
Subscribe now

Leave a comment

