Subscribe now

Share

Samuel Sewall (1700): The Selling of Joseph: A Memorial'. a€~FOR AS MUCH as Liberty is in real 
value next unto Life: None ought to part with it themselves, or deprive others of it, but upon most 
mature Consideration.

The Numerousness of Slaves at this day in the Province, and the Uneasiness of them under their 
Slavery, hath put many upon thinking whether the Foundation of it be firmly and well laid; so as to 
sustain the Vast Weight that is built upon it. It is most
certain that all Men, as they are the Sons of Adam, are Coheirs; and have equal Right unto Liberty, 
and all other outward Comforts of Life.

GOD hath given the Earth [with all its Commodities] unto the Sons of Adam, Psal 115. And hath made 
of One Blood, all Nations of Men, for to dwell on all the face of the Earth; and hath determined 
the Times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation: That they should seek the Lord. Forasmuch then as we are the Offspring of GOD.

Now although the Title given by the last ADAM, doth infinitely better Mens Estates, respecting GOD 
and themselves; and grants them a most beneficial and inviolable Lease under the Broad Seal of 
Heaven, who were before only Tenants at Will:

Yet through the Indulgence of GOD to our First Parents after the Fall, the outward Estate of all 
and every of the Children, remains the same, as to one another. So that Originally, and Naturally, 
there is no such thing as Slavery. Joseph was rightfully
no more a Slave to his Brethren, then they were to him: and they had no more Authority to Sell him, 
than they had to Slay him. And if they had nothing to do to Sell him; the Ishmaelites bargaining 
with them, and paying down Twenty pieces of Silver,
could not make a Title. Neither could Potiphar have any better Interest in him than the Ishmaelites 
had. For he that shall in this case plead Alteration of Property, seems to have forfeited a great 
part of his own claim to Humanity.

There is no proportion between Twenty Pieces of Silver, and LIBERTY. The Commodity itself is the 
Claimer. If Arabian Gold be imported in any quantities, most are afraid to meddle with it, though 
they might have it at easy rates; lest if it should
have been wrongfully taken from the Owners, it should kindle a fire to the Consumption of their 
whole Estate. a€~Tis pity there should be more Caution used in buying a Horse, or a little lifeless 
dust; than there is in purchasing Men and

Women: Whenas they are the Offspring of GOD, and their Liberty is, Auro pretiosior Omni.

And seeing GOD hath said, a€oeHe that Stealeth a Man and Selleth him, or if he be found in his 
hand, he shall surely be put to Death.a€D Exod. 12.16. This Law being of Everlasting Equity, 
wherein Man Stealing is ranked amongst the most atrocious
of Capital Crimes: What louder Cry can there be made of the Celebrated Warning, Caveat Emptor!

And all thing considered, it would conduce more to the Welfare of the Province, to have White 
Servants for a Term of Years, than to have Slaves for Life. Few can endure to hear of a Negroa€™ s 
being made free; and indeed they can seldom use their
freedom well; yet their continual aspiring after their forbidden Liberty, renders them Unwilling 
Servants. And there is such a disparity in their Conditions, Color & Hair, that they can never 
embody with us, and grow up into orderly Families, to the
Peopling                                                                                            
                        of the Land: but still remain in our Body Politick as a kind of extra-vasat 
Blood. As many Negro men as there are among us, so many empty places there are in our Train Bands, 
and the places taken up of Men that might make Husbands for our
Daughters. And the Sons and Daughters of New England would become more like Jacob, and Rachel, if 
this Slavery were thrust quite out of doors. Moreover it is too well known what Temptations Masters 
are under, to connive at the Fornification of their
Slaves; lest they should be obliged to find them Wives, or pay their Fines.

It seems to be practically pleaded that they might be Lawless; a€™tis thought much of, that the Law 
should have Satisfaction for their Thefts, and other Immoralities; by which means, Holiness to the 
Lord, is more rarely engraven upon this sort of
Servitude. It is likewise most lamentable to think, how in taking Negros out of Africa, and Selling 
of them here, That which GOD haa€™ s joyned together men do boldly rend asunder; Men from their 
Country, Husbands from their Wives, Parents from
their Children.

How horrible is the Uncleanness, Mortality, if not Murder, that the Ships are guilty of that bring 
great Crouds of these miserable Men, and Women. Methinks, when we are bemoaning the barbarous Usage 
of our Friends and Kinsfolk in Africa: it might not
be unseasonable to enquire whether we are not culpable in forcing the Africans to become Slaves 
amongst our selves. And it may be a question whether all the Benefit received by Negro Slaves, will 
balance the Accompt of Cash laid out upon them; and
for the Redemption of our own enslaved Friends out of Africa. Besides all the Persons and Estates 
that have perished there.

Obj. 1. These Blackamores are of the Posterity of Cham, and therefore are under the Curse of 
Slavery. Gen. 9.25,26,27.

Answ. Of all Offices, one would not begg this; viz. Uncalla€™ d for, to be an Executioner of the 
Vindictive Wrath of God; the extent and duration of which is to us uncertain. If this ever was a 
Commission; How do we know but that it is long since out of
date? Many have found it to their Cost, that a Prophetical Denunciation of Judgment against a 
Person or People, would not warrant them to inflict that evil. If it would, Hazael might justify 
himself in all he did against his Master, and the Israelites, from
2Kings8. 10,12.

But it is possible that by cursory reading, this Text may have been mistaken. For Canaan is the 
Person Cursed three times over, without the mentioning of Cham. Good Expositors suppose the Curse 
entailed on him, and that
this Prophesie was accomplished in the Extirpation of the Canaanites, and in the Servitude of the 
Gibeonites, Vide Pareum. Whereas the Blackmores are not descended of Canaan, but of Cush.


It seems to be practically pleaded that they might be Lawless; a€™tis thought much of, that the Law 
should have Satisfaction for their Thefts, and other Immoralities; by which means, Holiness to the 
Lord, is more rarely engraven upon this sort of
Servitude. It is likewise most lamentable to think, how in taking Negros out of Africa, and Selling 
of them here, That which GOD haa€™ s joyned together men do boldly rend asunder; Men from their 
Country, Husbands from their Wives, Parents from
their Children.

How horrible is the Uncleanness, Mortality, if not Murder, that the Ships are guilty of that bring 
great Crouds of these miserable Men, and Women. Methinks, when we are bemoaning the barbarous Usage 
of our Friends and Kinsfolk in Africa: it might not
be unseasonable to enquire whether we are not culpable in forcing the Africans to become Slaves 
amongst our selves. And it may be a question whether all the Benefit received by Negro Slaves, will 
balance the Accompt of Cash laid out upon them; and
for the Redemption of our own enslaved Friends out of Africa. Besides all the Persons and Estates 
that have perished there.

Obj. 1. These Blackamores are of the Posterity of Cham, and therefore are under the Curse of 
Slavery. Gen. 9.25,26,27.

Answ. Of all Offices, one would not begg this; viz. Uncalla€™ d for, to be an Executioner of the 
Vindictive Wrath of God; the extent and duration of which is to us uncertain. If this ever was a 
Commission; How do we know but that it is long since out of
date? Many have found it to their Cost, that a Prophetical Denunciation of Judgment against a 
Person or People, would not warrant them to inflict that evil. If it would, Hazael might justify 
himself in all he did against his Master, and the Israelites, from
2Kings8. 10,12.

But it is possible that by cursory reading, this Text may have been mistaken. For Canaan is the 
Person Cursed three times over, without the mentioning of Cham. Good Expositors suppose the Curse 
entailed on him, and that
this Prophesie was accomplished in the Extirpation of the Canaanites, and in the Servitude of the 
Gibeonites, Vide Pareum. Whereas the Blackmores are not descended of Canaan, but of Cush.

Psal. 68. 31. Princes shall come out of Egypt [Mizraim] Ethopia [Cush] shall soon stretch out her 
hands unto God. Under which Names, all Africa may be comprehended; and the Promised Conversion 
ought to be prayed for. Jer. 13,23. Can the Ethiopian
change his skin? This shews that Black Men are the Posterity of Cush: Who time out of mind have 
been distinguished by their Colour. And for want of the true, Ovid assigns a fabulous cause of it.

Sanguine turn credunt in corpora summa vocato

Aethiopum populos nigrum traxisse colorem. Metamorph, lib.2.

Obj. 2. The Nigers are brought out of a Pagan Country, into places where the Gospel is Preached.

Answ. Evil must not be done, that good may come of it. The extraordinary and comprehensive Benefit 
accruing to the Church of God, and to Joseph personally, did not rectify his brethrens Sale of him.

Obj. 3. The Africans have Wars with one another: our Ships bring lawful Captives taken in those 
Wars.

Answ. For ought is known, their Wars are much such as were between Jacoba€™ s Sons and their 
Brother Joseph. If they be between Town and Town; Provincial, or National: Every War is upon one 
side Unjust. An Unlawful War cana€™t make
lawful Captives. And by Receiving, we are in danger to promote, and partake in their Barbarous 
Cruelties. I am sure, if some Gentlemen should go down to the Brewsters to take the Air, and Fish: 
And a stronger party from Hull should Surprise them,
and Sell them for Slaves to a Ship outward bound: they would think themselves unjustly dealt with; 
both by Sellers and Buyers. And yet a€™tis to be feared, we have no other kind of Title to our 
Nigers. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the Prophets. Matt. 7.12.

Obj. 4. Abraham had servants bought with his Money, and born in his House.

Answ. Until the Circumstances of Abrahama€™ s purchase be recorded, no Argument can be drawn from 
it. In the mean time, Charity obliges us to conclude, that He knew it was lawful and good.

It is Observable that the Israelites were strictly forbidden the buying, or selling one another for 
Slaves. Levit. 25. 39,46. Jer. 34. 8a€“22. And GOD gaged His Blessing in lieu of any loss they 
might conceipt they suffered thereby. Deut. 15. 18. And since
the partition Wall is broken down, inordinate Self love should likewise be demolished. GOD expects 
that Christians should be of a more Ingenuous and benign frame of spirit. Christians should carry 
it to all the World, as the Israelites were to carry it one
towards another. And for men obstinately to persist in holding their Neighbours and Brethren under 
the Rigor of perpetual Bondage, seems to be no proper way of gaining Assurance that God haa€™ s 
given them Spiritual Freedom. Our

Blessed Saviour haa€™ s altered the Measures of the Ancient Love-Song, and set it to a most 
Excellent New Tune, which all ought to be ambitious of Learning. Matt. 5.43,44. John 13. 34. These 
Ethiopians, as black as they are; seeing they are the Sons
and Daughters of the First Adam, the Brethren and Sister of the Last ADAM, and the Offspring of 
GOD; They ought to be treated with a Respect agreeable.

Servitus perfecta voluntaria, inter Christianum & Christiainum, ex parte servi patientis saepe est 
licita, quia est necessaria: sed ex parte domini agentis, & procurando
& exercendo, vixpotest esse licita: quia non convenit regulae Uli generali: Quaecunque volueritis 
utfaciant vobis homines, ita & vosfacite eis. Matt. 7.12.

Perfecta servitus poenae, non potest jure locum habere, nisi ex delicto gravi quod ultimum 
supplicum aliquo modo meretur: quia Libertas ex naturali aestimatione proxime accedit ad vitam 
ipsam, & eidem a multis proeferri solet.

BOSTON of the Massachusets; Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen, June, 24th. 1700. LINK:

<https://www.learningforjustice.org/classroom-resources/texts/hard-history/the-selling-of-ioseph-a-m
emorial>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

