Todd Thicker <https://twitter.com/toddntucker> gets me thinking about these issues today...
Subscribe now


Brad DeLong (2015): Albert Hirschmana€™ s Linkages, Economic Growth, & Convergence: When you think 
about it, broadly speaking, the question of why we have seen such huge rises in the real wages of 
labora€“of bare, unskilled labor not boosted by expensive and lengthy investments in upgrading what 
it can doa€“is somewhat puzzling.

We can see why overall productivity-per-worker has increased. We have piled up more and more 
machines to work with per worker, more and more structures to work in per worker, and develop more 
and more intellectual blueprints for how to do things. But why should any of these accumulated 
factors of production be strong complements for simple human labor?

Karl Marx thought that they would not: he thought that what more accumulation of capital would do 
would be to raise average production-per-worker while also putting strong downward pressure on the 
wages and incomes of labor, enriching only those with property. Yet the long sweep of history since 
the early-18th century invention of the steam engine sees the most extraordinary rise in the wages 
of simple, a€ceunskilleda€D labor.
Get 50% off for 1 year

There are, again broadly speaking, two suggested answers:

•  The first is that the accumulated intellectual property of humanity since the invention of 
language is a highly productive resource. Nobody can claim an income from it by virtue of 
ownership. Therefore that part of productivity due to this key factor of production is shared out 
among all the other factors. And, via supply and demand, a large chunk of that is shared to labor.

•  The second is that there is indeed a property of the unskilled human that makes its labor a very 
strong complement with other factors of production. That property is this: our machines are dumb, 
while we are smart. Human brain fits in a breadbox, draws 50W of power, and is an essential 
cybernetic control mechanism for practically everything we wish to have done, to organize, or even 
to keep track of. The strong and essential complementarity of
our dumb machines and our smart brains is the circumstance that has driven a huge increase in labor 
productivity in manufacturing. And, by supply and demand, that increase has then been distributed 
to labor at large.

Both have surely been at work together.

But to the extent that the second has carried the load, the rise of the robotsa€”the decline in the 
share of and indeed the need for human labor in manufacturinga€”poses grave economic problems for 
the future of humanity, and poses them most immediately for emerging market economies.
So let me give the mic to smart young whippersnapper Noah Smith chttps://twitter.com/Noahpinion>, 
playing variations on a theme by Dani Rodrik <https://twitter.com/rodrikdani>:

Noah Smith: Will the World Ever Boom Again?: a€oeLeta€™ s step back and take a look at global 
economic development. Since the Industrial Revolutiona€! Europe, North America and East Asia raced 
aheada€! maintained their leada€! confoundfing] the predictions ofa€! converg[ance]. Only since the 
1980s has the rest of the world been catching upa€!. But can it last? The main engine of global 
growth since 2000 has been the rapid
industrialization of Chinaa€! the most stupendous modernization in history, moving hundreds of 
millions of farmers from rural areas to cities. That in turn powered the growth of 
resource-exporting countries such as Brazil, Russia and many developing nations that sold their 
oil, metals and other resources to the new workshop of the world. The problem is that Chinaa€™ s 
recent slowdown from 10 percent annual growth to about 7
percent is only the beginninga€!.

Buta€! what if China is the last country to follow the tried-and-true path of industrialization? 
There is really only one time-tested way for a country to get rich. It moves farmers to factories 
and import foreign manufacturing technologya€! the so-called dual-sector model of economic 
development pioneered by economist W. Arthur Lewis. So far, no country has reached high levels of 
income by moving farmers to service jobs en
massea€!. Poor nations are very good at copying manufacturing technologies from rich countries. But 
[not] in servicesa€!. Manufacturing technologies are embodied in the products themselves and in the 
machinesa€! used to make the productsa€!. Manufacturing is shrinkinga€! all across the globe, even 
in Chinaa€! a victim of its own successa€!. If manufacturing becomes a niche activity, the worlda€™ 
s poor countries could be in
troublea€!

LINK: 
<http://www.bloombergview.com/articles/2015-07-20/will-the-world-ever-have-fast-economic-growth-agai
n->

By a€oea niche activitya€D I read a€oedoes not employ a lot of workersa€Da€“the value added of 
manufacturing is likely to still be very high and growing, certainly in real terms, just as the 
value of agricultural production is very high and growing today. But little of that value flows to 
unskilled labor. Rather, it flows to capital, engineering, design, and branding.
Noaha€™ s points about economic development are, I think, completely correct.

The point is, however, one of very long standing. The mandarins of 18th-century Augustan-Age 
Whitehall had a plan for the colony that was to become the United States. They were to focus on 
their current comparative advantages: produce, in slave plantations and elsewhere, the natural 
resource-intensive primary products that the first British Empire wanted in exchange for the 
manufactured goods and transportation services the first British Empire provided
that made it so relatively rich for its time.

Alexander Hamilton had a very different idea. Hamilton believed very strongly that the US 
government needed to focus on building up manufacturing, channels through which savings be invested 
in industry, and exports different from those of Americaa€™ s resource-based comparative advantage. 
The consequence would be the creation of engineering communities of technological competence which 
would then spread knowledgeof how tobe productive
throughout the country. Ever since, every country that has successfully followed the Hamiltonian 
patha€”that is kept its manufacturing- and export-subsidization policies focused on boosting those 
firms that do actually succeed in making products foreigners are willing to buy and not havens for 
rent-seekersa€”have succeeded first in escaping poverty and second in escaping the middle-income 
trap.

The worry is that China will turn out to be the last economy able to take this roada€“that after 
China manufacturing will be simply too small and require too little labor as computers substitute 
for brains as cybernetic control mechanisms to be an engine of economy-wide growth. And the fear is 
that a country like India that tries to take the services-export route will find that competence in 
service exports does not more than competence innatural-resource exports
to produce the engineering communities of technological competence which generate the economy-wide 
spillovers needed for modern economic growth that achieves the world technological and productivity 
frontier.

Very interesting times. Very interesting puzzlesa€!

And, of Course:

Preorder "Slouching Towards Utopia"

References:


Share

• Albert Hirschman <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Albert _O._ Hirschman>

• Concrete Economics <https://www.amazon.com/dp/1422189813>

• Dani Rodrik <https: //twitter.com/rodrikdani>

• Noah Smith <https://twitter.com/Noahpinion>

• Noah Smith: Will the World Ever Boom Again? 
<http://www.bloombergview.com/articles/2015-07-20/will-the-world-ever-have-fast-economic-growth-agai
n->

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

