Very Briefly Noted:

• Susan Levenstein: Promising Pills, but Lengthening Shadows'. a€~Paxlovida€! Pfizera€™ s new 
combinational a novel antiviral, PF-07321332, tailor-made for SARS-CoV-2a€! [plus] a low dose of an 
AIDS
drug called ritonavir that lets PF-07321332 hang around longer and strongera€! <http ://w w 
w.stethoscopeonrome,com/>

• Wendy Edelberg: What Does Current Inflation Tell Us About the Future?'. Some signal, but not a 
lota€!. Because the factors that are leading to inflation are pandemic-related and therefore 
temporary, the current
trend does not forecast the futurea€! <https://www.hamiltonproiect.org/blog/what does 
current_inflation tell us about the future>


• Nicholas Gruen: Discursive Collapsea€”Discursive Reversal: The Micro-Foundations'. a€~The 
discipline exercises what Marcuse called a€~repressive tolerancea€™ which is to say it doesna€™t 
directly
repress the discussion, it tolerates it, and ignores its corrosive implicationsa€!. Ia€™ 11 point 
to another brilliant explanation of what I take to be the same phenomenon in macroa€!

<https ://clubtroppo .com 
.au/2015/05/09/discursive-collapse-discursive-reversal-the-micro-foundations/>

•  Economist: Which Vaccine Is the Most Effective Against the Delta Variant? I The Economist'. 
a€~The mRNA jabs seem besta€”but all offer protection^! <https://www.economist.com/graphic-
detail/2021/11/17/which-vaccine-is-the-most-effective-against-the-delta-variant>

• Wikipedia: Xi Zhongxun <https ://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Xi_Zhongxun>

•  Rivka Galchen: Can Nuclear Fusion Put the Brakes on Climate Change?: a€~Amid an escalating 
crisis, the power source offers a dreama€”or a pipe dreama€”of limitless clean energya€!

<https ://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2021/10/1 
l/can-nuclear-fusion-put-the-brakes-on-climate-change>

Paragraphs:

Paul Krugman (May 21,2020): Crying Fire! Fire! In Noaha€™ s Flood: a€~Ia€™m getting a lot of rage 
from people who want their deficit-and-inflation crisis, and wona€™t take no for an answera€!. I 
was trying to
come up with an explanation of the curious insistence that wea€™re facing an imminent interest rate 
and/or inflation crunch; then I realized that John Maynard Keynes had already done that, in 
explaining the hold classical

economics retained on thought despite its obvious inability to account for the Great Depression: 
aCceThe completeness of the Ricardian victory is something of a curiosity and a mystery. It must 
have been due to a complex of
suitabilities in the doctrine to the environment into which it was projected. That it reached 
conclusions quite different from what the ordinary uninstructed person would expect, added, I 
suppose, to its intellectual prestige.

That its teaching, translated into practice, was austere and often unpalatable, lent it virtue. 
That it was adapted to carry a vast and consistent logical superstructure, gave it beauty. That it 
could explain much social injustice and
apparent cruelty as an inevitable incident in the scheme of progress, and the attempt to change 
such things as likely on the whole to do more harm than good, commended it to authority. That it 
afforded a measure of
justification to the free activities of the individual capitalist, attracted to it the support of 
the dominant social force behind authoritya€!a€D And all of this has a real, damaging effect on 
policy. The econ team at Goldman
Sachs (not online) makes the interesting point that FOMC inflation forecasts are pulled up by a 
small group that keeps forecasting much higher inflation than anyone else; this in turn helps limit 
the Feda€™ s willingness to
support the economy. And the deficit hawks have, of course, killed any hope of more stimulus. 
Anyway, Ia€™ m sure that the usual suspects wona€™ t change their tune. Even if we do have a 
Japan-style lost decade,
theya€™ll keep predicting hyperinflation just around the cornera€!

LINK: <https://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/05/21/crying-fire-fire-in-noahs-flood-3/>

Robert Skidelsky: What Killed Macroeconomics?: a€~Mathematical refinement aside, economics is back 
to where it was a century ago: the study of the allocation of given resources, plus the quantity 
theory of money.
Macroeconomicsa€”the theory of output as a whole, which was invented by John Maynard Keynesa€”has 
virtually disappeared, despite the revival of key tools when crises erupta€!. For example, what 
causes
unemployment?         The standard textbook answer is a€oedownward wage rigidity.a€D A hairdresser 
who asks for a wage of $14 per hour, but who can be profitably employed only at $13 per hour, is 
choosing not to be
employed.     That choice is thus voluntary, reflecting a preference for leisure, or a decision not 
to be a hairdresser. The same is true of all workers in an economy. On this view, what is called 
unemployment is a choice not to
worka€!. So, if the government expands the money supply in an effort to increase employment, the 
only result will be inflation, because monetary expansion does nothing to increase the supply of 
labor willing to work.
Monetary policy should thus concern itself solely with the objective of price stability, which is 
best entrusted to an independent central bank free from political temptation. Most sensible 
economists have quailed before the
logic   of their own assumptions. Thus, in their recent textbook Macroeconomics^.} Daron 
Acemoglua€! David Laibson, anda€! John Lista€! [claim] cyclicala€! unemployment occurs because of 
a€oetechnology shocks,
changing sentiments, and monetary/financial factors ,a€D and is a€oeamplified by downward wage 
rigidity and multipliers .a€Da€! Modern economic theory holds that obstacles to full employment are 
not inherent but
contingent. Thus, they can be minimized by labor-market reforms designed to a€ceunsticka€D sticky 
wages, and by better regulation of banksa€!. Unless economists recognize the existence of 
inescapable uncertainty, there
can   be no macroeconomic theory, only prudential responses to emergenciesa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/macroeconomic-policv-fiscal-stimulus-lacks-robust-theo
rv-bv-robert-skidelskv-2021-ll>

Charlie Stross: An Update on the Revolutionary Experiment: a€~November 2021, and Brexit is still 
on-going. I am trying to refrain from posting wall-to-wall blog essays about how badly the on-going 
brexit is going, but
ita€™ s been about 9a€“10 months since I last gnawed on the weeping sore, so herea€™ s an interim 
updatea€!. Brexit is a utopian nation-building program that about 25a€“30% of the nation are really 
crazily enthusiastic
about (emphasis on a€cecrazya€Da€”ita€™ s John Rogersa€™ crazification factor at work here), and 
because they vote Tory, Johnson is shoveling red meat into the gimp cage on a daily basis. Because 
Brexit is utopian it
can never fail, it can only be failed. So it follows that if some aspect of Brexit goes sideways, 
traitors or insufficiently-enthusiastic wreckers must be at fault. (See also Bolshevism in the 
Lenin/early Stalin period.) Alas, it
turns out that the Brexiter politicians neglected to inform themselves of what the EU they were 
leaving even was, namely a legalistic international treaty framework. So they keep blundering about 
blindly violating legal
agreements that trigger, or will eventually trigger, sanctions by their trading partnersa€!. In 
general, Conservative MPs fall into two baskets: True Believers and Corrupt Grifters. In normal 
times (i.e. not this century so far)
the   True Believers were tolerably useful insofar as they included Burkean small-c 
conservativesa€!. But Thatcher and her followers werena€™t pragmatists, they were ideologues. And 
by divorcing government from
measurable outcomesa€’’instead, making loyalty to an abstract program the acid testa€”they opened 
the door for the grifters, who could spout doubleplusgood duckspeak with the best of the 
Thatcherites and meanwhile
quietly   milk their connections for profit-making opportunities^!. When youa€™re a grifter and the 
marks are about to notice what youa€™re doing, standard procedure is to scream and shout and hork 
up a massive
distraction. (Johnsona€™ s own term for this is a€oethrow a dead cat on the tablea€D.) The Tories 
focus-group tested a€oeculture warsa€D in the run up to the 2019 election and discovered there was 
a public appetite for
such  things among their voter base (who trend elderly and poorly educated). Think MAGA. The 
transphobia campaign currently running is one such culture war: so is the war on wokeness that 
cross-infected the UK from
you-know-who. Ita€™ s insane. Turns out that about 80% of the shibboleths that infect the US hard 
right play well to the UK centre-right. The notable exception is vaccine resistance a€“ 
anti-vaxxers are a noisy but tiny
fringea€!

LINK: <https://www.antipope 
.org/charlie/blog-static/2021/11/an-update-from-the-revolutiona.html#more>

Simon Kuper: What Truly Unites the Boris Johnson Party: a€~This Tory party is the Boris Johnson 
party. It has a new winga€”former UK Independence party voters who are personally loyal to 
Johnsona€”and an updated
inner circle of privately educated Brexiters who are his familial tribe. In short, ita€™ s the 
quintessentially Johnsonian mix of anti-elitists and elite. And the only ideology uniting wing and 
circle is Brexit. The UKa€™ s
threat  to renege on the Northern Ireland protocol that it agreed with the EU sets the tone. The 
party plans to spend this decade fighting Brussels, Scottish Nationalists and Remainers. What 
unites the Johnson party is Johnson.
But all attempts to identify his personal ideology have failed. He isna€™t a social liberal, given 
that his government hounds immigrants and seeks out conflicts with the a€cewokea€D. He isna€™t a 
small-state Thatcherite,
given that Britaina€™ s tax burden is set to hit its highest level since the 1950s. And he isna€™t 
a committed Brexiter, given that before the referendum he wrote two opposing newspaper columns to 
decide his own
positiona€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/29f84628-46aa-4196-ab 11 -fe2047fec8d3>

Timothy Burke: Academia: Straight to the Core: a€~I feel some attraction to the curricular ideal of 
a a€oecore curriculuma€Da€!. Roosevelt Montasa€!. The program, he says, does have to focus on 
a€oecore textsa€D, it
does have to be chronological (which means that authors besides white men can only enter into the 
Core at the end of the sequence, in his view), and it does have to stay focused on how the Western 
tradition was shaped
because that is a€oethe lineage of thought and debate that has most shaped the Western worlda€D. 
Cue the sad trombone noise, because thata€™ s where the problem really lies with the idea as 
Columbia practices ita€!

LINK:


Eight by Seven

Academia: Straight to the Core

I feel some attraction to the curricular ideal of a a€oecore curriculuma€D, some set of classes 
that all students at an institution all must take, as at Columbia University. Roosevelt Montas, the 
director of Columbiaa€™ s Core
program, offers a lucid defense of the ideaa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 4 comments A- Timothy Burke

Daniel Larison: Why Hawks Keep Getting Russia Wrong'. a€~Exaggerating the threat and 
misunderstanding what Russia wants are good ways to blunder into a serious crisis. Jeff Hawn makes 
a persuasive case that Russia is
not going to attack Ukraine: a€oeBut is Russia actually about to attack Ukraine? The answer, based 
on the empirical evidence, seems to be a resounding no. These moves might be disturbing, especially 
given Russiaa€™ s
history in Ukrainea€”but they dona€™t presage war.a€da€! The likely economic and political costs 
that an invasion would entail would be significant, Russia would gain little or nothing from an 
invasion, and it would be
saddled with occupying hostile territory indefinitely. Intervening in 2014 as Russia did had 
significant costs as well, but these were offset by the gain of securing Crimea. A Russian invasion 
of more Ukrainian territory would
gain them nothing but escalating costs the longer that an occupation dragged on. I would add that 
Russia hawks keep sounding the alarm about a possible invasion because they have a distorted 
understanding of the Russian
governments™ s interests and motivations. They also consistently project their own aggressive 
tendencies onto other statesa€!. Leonid Bershidsky argues that Putin would not want to risk Nord 
Stream 2 by attacking
Ukraine,     and this also makes a lot of senseaCI

Eunomia

Why Hawks Keep Getting Russia Wrong

Jeff Hawn makes a persuasive case that Russia is not going to attack Ukraine: But is Russia 
actually about to attack Ukraine? The answer, based on the empirical evidence, seems to be a 
resounding no. These moves might be
disturbing, especially given Russiaa€™ s history in Ukrainea€”but they dona€™t presage wara€!

Read more

a year ago A- 7 likes A- 3 comments A- Daniel Larison


Eunomia

Why Hawks Keep Getting Russia Wrong

Jeff Hawn makes a persuasive case that Russia is not going to attack Ukraine: But is Russia 
actually about to attack Ukraine? The answer, based on the empirical evidence, seems to be a 
resounding no. These moves might be
disturbing, especially given Russiaa€™ s history in Ukrainea€”but they dona€™t presage wara€!

Read more

a year ago A- 7 likes A- 3 comments A- Daniel Larison

Phil Libin: mmhmm: a€~It was 42 days between the founding and when we released our private beta on 
July 7th [2020]a€!. We actually didna€™ t want publicity in July because we wanted to do a limited 
closed invite-only
beta so that we could iterate quickly on the product. I had come up with a four year plan for our 
investors and it was just one word per year. Year one was, a€oeget started.a€D Put something out 
into the world. We didna€™ t
want fomo or marketing. A closed beta would allow us to invite a statistically significant number 
of new people every day so that we could test whether the previous daya€™ s work had made things 
better or worsea€!. We
decided to do one story and Ia€™ ve been friends with Casey Newton for a while so I reached out to 
him and he wrote a piece for the Vergea€!. Trying to keep it quiet failed. We had a hundred 
thousand sign ups within a few
weeks and we were only letting in a couple of hundred people at a time so the list got pretty long. 
There was definitely a real pent up demand for something to make you smile a little bit on video, 
which wea€™ re happy to
do.  We ran the private beta from July until a few months agoa€!. I have a whole quasi religion 
about metrics and therea€™ s a framework that I use called State Machine. This is how we ran 
Evernote and Ia€™ ve applied it
to every other product or company that Ia€™ ve worked on or invested in since. Therea€™ s a lot of 
different things to optimize for, but in the long term what we care about most is the growth of 
high value usersa€!. Who are
the people for whom we are having a meaningful impact on? Whose lives or jobs are meaningfully 
better off because we exist as a product? We want to measure that and we want that number to be 
growing every month. But
on the way to that, therea€™ s a bunch of other steps in the middle. Wea€™ ve been pretty 
intentional about how we think about how we measure valuea€!. I think the most important job of a 
CEO is to isolate the rest of the
company from fluctuations of the hype cycle because the hype cycle will destroy a company. Ita€™ 11 
shake it apart. In tech the hype cycles tend to be pretty intense. At mmhmm we are very much in the 
Venn diagram of two
hype cycles. Therea€™ s a general hype cycle around video, which is going to be way up and down 
over the next few yearsa€!. There is also a hype cycle around early and mid stage startup 
investment^!. I make a lot of
demo videos. I do a lot of jazz hands. But thata€™ s not actually my job. My job is to gather 
really brilliant people and then make sure that theya€™ ve got a few years of not being buffeted by 
the hype cycle so they can
actually                                                                                            
             do something great. Thata€™ s how I try to advise people when they make the mistake of 
asking for my advice on stuff like thisa€!

LINK:

One Year Wiser

mmhmm and Phil Libin

mmhmm is Phil Libina€™ s fifth startup and he learned a lot from the first four. One of those 
startups was Evernote, which he co-founded and led as CEO for 8 years, mmhmm started from a joke of 
an idea in May 2020 but
quickly evolved into a real business with the launch of their closed beta in July, just two months 
later. Last week, exactly a year after tha€!

Read more

2 years ago A- 6 likes A- Tyler Swartz
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

