Subscribe now

CONDITION: Not as Much a€ceOrganic Community Buzza€Das I Would Like to Seea€!

a€!around my Slouching Towards Utopia book <bit .ly/3pP3Krk>.
But there is some. And it is very nice:

•  Financial Times: The Best Books of the Week: a€~Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> by J 
Bradford DeLonga€’’fuelling Americaa€™ s global dream: An economic history of the last century 
recalls a period that improved and redefined the lives of billionsa€”yet also enabled war and 
environmental destruction^!

•  Zach Carter: On Economic History: a€~Brada€! knew he was swinging for the fences and he cared 
about getting it right. There's an intellectual flexibility at work in the book that I find really 
admirable, even when I don't necessarily agree with where he's taking things. Economic history is 
an unusual field. Good economists study it closely, but there is nevertheless an allergy to history 
in some corners of the discipline. Economists who love math
think stories about the past are unscientific, and theya€™re right. But numbers without narrative 
are meaninglessa€!. Understanding economics from an historical perspective helps demystify ita€!. 
Sudden enthusiasm for imposing profound hardship on millions of people could be defensible if it 
were scientifically necessary. There are a lot of sad things in the world beyond our control. But 
when we look under the hood, we find an intellectual
messa€!. Do read [myl review [of Slouching]a€\

Clearly I need to generate more organic community buzz!
Share

FIRST: Twitter vs. Musk: Trapping the Chaos Monkey

UPDATE: Wow! Musk got his stay, over the objections of Twitter. I confess I did not see that 
coming.

Market Summary > Twitter Inc

51.30 USD

+8.64 (20.25%) + year to date

Closed: Oct 5, 7:59 PM EDT • Disclaimer
After hours 50.99 -0.31 (0.60%)

1D 5D 1M 6M                YTD     1Y     5Y    Max

45                           kA


30                   1                    1                   1                    1

Mar 2022             May 2022             Jul 2022              Sep 2022

DJ: a€~It's the ole' a€oethis case is moot because we plan to do something in the future that will 
moot the casea€D defensea€!

DJ @DJNYCNY

©chancery _daily It's the ole1 "this case is moot because we plan to do something in the future 
that will moot the case" defense.
7:05 PM r™ Oct 6,2022

18Likesl Retweet

This is not a joint motion from Twitter and Musk. This is only from Musk and his lawyers:

DEFENDANTS AND COUNTERCLAIM-PLAINTIFFS’ MOTION TO
STAY PENDING CLOSING OF THE TRANSACTION

Defendants Elon R. Musk, X Holdings I Inc., and X Holdings II, Inc.
(“Defendants”), by and through their undersigned attorneys, hereby move to stay

this action and remove the October 17 trial from the Court’s calendar based on


changed circumstances that have effectively mooted this action.

PRELIMINARY STATEMENT

1 . This Court ordered an expedited trial on Twitter’s sole equitable claim
for relief that Defendants “specifically perform their obligations under the merger
agreement and consummate the closing in accordance with the terms of the merger
agreement.” Defendants have agreed to do exactly that. They have stated they are
willing    to close the transaction at $54.20, the Debt Financing parties are working

cooperatively to fund the close, and closing is expected on or around October 28,

a€oeEffectively mooteda€D.

Why is this not a joint stipulation? Or, rather, what is there in the deal he signed that Musk 
wants changed before he will actually close the deal that is sufficiently fraught to make Twitter 
unwilling to stipulate that closing is scheduled for on or about October 28? Or is it simply that 
Twitter not trust Musk enough to be willing to accomodate him on a delay-of-trial?
And why, if you are a lawyer who wants to practice before the Delaware Court of Chancery again, is 
this a piece of paper you would want to put under the nose of the very busy Chancellor, who regards 
you as and expects you to act like an Officer of the Court, rather than merely as a high-paid 
obsequious enabler of the chaos monkey?

This smells to me like Musk scared that he has driven away partners, that he may lose control of 
Tesla over the requirement that he fund the Twitter purchase, that he is demanding that his lawyers 
do something, and this is a something.
But I do expect more chaos-monkey shenanigans before the next phase of the Musk-Twitter saga 
commences, in which Musk actually has to run Twitter.

And I tp.ntativp.lv filp. this nndp.f Thinas lawvp.rs dn tn wastp. thp. timp. nf a hnsv Chanrp.llnr 
in thp hnnp that dnincr thpm will kpp.n thp.ir chans-mnnkp.v r.lip.nt from stiffincr thp.m


Leave a comment

MUST-LISTEN: An Interview With Daniel Gross and Nat Friedman About the Democratization of AI

Unfortunately paywalled:

Ben Thompson, Daniel Gross, & Nat Friedman: The Democratization of AI: I dona€™t generally do 
interviews with investors, but today is an exception. Daniel Gross founded Cue, a search engine 
that was bought by Apple and incorporated into iOS, and led machine learning efforts at Apple from 
2013-2017, before becoming a partner at YCombinator and then transitioning into angel investing. 
Nat Friedman co-founded Xamarin,
an open-source cross-platform SDK which was bought by Microsoft in 2016; Friedman led Microsofta€™ 
s acquisition of GitHub of 2018, and was CEO of the developer-focused company until last year; he 
too is now focused on angel investinga€!

Give a gift subscription

MUST-READ: The Permanent Problem of the Human Race

Brink Lindsey: What Is the Permanent Problem?: a€~Once a society becomes rich enough to make 
poverty exceptional rather than the rule, people start to want different thingsa€! belonging, 
self-respect, status, purpose, and meaning. This cultural shift has been most thoroughly documented 
by political scientist Ronald Inglehart in a long-running series of World Values Surveysa€!. 
Although consumer capitalism continues to raise material living standards, it
has not been very effective at satisfying those higher, spiritual needs whose fulfillment defines a 
high quality of life. It does well enough for the well-educated professional and managerial 
elitea€’’roughly the top 25 percent in contemporary rich democracies. Which is no mean 
accomplishment: never before in history has such a large fraction of society lived so well. For 
these people, their working Eves are sufficiently interesting, challenging, and financially
rewarding to be well worth all the associated rigors and stresses. But outside this golden circle, 
delineated these days primarily by educational credentials, things are differenta€!. Yet what has 
unfolded in societies liberated from physical want falls far short of widespread individual 
flourishing. The progressive disintegration of family and community life is most severe among the 
less educated. Where once workplace solidarity and tight-knit social relationships
were compensations for lower economic standing, now the new class divide leaves those outside the 
elite increasingly atomized and adrifta€!. Here then is the crux of the problem. Capitalism has 
roused us to elevate new values to the position of primary concern, but has failed to supply 
conditions consistent with achieving them. This is the classic situation that gives rise to 
revolutions and the collapse of established social orders: rising expectations without the
means to fulfill them. This, in my view, is whata€™ s provoking our a€oegeneral nervous 
breakdowna€Da€!


he Permanent Problem

What Is the Permanent Problem?

Since 2016, Ia€™ ve done a great deal of reading, writing, thinking, talking, and brooding about 
the crisis of liberal democracy wea€™re now living through a€” how it originated, what powers it, 
and how possibly to defuse it or at least muddle through it. And what Ia€™ ve concluded is that 
this political crisis is one aspect oa€l
Read more

4 months ago A- 24 likes A- 18 comments A- Brink Lindsey

Get 25% off a group subscription

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Paul Krugman: Is the era of low interest rates over?: a€~The so-called natural rate of 
interesta€!. The fact that we didna€™ t see inflationary overheating over the course of a 30-year 
trend of falling interest rates suggests that the decline wasna€™ t artificiala€!. Investment 
spending is driven in large part by growtha€!. Since the 1990sa€! drivers of investment lost a lot 
of their momentuma€l. Is there any reason to expect either demography or
technology to be more favorable for investment in, say, 2024 than they were in 2019? I dona€™t see 
ita€L The era of low interest rates probably isna€™t over after alla€!

•  Martin Wolf: Xi Jinpinga€™ s third term is a tragic error: a€~Chinaa€™ s macroeconomic, 
microeconomic and environmental difficulties remain largely unaddresseda€!

•  Nilay Patel: How Arm conquered the chip market without making a single chip, with CEO Rene 
Haasa€!

•  Nilay Patel: Pat Gelsinger came back to turn Intel arounda€”herea€™ s how ita€™ s going: 
a€~Changeda€! culturea€! bet big on the silicon heartlanda€!

• Michael Clark: Metaa€™ s shutting down its Substack competitor after less than two yearsa€!

•  Elizabeth Lopatto: Elon Musk says hea€™ 11 buy Twitter, again, for $54.20 a share, again: 
a€~a€oeHe was staring down the business end of what was likely going to be a very unpleasant 
deposition ,a€D Talley saysa€!. a€oeThe less charitable way to put it is that he just made stuff 
up. That would have been very uncomfortable for Musk and his legal team, and thata€™ s definitely a 
motivationa€D to settlea€!

• Scott Sumner: Thoughts on the neoliberal wavea€!

•  Tyler Cowen: What should I ask Brad DeLong?: a€~I will be doing a Conversation with him. So what 
should I ask? Do please remember, this is the Conversation I want to havea€!. And of course Brad 
has a new book out Slouching Toward Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Centurya€.\

•  Chad Orzel: Why I'm Not Writing About This Year's Nobel: a€~Yes, I am aware of the irony of 
writing probably 1500 words about how Ia€™m not writing about something. I contain multitudes, and 
all that

•  Noah Smith: Authoritarians are not governing effectively: a€~A week ago, I wrote that the 
supporters of liberal democracy need to offer the world a concrete vision of the kind of future 
they want to create. But even though this vision hasna€™t yet emerged, the authoritarians of the 
world are already making a pretty good case for liberal democracy simply by being incredibly 
incompetenta€!

• Rana Faroohar: Homecoming: The Path to Prosperity in a Post-Global Worlda€!

Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Steve Schmidt: The Apostle Newt: a€~Newt Gingrich changed America for the worse. He ignited a cold 
civil war in America, and has wrought profound damage to American politics and the most important 
institutions in the country. He will be remembered as an odious and malignant figure in Americaa€™ 
s history. He is a towering hypocrite, who took a wrecking ball to the US Congress and broke it. 
The appointment of his wife and former mistress as the
American ambassador to the Holy See by Trump wasna€™ t just a disgrace, it was disgusting. There 
are few Americans who have done more to damage American unity and harm the American spirit than the 
self-declared a€oeworld historical figure.a€D He led the impeachment of a president in one of the 
greatest abuses of power and hypocrisy in American political history. Watching Gingrich play 
preacher and talk about Christ and the redemption of Herschel
Walker is proof that, with each day, some new act of brazen insanity will crush the previous daya€™ 
s records and achievementsa€!

Kristine Aquino: Five Things: a€~Oil is poised for a second weekly advance after the OPEC+ alliance 
agreed to the biggest production cut since 2020. The move prompted Goldman Sachs to raise its oil 
price forecast. While higher energy prices stoke inflation, markets appear to be seizing on the 
thought that they will end up limiting demand, hit company earnings and slow economic growth. For 
US officials, who spent the past few days in a frantic lobbying
effort to persuade Saudi Arabia and others in the group to change course, the implication is clear: 
in the increasingly hostile energy war between Russia and the West, Saudi Arabia is willing to help 
Vladimir Putin and snub Joe Bidena€!

Matt Yglesias: Ten years of YIMBYism have accomplished a lot: a€~The California approach so far 
has, I think, been driven largely by a sense of what they can get the votes for, which is great for 
a pioneering group. But my understanding is that the popularity of these reforms varies quite a bit 
from idea to idea, so ita€™ s worth understanding which risks are worth running and which arena€™ 
t. Overall, though, I think the future is bright. Ten years ago,
housing reform was considered a bizarre niche issue that nobody in the audience cared about and 
where change was politically impossible. Now, ita€™ s a mainstream topic of discussion with real 
political champions, local activist groups around the country, and a blueprint for state-level 
change. More and more people also acknowledge these days that housing is just so central to the 
economy that you cana€™ t treat it as a tiny quirky obsession of urbanists a€”
anyone who cares about sustainable growth needs to care about housing supplya€!



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

