Subscribe now

Language-Path: Arbwyth->Trade 24->Cherguelen->Triskw
From: Twirlip of the Mists

Subject: Blighter Video thread
Keywords: Hexapodia as the key insight
Distribution: Threat of the Blight
Approved:    yes

Date: 8.68 days since Fall of Relay

I haven't had a chance to see the famous video from
Straumli Realm, except as an evocation. (My only
gateway onto the Net is very expensive.) Is it true
that humans have six legs? I wasn't sure from the


Pre-Note:

FRED   — Total Factor Productivity at Constant National Prices for United States

1.05


1.00

0.95

0.90

0.85

0.80

0.75

0.70

0.65

1960               1970               1980               1990               2000               2010

Here in the U.S., at the leading edge of the world economy, measured producivity growth fell off a 
cliff in the late 1960s, recovreed somewhat in the 1980s, resumed what had been its a€oenormala€n 
pre-1970 pace in the 1990s with the dot-com booma€”and then fell off a cliff again in the mid-2000s.
Did the neoliberal swing toward a€ceshort-termisma€D, viewing corporations as cash-flow engines and 
nothing elsea€”plus the great reduction in public R&D and infrastructure spendinga€”play a role in 
this? Perhaps. Maybe even probably.

Could and should we rebuild the corporate industrial research labs that atrophied, at least 
somewhat, during the neoliberal era? Perhaps. Maybe even probably.
Share

Key Insights:

1. Sometimes the best things in history come from accidents and stupidity.

2. Collective stupidity enabling individual intelligence enables us to do unexpected 
thingsa€”sometimes very good things (and sometimes very bad things).

3. Because every institution has its own particular biases and limitations (as well as strengths), 
you need a diversity of institutions if you are going to achieve big goals.

4. The market ain't going to provide enough and the right kind of R&Da€”no single institution or 
set of institutions will.

5. The best we can do is to very amply fund as many kinds of R&D institutions as possible.

6. Hexapodia!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


References:

• Ashish Arora & al.'. The Changing Structure of American Innovation: Some Cautionary Remarks for 
Economic Growtha€\

• John Gertner: The Idea Factory: Bell Labs and the Great Age of American InnovationaCi

• Iulia Georgescu: Bringing back the golden days of Bell Labsd€\

• Han Gur: a€~Interested in bringing back Bell Labs? Some thoughts on why it's not possible, and 
what we should do insteada€!

• Lawrence Lessig: Code 2.0a€\

•  Noah Smith: The dream of bringing back Bell Labs’. Was America's most famous corporate lab a 
product of its time, or something that can be reproduced?^!

+, of course:

• Vernor Vinge: A Fire Upon the Deep chttps: //archive .org/details/fireupondeepOO ving_ 0/mode/1 
up>
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Subscribe now

