Subscribe now

First: If Alan Greenspan Were Ever to Let Down What Hair He Has:

Bob Reich complains that when he was in the Clinton administration he never asked Alan Greenspan 
the questions and never got the answers he wanted to.

Now when I was a not very senior Treasury Department official during the Clinton administration, I 
did get to ask Alan Greenspan the questions that Bob wanted to ask him. And I got answers. You see, 
every week a bunch of us senior Treasury Department staff would go over to the Federal Reserve for 
a lunch. (Food quality: 1 out of 10.) And, since about 1/3 of my job was fed watching and such, I 
went most of the time. And Greenspan was there, maybe 1/5 of
the time, if I recall correctly. Sometimes he was quiet. Sometimes he was witty. And sometimes he 
let what little hair he had down, regarding himself as among, broadly, friends:

Robert Reich: Personal History: My Lunch with Alan Greenspan: a€~Our lunch was pleasant, our 
conversation easy. He deftly avoided talking about the deficit jobs and inflation. I left feeling 
pampered and charmed. Greenspan got out of the lunch exactly what he wanted. Yet I never asked him 
the questions I intended to ask and never got the answers I imagined hea€™ d givea€!
LINK:

Robert Reich

Personal History: My lunch with Alan Greenspan

On balance, Ia€™ m glad Joe Biden decided to reappoint Jerome Powell to chair the Fed. During 
Powella€™ s first four-year term, he shifted monetary policy away from its singular focus on 
preventing inflation and toward aggressively trying to get unemployment as low as possible. (Lael 
Brainard, whom Biden appointed to be vice chair, will be a lot tougher regula€!

Read more

a year ago A- 25 likes A- 13 comments A- Robert Reich

So let me give my version of what Alan Greenspan's monologue about the issues Bob Reich had wished 
he would have opened up to him, only written not in Greenspanese but instead in plainer language:

a€oeHere I am! A lifelong disciple of Ayn Rand, and yet the US and the world economya€™ s central 
planner! Isn't that rich? But somebody has to do this job. And I am certain I am the best person to 
do this job, largely because I really wish this job did not have to be done. But it does. What 
happened to all the magic of the marketplace, and the enormously productive creative-destructive 
acts of unfettered entrepreneurs like my teacher
Ayn Randa€™ s characters Howard Rourk and John Galt? Why are we here?

[shrugs shoulders]

a€oeBut we are here. It is a fact that the interest rate financial markets on their own generate is 
not a good guide for the economy. What is it not a good guide to? To the a€~neutrala€™ Wicksellian 
rate: the rate at which the rewards to building businesses are high enough that entrepreneurs hire 
workers not employed making consumption goodsa€”so that there is no cyclical but only structural 
and frictional unemployment^’’but at
which the perceived rewards to building businesses are not so high as to be unrealizable given 
limited numbers of potential workers and resources not already committed to satisfying current 
demand for consumption goods. Fall away from the Wicksellian a€ceneutrala€D rate on the 
interest-rates-too-high side, and you get mass unemployment. Fall away on the 
interest-rates-too-low side, and you get an acceleration of inflation as the
market has to allocate in the fact of a demand for more than 100% of possible production.

a€ceBut I have to do more than hit the sweet spot. Inflation rises if the interest rate is below 
neutral, yes. But inflation also rises if businesses feel that they need to insure themselves 
against any material risk that the Federal Reserve will start leaning on the a€~interest rates too 
lowa€™ side.


a'eueinus my joo requires mat i appear io oe ur. uoom: tuai Businesses icei certain mat my 
principal concern is lor a^ eiiecuve price siaoiniya^ —*, ana mat mere is no material risx. mat i 
win lean on me a^ interest rates too iowae*“ siue.

a€oeAnd now we come to the paradox of central banking: if I play the public role of Dr. Doom, then 
I can actually set interest rates on the technocratic meritsa€”and if there is a case that the 
a€~neutrala€™ interest rate is lower than financial worthies believe, I can lower it and find out. 
If I didna€™t play the role of Dr. Doom, I would never have that freedom of action.

a€oeAnd, indeed, three times the financial worthies cried that I was an inflationista£€”in 1993, 
when I kept from raising interest rates until well after the moment that not just Republican but 
Democratic financial worthies thought I should start; in 1995-6, when I cut short the tightening 
cycle to see if the dot-com boom was indeed a thing that had lowered the a€~neutrala€™ rate (over 
moderately strong protests from some recent
Democratic Fed Governor appointees, I must say); and in 2003-4, and in this last I went so far that 
a surprising number of people who should know better blame me, falsely, for the Great Recession.

a€oeWas I perfect? No.

a€oel could have gotten in front of and tried to stop the Bush 2001 tax-cut train, and if I could 
have done so it would have been good for the country. But Republican party loyalty is a mighty 
forcea€”I would have failed. And I had already crossed Republican worthies three times: in not 
lowering interest rates faster in 1990, in not raising interest rates in early 1993 and thus 
disrupting Bill Clintona€™ s chance to make sensible economic
policy, and in not raising interest rates further in 1995 and so giving Bill Clinton a very strong 
recovery on which to run for reelection. I made these decisions on the monetary-policy merits. But 
in 20011 was on the point of being thrown out of the Republican Party (just as Ben Bernanke was to 
be a decade later) and had only a little influence, that I had to husband. After 1992, the Bush 
family and its retainers really, really, really did not
and                                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
do not like me at all.

a€oeWas I perfect? No.

a€oel had no idea that the bankers were as crazy in 2004 and after as they were. I judged that the 
Federal Reserve could handle anything the housing sector threw at us and keep it from becoming a 
depression. I was wrong. And I judged that there was no way I could get in between lenders who 
wanted to lend and borrowers who wanted to borrow, tell them they could not do so, and make it 
sticka€”congress, all of congress, Republicans
and Democrats alike, would have had my scalp if I had tried to do so over 2003-5.

a€oeBut the stock market crash of 1987a€”my Fed kept that from badly disrupting the U.S. economy. 
The S&L crisis of 1990 that came about because politicians like John McCain ran interference for 
griftersa€”my Fed kept that from badly disrupting the economy. The Mexican financial crisis of 
1995a€”my Fed kept that from badly disrupting the economy. The East-Asia and Russia crisis of 
1997-8a€”my Fed kept that from badly
disrupting the economy. The dot-com crash of 2000a€”my Fed kept that from badly disrupting the 
economy. 9/lla€”my Fed kept that from badly disrupting the economy. My monetary policy during the 
1990s was such that current Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen calls it a€oeThe Fabulous Decadea€d. 
And I tried my best to balance interests and risks and went the extra mile in keeping interest 
rates low to try to get America in the first
half                                                                                                
                                                                                                    
of the 2000s back to the macroeconomic sweet spot of maximum employment consistent with effective 
price stability .a€D

Needless to say, if Greenspan ever sees this and is asked about it, I expect him to respond the 
same way that he did to Bush Treasury Secretary Paul Oa€™ Neilla€™ s claims that Greenspan joined 
him in private opposition to the 2001 tax cut: a€oel am afraid that my memory and my friend Paula€™ 
s differ.a€D
Share


One Picture:

Omicron & Others: COVID


Clade

B 20H(Beta. V2)        | 21K

|    201 (Alpha. VI)        19A

|    20J (Gamma. V3)      19B

||   21A (Delta)          20A

□ 211 (Delta)          □ 20G

|T|  21J (Delta)         F  20B

2   21B (Kappa)       Q  20D

Q   2IF (lota)          g  20F

3.   21G (Lambda)      F’  2OE(EU1)

|    21H (Mu)          □  20C

o

H 15   

21K

I wk



O1?B

2020-Mar          2020-Jun          2020-Sep         2020-Dec          2021-Mar          2021 Jun   
       2021-Sep

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Joe Conason: In A Pandemic, Hesitation Is Doom 
<https://www.nationalmemo.com/vaccine-patent-suspension>

• xOmachos: Eradicating .DSStoxe from Git: a€~What if we could globally ignore DSStore rather than 
adding it to every repositorya€™ s .gitignore file?a€! <https ://0xmachos .com/2020-01 
-22-Eradicating- ,DS Store-From-Git/>

• Hunter Walker: Jan. 6 White House Rally Organizers Were a€~Following POTUSa€™ Leada€™: a€~Rally 
planners coordinated closely with the White House before Jan. 6 and readied a dinner party while 
the Capitol was under siege, according to leaked group text messages obtained by Rolling Stonea€! 
<https://www.rollingstone.com/politics/politics-features/i6-white-house-rally-organizers-trump-coope
rate-1260849/>

• Lara Williams: Give Thanks for Vaccines, Economic Improvement and Safe Gatherings <https 
://www.bloomberg 
.com/opinion/articles/2021-11-2l/give-thanks-for-vaccines-economic-improvement-and-safe-gatherings?s
ref=r4AzvICB&cmpid%3D=socialflow-twitter-view>

• Trevon D Logan: a€™ American democracy is very, very young. It is not even 60 years old. Look at 
voting registration and voting by race in Mississippi counties in 1946a€“in some cases no Black 
people voted. None. When people are nostalgic for the a€oegood old days,a€D this is what they 
meana€!

Dr. Tre von D Logan @TrevonDLogan

American democracy is very, very young. It is not even 60 years old. Look at voting registration 
and voting by race in Mississippi counties in 1946a€“ in some cases no Black people voted. None. 
When people are nostalgic for the a€oegood old days,a€D this is what they mean.


County       White
population

Colored
population

Total Negroes Negroes
registered registered voted


Adams         10,344        16,885        3,371        147         0

Harrison        40,742        10,046        11,000        340        12

Hinds          51,826        55,445        27,386        414       195

Lauderdale      35,435        22,810        12,000        188        27

Leflore         14,394        38,970         4,345         26         0

Marshal!        7,556        17,965        2,370         17         5

Washington      18,568        48,831         5,200        126        25

Winston        13,638         9,062         5,000        25         0

Source: Special Committee to Investigate Campaign Expenditures, Report, Campaign Ex­
penditures, 1946, p. 12. The above figures from counties Investigated conclusively show the
end result of the campaign to keep the Negro from the polls.

* "   ■ ■  “   - m -

1:40 PM r™ Nov 28,2021

12 !Likes40Re tweets

• Gerald Friedman: a€™ Germany, Italy join list of countries with detected cases of omicron 
COVIDa€“19 varianta€!

#IStandwithPP

Gerald Friedman @gfriedma


thehill.comGermany, Italy join list of countries with detected cases of omicron COVID-19 
variantBoth Italy and Germany reported on Saturday that they had detecte...
1:37 PM r™ Nov 28,2021

• Max Kennerly: a€™ Part of what makes Fox News so distressing is the incoherence. a€oeThe variant 
is fake, but Trump would already have a new vaccine for it, but vaccines dona€™ t work.a€D Anyone 
who can accept all of those togethera€’’millions of Fox News viewersa€”is impervious to reason. 
Theya€™ re in a culta€!

Max Kennerly @MaxKennerly

Part of what makes Fox News so distressing is the incoherence. "The variant is fake, but Trump 
would already have a new vaccine for it, but vaccines don't work." Anyone who can accept all of 
those togethera€’’millions of Fox News viewersa€”is impervious to reason. They're in a cult.

Heartland Signal

@HeartlandSignal

Fox News hosts suggest coronavirus variants are made
up to help Democrats:

CAIN: “Always a new variant.”

HEGSETH: “Count on a variant about every October,
every two years.”

CAIN: “You're probably right...”

HEGSETH: [mimicking phone call] “We’re gonna need
a new variant here.”


2:07 PM • Nov 27, 2021 • Twitter for iPhone

Acyn

wJK @Acyn

Miller: If President Trump was still in office, we’d
already have modified vaccines to deal with the new
variants

10:13 PM • Nov 26, 2021 • Twitter for iPhone


Jon Schwarz©

G @schwarz

Another day, another example of Tucker Carlson —

who obviously is himself vaccinated — lying to his
audience, whom he hates and wants to die
washingtonpost.com/politics/2O21/...

“The vaccinated can spread the virus as efficiently as anybody else,” Carlson claimed.
“So what is the justification for these mandates at this point?”

Berenson responded that “there’s just no evidence that the vaccines halt infection or
transmission in any way.”

3:24 PM • Nov 26, 2021 • Twitter Web App

8:09 PM r™ Nov 27,2021

5,475Likesl ,395Re tweets

• Erin L. Thompson: a€™ Just met someone whoa€™ s a set designer and keeps $500k in fake movie 
money in her medicine cabinet to fa€” with her Tinder datesa€!

Erin L. Thompson @ artcrimeprof

Just met someone whoa€™ s a set designer and keeps $500k in fake movie money in her medicine 
cabinet to fuck with her Tinder dates. #hero


11:49 PM r™ Nov 27, 2021

2,260Likes256Retweets

• Sam Ro: 10 Truths About the Stock Market: a€~l. The long game is undefeated. 2. You can get 
smoked in the short-term. 3. Dona€™ t ever expect average. 4. Stocks offer asymmetric upside. 5. 
Earnings drive stock prices. 6. Valuations wona€™ t tell you much about next year. 7. There will 
always be something to worry about. 8. The most destabilizing risks are the ones people arena€™ t 
talking about. 9. Therea€™ s a lot of turnover in the stock
market. 10. The stock market is and isna€™ t the economya€!

LINK:


10 truths about the stock market dY“"

The stock market can be an intimidating place: ita€™ s real money on the line, therea€™ s an 
overwhelming amount of information, and people have lost fortunes very quickly. But ita€™ s also a 
place where thoughtful investors have long accumulated a lot of wealtha€!

Read more

a year ago A- 12 likes A- Sam Ro, CFA

Paragraphs:

A Friend: a€~[I see] no signsa€! Republicans (beyond Mitt Romney and a few quiet and ineffective 
House back-benchers) are interested in concrete policy agendas of any kinda€”Trumpist or otherwise. 
Performative culture war theater takes up most of the political oxygena€! [and] crazed opposition 
of whatever Democrats are forwarding [takes the rest]. In short, there is no significant Republican 
demand fora€! policy agendas peddled by [any one on the
center- or far-right] a€!

James Crugnale: Someone Unearthed a 1997 Wired Article Predicting a€™ 10 Things That Could Go Wrong 
in the 21st Centurya€™ a€” & Nearly All Of Them Came True=: a€~In a listicle attached to the story, 
[Peter] Leyden and [Peter] Schwartz predicted a€oeten scenario spoilersa€D that would a€oecut 
shorta€D the economic boom of the 1990s. a€“ Tensions between China and the US escalate into a new 
Cold War a€” bordering on a hot one. a€“ New
technologies turn out to be a bust. They simply dona€™ t bring the expected productivity increases 
or the big economic boosts. a€“ Russia devolves into a kleptocracy run by a mafia or retreats into 
quasi-communist nationalism that threatens Europe. a€“ Europea€™ s integration process grinds to a 
halt. Eastern and Western Europe cana€™ t finesse a reunification, and even the European 
Unification process breaks down. a€“ Major ecological crisis causes a
global climate change that, among other things, disrupts the food supply - causing big price 
increases everywhere and sporadic famines. a€“ Major rise in crime and terrorism forces the world 
to pull back in fear. People who constantly feel they could be blown up or ripped off are not in 
the mood to reach out and open up. a€“ The cumulative escalation in pollution causes a dramatic 
increase in cancer, which overwhelms the ill-prepared health system. a€“
Energy prices go through the roof. Convulsions in the Middle East disrupt the oil supply, and 
alternative energy sources fail to materialize. a€“ An uncontrollable plague - a modern-day 
influenza epidemic or its equivalent takes off like wildfire, killing upward of 200 million people. 
a€“ A social and cultural backlash stops progress dead in its tracks, human beings need to choose 
to move forward. They just may nota€!. The infographic went viral on Reddit and
Twitter, with many commentators reacting incredulously to the nearly 25-year-old predictionsa€!

LINK: chttps://digg .com/2021/wired-article-future-predictions-came-true>

Wikipedia: Somerset v Stewart: a€~Somerset v Stewart (1772) 98 ER 499 (also known as Somersetta€™ s 
case, v. XX Sommersett v Steuart and the Mansfield Judgment) is a judgment of the English Court of 
Kinga€™ s Bench in 1772, relating to the right of an enslaved person on English soil not to be 
forcibly removed from the country and sent to Jamaica for sale. Lord Mansfield decided that: 
aCceThe state of slavery is of such a nature that it is incapable of
being introduced on any reasons, moral or political, but only by positive law, which preserves its 
force long after the reasons, occasions, and time itself from whence it was created, is erased from 
memory. It is so odious, that nothing can be suffered to support it, but positive law. Whatever 
inconveniences, therefore, may follow from the decision, I cannot say this case is allowed or 
approved by the law of England; and therefore the black must be

dischargeda€ !a€D

LINK: chttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Somerset_v_ S te wart>

Jerry P. Weir & Marion F. Gruber: An Overview of the Regulation of Influenza Vaccines in the United 
States: a€~=Influenza virus vaccines are unique among currently licensed viral vaccines. The 
vaccines designed to protect against seasonal influenza illness must be updated periodically in an 
effort to match the vaccine strain with currently circulating viruses, and the vaccine 
manufacturing timeline includes multiple, overlapping processes with a very limited
amount of flexibility. In the United States (U.S.), over 150 million doses of seasonal trivalent 
and quadrivalent vaccine are produced annually, a mammoth effort, particularly in the context of a 
vaccine with components that usually change on a yearly basis. In addition, emergence of an 
influenza virus containing an HA subtype that has not recently circulated in humans is an ever 
present possibility. Recently, pandemic influenza vaccines have been licensed, and
the pathways for licensure of pandemic vaccines and subsequent strain updating have been defined. 
Thus, there are formidable challenges for the regulation of currently licensed influenza vaccines, 
as well as for the regulation of influenza vaccines under development. This review describes the 
process of licensing influenza vaccines in the U.S., the process and steps involved in the annual 
updating of seasonal influenza vaccines, and some recent experiences and
regulatory challenges faced in development and evaluation of novel influenza vaccinesa€!

LINK: <https://www.ncbi .nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4947948/>

The Economist: Chinaa€™ s Communist Authorities Are Tightening Their Grip on the Private Sector: 
a€~Its growth model is at riska€!. China Internet Investment Funda€!. [Its] 1% stake in a ByteDance 
subsidiary gives it the power to appoint one of three board members in a unit that holds key 
licences for operating its domestic short-video business. A similar bargain has been struck with 
Weibo, which is listed in New York, with CIIF picking up 1% for just
10.7m yuan ($1.5m). The firms hardly need more capital. Nor is CIIF, with plans for a lOObn yuan 
funda€”enough to rival a big Silicon Valley venture-capital firma€”overly concerned with the 
outsize returns its investments will certainly deliver. That is because the outfita€! is itself 
mostly owned by the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC), a powerful internet watchdog. The 
arrangement is akin to Americaa€™ s Federal Communications Commission
taking discounted stakes in tech groups such as Facebook and Twitter, appointing board members, 
then steering them in the direction it sees fita€!. Under the aegis of President Xi Jinping, 
regulators in recent years have unleashed a sustained attack on the technology sector, deeming it 
to have gained too much influence and strayed too far from the Communist Partya€™ s core values. 
Tech magnates such as Jack Ma, the co-founder of e-commerce giant Alibaba,
have been subdued. Entire business models have been rewritten from on higha€”and the tenor of the 
Chinese economy altered as a resulta€!. An uncomfortable prospect for Mr Xia€™ s new era of party 
control of the economy: fear by state-capitalists of falling foul of ideological diktats could 
lower investment returns and throttle corporate dynamism. CIIFa€™ s board appointee to ByteDance 
has no clear business experience on his rA©sumA©, according to
Ms Li, but a background in communist propaganda. For doing business in China these days, an 
insidera€™ s steer on how not to run afoul of the Party may prove invaluablea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/business/chinas-communist-authorities-reinvent-state-capitalism/21806311>



Wikipedia: Somerset v Stewart: a€~Somerset v Stewart (1772) 98 ER 499 (also known as Somersetta€™ s 
case, v. XX Sommersett v Steuart and the Mansfield Judgment) is a judgment of the English Court of 
Kinga€™ s Bench in 1772, relating to the right of an enslaved person on English soil not to be 
forcibly removed from the country and sent to Jamaica for sale. Lord Mansfield decided that: 
a€oeThe state of slavery is of such a nature that it is incapable of
being introduced on any reasons, moral or political, but only by positive law, which preserves its 
force long after the reasons, occasions, and time itself from whence it was created, is erased from 
memory. It is so odious, that nothing can be suffered to support it, but positive law. Whatever 
inconveniences, therefore, may follow from the decision, I cannot say this case is allowed or 
approved by the law of England; and therefore the black must be

dischargeda€ !a€D

LINK: chttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Somerset_ v_Stewart>

Jerry P. Weir & Marion F. Gruber: An Overview of the Regulation of Influenza Vaccines in the United 
States: a€~=Influenza virus vaccines are unique among currently licensed viral vaccines. The 
vaccines designed to protect against seasonal influenza illness must be updated periodically in an 
effort to match the vaccine strain with currently circulating viruses, and the vaccine 
manufacturing timeline includes multiple, overlapping processes with a very limited
amount of flexibility. In the United States (U.S.), over 150 million doses of seasonal trivalent 
and quadrivalent vaccine are produced annually, a mammoth effort, particularly in the context of a 
vaccine with components that usually change on a yearly basis. In addition, emergence of an 
influenza virus containing an HA subtype that has not recently circulated in humans is an ever 
present possibility. Recently, pandemic influenza vaccines have been licensed, and
the pathways for licensure of pandemic vaccines and subsequent strain updating have been defined. 
Thus, there are formidable challenges for the regulation of currently licensed influenza vaccines, 
as well as for the regulation of influenza vaccines under development. This review describes the 
process of licensing influenza vaccines in the U.S., the process and steps involved in the annual 
updating of seasonal influenza vaccines, and some recent experiences and
regulatory challenges faced in development and evaluation of novel influenza vaccinesa€!

LINK: <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4947948/>

The Economist: Chinaa€™ s Communist Authorities Are Tightening Their Grip on the Private Sector: 
a€~Its growth model is at riska€!. China Internet Investment Funda€!. [Its] 1% stake in a ByteDance 
subsidiary gives it the power to appoint one of three board members in a unit that holds key 
licences for operating its domestic short-video business. A similar bargain has been struck with 
Weibo, which is listed in New York, with CIIF picking up 1% for just
10.7m yuan ($1.5m). The firms hardly need more capital. Nor is CIIF, with plans for a lOObn yuan 
funda€”enough to rival a big Silicon Valley venture-capital firma€”overly concerned with the 
outsize returns its investments will certainly deliver. That is because the outfita€! is itself 
mostly owned by the Cyberspace Administration of China (CAC), a powerful internet watchdog. The 
arrangement is akin to Americaa€™ s Federal Communications Commission
taking discounted stakes in tech groups such as Facebook and Twitter, appointing board members, 
then steering them in the direction it sees fita€!. Under the aegis of President Xi Jinping, 
regulators in recent years have unleashed a sustained attack on the technology sector, deeming it 
to have gained too much influence and strayed too far from the Communist PartyaC™ s core values. 
Tech magnates such as Jack Ma, the co-founder of e-commerce giant Alibaba,
have been subdued. Entire business models have been rewritten from on higha€”and the tenor of the 
Chinese economy altered as a resulta€!. An uncomfortable prospect for Mr Xia€™ s new era of party 
control of the economy: fear by state-capitalists of falling foul of ideological diktats could 
lower investment returns and throttle corporate dynamism. CIIFa€™ s board appointee to ByteDance 
has no clear business experience on his rA©sumA©, according to
Ms Li, but a background in communist propaganda. For doing business in China these days, an 
insideraC™ s steer on how not to run afoul of the Party may prove invaluablea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/business/chinas-communist-authorities-reinvent-state-capitalism/21806311>


Brad DeLong: a€™ @davidfrum @gcaw @ The Atlantic: Forgive me for saying this: But land 
acknowledgements help people who never think about their predecessors at all to think about them a 
little. Making an acknowledgement does not mean you shouldna€™ t think more; but that you should 
think more does not excuse thinking lessa€!a€oe I Twitter_: a€~Forgive me for saying this: But land 
acknowledgements help people who never think about their
predecessors at all to think about them a little. Making an acknowledgement does not mean you 
shouldna€™ t think more; but that you should think more does not excuse thinking less. To say that 
land acknowledgements are moral posturing and thus should be discouraged because they are a€Umoral 
posturing" is inane and stupid when your alternative is to say and do nothing at all, which it 
always isa€!

LINK:

@davidfrum @gcaw @TheAtlantic Forgive me for saying this: But land acknowledgements help people who 
never think about their predecessors at all to think about them a little. Making an acknowledgement 
does not mean you shouldn't think more; but that you should think more does not excuse thinking 
less...
1:41 PMr™ Nov 28,2021

Noah Smith: Video Interview: Eric Topol on the Omicron Variant: a€~Delta, though much more 
transmissible, wasna€™t an a€oeescape varianta€D. The original, unmodified mRNA vaccines worked 
perfectly wella€!. The same is probably not true of Omicron. Lab studies suggest that Omicron has 
evolved ways to escape both acquired immunity and vaccine immunity. That suggests that vaccine 
companies will need to make new booster shots against
Omicron. In fact, this is easy to doa€!. The key is getting rapid FDA approval and getting the CDC 
to recommend the boosters. The CDC was slow to recommend boosters against Delta in part because of 
concern over vaccine availability for developing countries, but mostly because the CDC is very 
parochial and didna€™ t trust the data on boosters and Delta that was emerging from other countries 
like Israela€!. In the meantime, Pfizera€™ s antiviral drug
should be effective against most or all Covid variants, and represents a vital addition to our 
toolkit against new variants like Omicron. In other words, science is advancing rapidly, and we 
really can end this pandemic once and for all. But we cannota€”we must nota€”rest on the laurels of 
our initial vaccine achievement. We still have lots of work to do, and our public health agencies 
are still not doing as good a job as they ought to be doing. The Biden
administration needs to immediately kick this effort into high geara€!

LINK:

Video interview: Eric Topol on the Omicron variant

Eric Topol, a cardiologist by training, is the founder of the Scripps Research Translational 
Institute. Throughout the pandemic, Eric has been the source of a wealth of up-to-date, expertly 
curated information on Twitter a€” indeed, Ia€™ ve found him to bea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 21 likes A- 24 comments A- Noah Smith
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Noah Smith: Video Interview: Eric Topol on the Omicron Variant: a€~Delta, though much more 
transmissible, wasna€™t an a€oeescape varianta€D. The original, unmodified mRNA vaccines worked 
perfectly wella€!. The same is probably not true of Omicron. Lab studies suggest that Omicron has 
evolved ways to escape both acquired immunity and vaccine immunity. That suggests that vaccine 
companies will need to make new booster shots against
Omicron. In fact, this is easy to doa€!. The key is getting rapid FDA approval and getting the CDC 
to recommend the boosters. The CDC was slow to recommend boosters against Delta in part because of 
concern over vaccine availability for developing countries, but mostly because the CDC is very 
parochial and didna€™ t trust the data on boosters and Delta that was emerging from other countries 
like Israela€!. In the meantime, Pfizera€™ s antiviral drug
should be effective against most or all Covid variants, and represents a vital addition to our 
toolkit against new variants like Omicron. In other words, science is advancing rapidly, and we 
really can end this pandemic once and for all. But we cannota€”we must nota€”rest on the laurels of 
our initial vaccine achievement. We still have lots of work to do, and our public health agencies 
are still not doing as good a job as they ought to be doing. The Biden
administration needs to immediately kick this effort into high geara€!

LINK:

Noahpinion

Video interview: Eric Topol on the Omicron variant

Eric Topol, a cardiologist by training, is the founder of the Scripps Research Translational 
Institute. Throughout the pandemic, Eric has been the source of a wealth of up-to-date, expertly 
curated information on Twitter a€” indeed, Ia€™ ve found him to bea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 21 likes A- 24 comments A- Noah Smith
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

