Subscribe now

A History of Economic Whac-A-Mole

Nov 2,2022

J. BRADFORD DELONG

In an insightful new history of US economic policymaking since 1961, Fortuna emerges as the primary 
narrative engine. While there has been little a€ceprogressa€E2in figuring
out how to manage modern economies in the interest of macroeconomic stability, there have been 
useful lessons for today's policy makers.

BERKELEY a€“ The big lesson of the past 60 years of US economic policy, according to former vice 
chair of the US Federal Reserve and current Princeton University economist
Alan S. Blindera€™ s new book, A Monetary and Fiscal History of the United States, 1961-2021, is 
that there is no big lesson.

There has been neither linear development nor much a€ceprogressa€D in figuring out how to manage 
modern economies in the interest of macroeconomic stability. Instead,
Blinder describes a€oe wheels within wheels, spinning endlessly in time and space a€! [with] 
certain themes a€! waxing and waning a€! monetary versus fiscal a€! the intellectual
realm a€! the world of practical policy making a€! the repeated ascendance and descendance of 
Keynesianism a€!.a€D

The underlying story is driven, ultimately, by historical contingency. Problems appear and are 
either solved or not solved. Either way, the response sets the stage for a new and
different problem to emerge, because the actions taken in the recent past left the economy more 
vulnerable in some way. But by the end of the story, one gets the sense that some of
the problems were quite similar to one another, and that economic policymakers have been playing a 
never-ending game of Whac-A-Mole.

Consider the question of whether inflation expectations are well anchored. Can inflation be 
expected to ebb, or does it tend to be highly persistent, with each shift in the rate
becoming permanently embedded in the likely future? When Blinder a€oeentered graduate school in the 
fall of 1967 a€! empirical evidence virtually screamed out that [it could be
expected to ebb]  Theory and empirics clashed sharply. As Groucho Marx memorably asked, a€~Who are 
ya gonna believe, me or your own eyes?a€™ The view at MIT, as I

recall, was go with your own eyes.a€D

Going with your own eyes was indeed not the right thing to do. As economist Thomas J. Sargent soon 
showed in a a€cebeautiful five-page papera€D that was
a€oeunderappreciated at the time,a€D much of the theoretical debate aCcewas beside the point,a€D 
Blinder writes.

Now, the same problem is back. Do inflation expectations remain well-anchored or not? Is the answer 
the same as it was in the 1970s? It might well be, or it might not be. This is
one of those rare moments where I am extraordinarily glad not to be on the Federal Reserve Board. 
Not only has the burden of responsibility become overwhelming, but the degree
of our ignorance is much greater than usual.

More broadly, Blinder has given us a very nice read. His book lets us ride shotgun along the 
extremely rocky road that US policymakers have traveled in their quest for price
stability, full employment, financial resilience, and robust investment. Each episode produced by 
the Wheel of Fortuna is strikingly and a€“ I believe a€“ almost completely
accurately described. Read and absorb Blindera€™ s account, and you will be qualified to present 
yourself as a respected elder statesmen who has seen much macroeconomic
policymaking up close, and whose advice warrants attention.

But are there any overarching lessons beyond the role played by Fortuna? One that I would point to 
is that while history (correctly handled) can be very useful in helping us
understand current situations, theory (at least currently fashionable theory) is not. Blinder 
reminds us that monetarism a€oerose to prominence on a combination of some hotly
disputed scholarly work, Milton Friedmana€™ s singular brilliance and skill in debate, and perhaps 
most important the rise of inflation.a€D

In the event, Keynesianism a€oewas unjustly tagged as inherently a€~inflationary,a€™ and monetarism 
stepped forward as the replacement,a€D exerting a€oesubstantial influence
on policy formulation in the United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and elsewhere.a€D But make 
no mistake: monetarisma€™ s influence on policy was malign. a€oeThe
policy debate was not, as Friedman and others sometimes claimed, over whether monetary policy 
mattered,a€D Blinder writes. a€oelt was about whether fiscal policy not
accommodated by monetary policy mattered. As it turns out, it did.a€D

Blinder then revisits the moment of New Classical Economics, whose claims about a€oepolicy 
ineffectivenessa€D went on to conquer a€oevast swaths of academia in the 1970s
and 1980s.a€D Fortunately, central bankers largely a€“ and rightly a€“ ignored this school of 
thought: After Paul Volckera€™ s time as Fed chair, who could deny that policy had
an effect on the real economy?

Similarly, Blinder raises questions whether the current theoretical workhorse, so-called New 
Keynesian DSGE models, is useful in helping policymakers understand those aspects
of the world that most concern them. Here, I think he is absolutely right to be skeptical.

Two other lessons are worth mentioning. First, monetary policymakers who make their decisions on 
political grounds should count on their reputations being permanently tarnished.
Fed Chair Arthur BurnsaC™ s reputation did not survive his excessive concern for Richard NixonaC™ s 
re-election in 1972. Similarly, Blinder argues that Alan Greenspan
a€oetarnished his gold-plated reputation by seeming to endorse the [George W.] Bush tax cuts,a€D 
thus pushing the policy across the line in Congress in 2001, much to the
countrya€™    s detriment.

Finally, using fiscal policy properly to manage demand and support growth is incredibly complex. 
The appropriate rules of thumb shift from decade to decade, and in ways that are
impossible for the political system to comprehend in real time. This is a huge problem. Back in 
1936, John Maynard Keynes thought that macroeconomic stabilization required both
fiscal and monetary policy, that it was attainable by technocratic management, and that such 
management could solve the two big problems of unemployment and income
distribution. But, as Blindera€™ s book relentlessly demonstrates, we are nowhere close to that 
policymaking Nirvana today.

Subscribe now
Leave a comment

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Share


