Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

First:

Frank Luntz is an interesting character: He started out as a one of the most red meat-loving of the 
Newt Gingrichites, foremost among those aiming at delegitimizing Democratic politiciansa€™ standing 
as Americans, in the hope of breaking the country in half and leaving Republicans in control of a 
paranoid fearful-of-Democrats base that would be
the larger half. In Luntza€™ s world, Palestinian proposals are a€cedemandsa€D while Israeli-Likud 
proposals are a€ceconcessionsa€D. In Luntza€™ s word, it is not a€oeglobal warminga€D but 
a€oeclimate changea€d; it is not the a€oeestate taxa€D but the a€oedeath taxa€D. a€oeSpeak like 
Newt!a€D he advised Republican candidates.

Democrats are: a€cesicka€D, a€oecorrupta€n, a€cehypocritesa€C, and a€cetraitorsa€D. Obamacare was a 
'a€oegovernment takeover of the health care sector.
Yet even Frank Luntz says that he has had enough of the Republican Party today:

Frank Luntz: COVID hospitalization rate for adults in 2021’. Vaccinated: 5DY .5DY^ people per 
100,000. Unvaccinated: dDY2dDY3.dDYz people The vaccine works. Get vaccinateda€!


Frank Luntz @FrankLuntz

COVID hos italization rate for adults in 2021: a€g Vaccinated: dDY .dDY# people per 100,000 a€g 
Unvaccinated: dDY2dDY3.dDY' people The vaccine works. Get vaccinated: VaccineFinder.org dY’%o

Charlie Kirk @ charliekirk 11

If the vaccine works, then why doesna€™ t it work?
5:50 PM r™ Dec 27,2021

4,999Likesl ,258Retweets

There is nothing else you can do that takes five minutes, and that cuts your risk of CO VID by a 
factor of 20, and cuts the risk that you give CO VID to your family, friends, and strangers you 
come in contact with by a factor of five.
Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.

Share

One Video

Richard Haass & Margaret MacMillan: How Can We Use (but Not Abuse) History?'. a€~How best to apply 
history to better understand current global challenges, including the erosion of democracy, the 
rise of China, and Vladimir Putina€™ s Russiaa€! 
<https://www.cfr.org/podcasts/how-can-we-use-but-not-abuse-historv>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:

180


176

172

USA, native bom


168

164

Skeletal remains, Europe

Sweden


160

0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600 1800 2000

Figure 3.6 Male heights from skeletons in Europe, AD 1—2000. Data from
Steckel, 2001, figures 3 and 4, and Koepke and Baten, 2005.

Very Briefly Noted

Juan Cole: Good News in 2022: Top 5 Reasons to be Happy about Electric Vehicles in US in Coming 
Year: a€~The price of a kilowatt hour of battery usage was $1000 just a decade ago, says Justin 
Rowlatt at the BBC. Today, it is $100 per KWh, just a tenth. It is already now cheaper to buy an EV 
and run it than to buy an equivalent
internal combustion vehicle and keep it on the roada€! <https ://www.juancole 
.com/2021/12/reasons-electric-vehicles .html>

Jon Stone: Boris Johnson Said He d€~Lovedd€™ Fox Hunting in a a€~Semi-Sexuala€™ Way & Encouraged 
Illegal Hunts to Ignore Ban 
<https://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/boris-iohnson-fox-hunting-sexual-illegal-ban-a962484
6.html>

Andy Slavitt: _a€™ My baseline is to advocate for policies that favor those with the fewest 
choices: -Require vaccines when in crowds -Preserve best anti-virals for immunocompromised -Support 
frontline health care workers by reducing spread. 2022 will have twists & turns but we have many 
tools we should use to both minimize death
& maximize living. Certainty seems like the only sure mistakea€! <

Andy Slavitt QY^dYtdY^o @ASlavitt

CO VID Update: Ia€™ ve interviewed well over 100 experts now. With omicron, the graphs & opinions 
are many but the truths are muddled. There are plenty of contradictions including 8 important ones. 
In that muddy world, 2022 will be shaped by differing circumstances & 3 attitudes. 1/
12:24 AM r™ Dec 26,2021

8,854Likes2,668Retweets

• Alice Evans: a€™33% of Egyptian women think a woman may deserve to be beaten. 59% think men 
should have the final word on decisions in the home. 85% think they should not have friends of the 
opposite sex. 61% think boys are responsible for their (older) sisters <https://t.co/bb7if83UkN>a€! 
<

Alice Evans @ alice evans

33% of Egyptian women think a woman may deserve to be beaten 59% think men should have the final 
word on decisions in the home. 85% think they should not have friends of the opposite sex 61% think 
boys are responsible for their (older) sisters. imagesmena.org/wp-content/upla€! 6Y±a6Y±-i

Attitudes toward Gender Equality: GEM Scale Questions

Percentage of respondents who agreed with selected statements about gender roles and 
decision-making, violence, and perceptions of
masculinity and femininity, IMAGES MENA Egypt 2016

MEN (%) WOMEN (%)

Attitudes toward gender roles and decision-making

A woman's most important role is to take care of the home and cook

for the family                                                 76-7


A man should have the final word about decisions in the home        90-3        58.5


Changing diapers, giving baths to children, and feeding children should
all be the mother’s responsibility

Attitudes toward violence

98.0       852

There are times when a woman deserves to be beaten            53-4        32.8

A woman should tolerate violence to keep the family together         90.0        70.9

If another man in my community insults me, 1 will defend my

reputation, with force if 1 have to                          85.7

Perceptions of masculinity and femininity

To be a man,you need to be tough                        26.6        22.9

1 think it is shameful when men engage in caring for children or other

domestic work                                    9-7         173

A husband should not have friends of the opposite sex            76.9        69.0

A wife should not have friends of the opposite sex               92.5        84.9

It is a man’s duty to exercise guardianship over his female relatives     77-9        79.1


Boys are responsible for the behaviour oftheir sisters, even if they are
younger than their sisters

Unmarried women should have the same right to live on their own as

79.8       60.9

unmarried men                                   83         33-4


Women should have the same freedom to access sites on the Internet
as men

25-7       41.6

2:05 PM r™ Dec 26,2021

55Likesl5Retweets

• Erik Brynjolfsson: a€™ We wona€™ t know the full effects of long Covid_ for a long time, but 
reports like these are troubling: Caroline Orr Bueno: "Ita€™ s been 20+ months since I had a very 
a€cemilda€D case of COVID and I still have nerve damage and havena€™ t regained my sense of smell 
or taste. Ia€™ m 36 years-old and
otherwise healthy. (Something to keep in mind when you hear about Omicron being a a€cemildera€D 
variant)a€! <

Erik Brynjolfsson @erikbryn

We won't know the full effects of long Covid for a long time, but reports like these are troubling.

Caroline Orr Bueno, Ph.D @RVAwonk

Ita€™ s been 20+ months since I had a very a€cemilda€D case of COVID and I still have nerve damage 
and havena€™ t regained my sense of smell or taste. Ia€™ m 36 years-old and otherwise healthy. 
(Something to keep in mind when you hear about Omicron being a a€cemildera€D variant).
4:41 PMr™ Dec 26,2021

37Likes5Retweets

Paragraphs:

Joanna Stern: I Spent 24 Hours in the Metaverse. I Made Friends, Did Work & Panicked About the 
Future'. a€~The best way to learn about the 3-D future internet everyonea€™ s talking about? Visit 
it in a virtual-reality headset. Trapped in the Metaverse: Herea€™ s What 24 Hours Feels Likea€!. 
WSJa€™ s Joanna Stern checked into a hotel and
strapped on a virtual-reality headset for the daya€!

LINK: <https://www.wsj .com/articles/metaverse-experience-facebook-microsoft-11636671113>


we won't Know me run ettects ot long co vid tor a long time, but reports like tnese are troubling.

Caroline Orr Bueno, Ph.D @RVAwonk

ItS™ s been 20+ months since I had a very ScemildSD case of COVID and I still have nerve damage and 
havenS™ t regained my sense of smell or taste. IS™ m 36 years-old and otherwise healthy. (Something 
to keep in mind when you hear about Omicron being a SoemilderSD variant).
4:41 PM r™ Dec 26,2021

37Likes5Retweets

Paragraphs:

Joanna Stern: I Spent 24 Hours in the Metaverse. I Made Friends, Did Work & Panicked About the 
Future'. S~The best way to learn about the 3-D future internet everyoneS™ s talking about? Visit it 
in a virtual-reality headset. Trapped in the Metaverse: HereS™ s What 24 Hours Feels LikeS!. WSJS™ 
s Joanna Stern checked into a hotel and
strapped on a virtual-reality headset for the dayS!

LINK: <https://www.wsj .com/articles/metaverse-experience-facebook-microsoft-11636671113>

Sabrina Tavernise: First They Fought About Masks. Then Over the Soul of the City: S~July, the first 
summer of the pandemic, Jonathan Waddell, a city commissioner in Enid, Okla., sat staring out at a 
rowdy audience dressed in red. They were in the third hour of public comments on a proposed mask 
mandates!. The meeting was unlike any he had
ever attended. One woman cried and said wearing a mask made her feel like she did when she was 
raped at 17. Another read the LordS™ s Prayer and said the word SceagendaSD at the top of the 
meeting schedule seemed suspicious. A man quoted Patrick Henry and handed out copies of the 
Constitution. SoeThe line is being drawn, folks,SD
said  a man in jeans and a red T-shirt. He said the people in the audience Scehad been shouted down 
for the last 20 years, and theyS™ re finally here to draw a line, and I think theyS™ re saying, 
S~WeS™ ve had enoughs™ SUS!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes .com/2021/12/26/us/oklahoma-masks .html>

Karl W. Smith: Inflation? Therea€™ s Another Explanation for Rising Housing Costs: S~As the U.S. 
economy haltingly recovers from Covid, rents are starting rise just about e very whereS’’but there 
is a distinct geographical pattern, with the data indicating that the work-from-home trend has led 
some well-paid professionals to ditch the city in favor
of more rural environs. It also seems to be pushing some folks toward lower-cost locations. These 
younger professionals, with incomes that count as modest if they live on the coasts but are still 
above the national average, have not only substantial purchasing power but sometimes also new 
families that need housing. In the first half of 2021 small towns
and rural areas saw twice as many businesses move in as out, while the urban cores on net lost 
establishments. Crucially, the scale of this migration does not have to be great for the net 
effects on local economies to be largeS!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-12-20/inflation-there-s-another-explanation-for-ris
ing-housing-costs>

Tim Snyder: USSR 1922a€“1991, USA 1776a€“2025?: S~the West won the cold war: a combination of 
elections, markets, the welfare state, and labor unions that allowed social mobility and a sense of 
the futureS!. Since the 1980sS! throwing away most of our advantagesS! weakening a system that once 
looked formidable and attractive. It
would be best to notice this while we still have some time to do something about itS!. We should 
not be congratulating ourselves. We should be asking ourselves what we have done wrong these last 
thirty years, and thinking about how to end our own stagnation. We should be preparing for the 
crisis looming in 2025S!

LINK:

USSR 1922-1991, USA 1776-2025?

Thirty years ago today the Soviet Union came to an end. This is not an occasion for triumphalism. 
It is a warning. Stagnation, or the absence of a future, was the underlying Soviet problem. 
Stalinism had created temporary social mobility in the Soviet Union, if at the cost of millions of 
deaths and the creation of the largest prison system in the worldS!

Read more

a year ago A- 117 likes A- 10 comments A- Timothy Snyder

Natalie E. Dean: How Do We Study the Severity of a New Variant?: S~A guide to help you organize 
your thinkingS!. Consider it a companion to the emerging research, with an emphasis on intuition 
rather than numbers. We can think about an individuals™ s risk of severe disease as reflecting 
three components: (1) their risk of exposure, (2) their
risk of infection given exposure, and (3) their risk of severe disease given infection. We can 
multiply these three components together to calculate their risk of severe diseaseS!

LINK:

Natalie Dean, PhD

How do we study the severity of a new variant?

Want to better understand the research coming out on the severity of Omicron? This is my guide to 
help you organize your thinking. Consider it a companion to the emerging research, with an emphasis 
on intuition rather than numbers. We can think about an individuals™ s risk of severe disease as 
reflecting three components: (1) their risk of
exposure, (2) thS!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- 1 comment A- Natalie E. Dean, PhD

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publications”! really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe


Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

