Subscribe now

FIRST: When the Fed Stops Trying

After Vladimir Putin's invasion of Ukraine, and the consequent disruptions in energy and grain 
markets, there may be no path forward, no needle to thread, for the Federal Reserve between Scylla 
and Charybdisa€’’between a monetary polic, so tight that it returns us to secular stagnation, the 
zero lower bound, and the lost half a decade of growth on the one hand; and a monetary policy so 
loose that it eventually end up in painful stagflation on the other.

But there might be such a path. And I find it disturbing that, in its rhetoric at least, the 
Federal Reserve is no longer trying to find it. Claiming that it will keep raising interest rates 
until after there are clear signs that the labor market is in a substantial downturn is a recipe 
for subsequent panicked cutting of interest rates back to the zero lower bound, after which the 
Federal Reserve will have next to no traction to boost the economy, and the chances of a rapid
return to full employment will then be very bad:

Brad DeLong: When the Fed Stops Trying: a€~Today it is unclear whether there is still a safe path 
between Scylla and Charybdis. But following two more 75-bps hikes in July and September, I worry 
that the Fed has given up on even trying to find it. Instead, like Odysseus, it has intentionally 
started to hew toward Scylla (secular stagnation), viewing it as the lesser of two evils. One no 
longer hears Fed officials cautioning that last
winter and springa€™ s tightening has yet to ramify fully throughout the economy. Instead, the Fed 
has signaled another 1.25-bpsa€™ worth of hikes to come before the end of this year.

US Secretary of the Treasury and former Fed Chair Janet Yellen once told me that the Feda€™ s 
rate-setting Federal Open Market Committee will tend to overreact to the immediate news cycle 
unless it bases its thinking on some transparent formula like the Taylor Rule. But while the Taylor 
Rule made sense during the Great Moderation, the days of persistently low and stable inflation are 
gone, and the Fed has no replacement
framework to elevate its thinking above the news-driven groupthinkaCI

There are consequences to choosing to have a Republican Worthya€”even a highly competent 
onea€”rather than a sensible macroeconomist at the head of the Fed.


Must-Read: Josh Barro on Permitting Reform

I think Josh Barrow has this wrong here. "Secret Congressa€D has only worked over the past two 
years, when it has worked, because Republicans think that they need to give centrist Democrats 
enough of a steam valve release to keep them from shifting to the same level of support for Schumer 
that all Republicans give to McConnell. a€oeSecret Congressmen is unstable, and occurs only when 
Democrats have majorities anyway. And after the midterm, the
presidential election is immediately on the horizon:

Josh Barro: Permitting Reform Will Live Another Day: a€~The parties have actually moved closer on 
these issues, which bodes well for eventual reforma€!. Why should Democrats invest in trying to 
block projects like Manchina€™ s beloved Mountain Valley Pipeline? We need more natural gas 
production and transmission, both to make Europea€™ s turn away from Russian gas possible, and in 
order to support wind and solar
projects that rely on natural gas infrastructure^!. We need backup gas generation we can turn on 
when ita€™ s cloudy (or not windy) out, or else wea€™ 11 have to rely on coala€!. [The] 
Democrat[ic]a€! party was overwhelmingly ready to swallow any objections and pass a reform package 
on the terms Manchin set if Republicans would cooperate. But they wouldna€™ ta€”on Tuesday, Mitch 
McConnell unloaded on Manchina€™ s
proposal in a way I find mostly disingenuousa€!. McConnella€™ s overriding motivation here in 
torpedoing ManchinaC™ s baby was political: to avoid handing Biden and Manchin another big 
bipartisan win so close to Election Daya€!.

Permitting reform is now the sort of initiative that would be best handled in a€oeSecret 
Congressa€Ua€! a lower-profile way to move legislation to their shared ends without anybody taking 
too much credit or blamea€!. Republicans will surely want to say this isna€™ t Manchind€™s reform 
packagea€”Capito has her own competing proposala€”and maybe the parties can agree to disagree on 
whose idea this all was. But the
underlying incentives for getting a deal done here, sooner or later, are pretty gooda€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Inflation:

FRED^   Personal Consumption Expenditures Excluding Food and Energy (Chain-Type Price Index)

10.0

7.5

<D

-7.5

Jul 2017         Jan 2018         Jul 2018         Jan 2019         Jul 2019         Jan 2020       
  Jul 2020         Jan 2021         Jul 2021         Jan 2022 Jul 2022

PCE deflator inflation has been bouncing around 5%/year for a year and a half now, without it 
leading to any shift in long-term bond market expectations of what out-year inflation is going to 
be. This is what Federal Reserve credibility is good fora€”to let inflation do whatever it needs to 
do to get the economy moving again in the short run, without triggering the expectational spiral 
that produces medium-run stagflation.
The only big danger I see springs from Vladimir Putin and Muhammed bin Salmana€”it is, more often 
than not, what happens to gas prices at the pump that unhinges inflation expectations when they get 
unhinged.

Leave a comment

Other Things That Flew By:

•  Annie Lowrey: Teachers, Nurses, and Child-Care Workers Have Had Enough: a€~The burnout crisis in 
pink-collar occupations puts everyonea€™ s well-being at risk.

•  Greg Sargent: Dangerous new threats from Trump loyalists require Democrats to act: a€~Nor can 
Democrats count on Biden succeeding in using the bully pulpita€l. We know whata€™ s likely to 
happen. Republicans are telling us so themselves. Democrats need to protect the country before 
ita€™ s too latea€!


• Tara Henley: Dingus of the Week: James Madison

•  Ivan Levingston & Jillian Deutsch: UK Has a€~No Chance in Hella€™ of Making Its Own Tech Champs: 
ARM Founder: a€~Hermann Hauser during the Bloomberg Tech Summita€l

•  Diane Coyle: Review of "Slouching Towards Utopiaa€D: a€~I like that it doesna€™ t claim there 
are easy lessons from the history, but insists that there are indeed subtler lessons...

• Rakesh Bhandari: a€~These tables of innovationsa€! made by the late Janos Komai a€ I

•  Tom Barson: a€'Review: @adam_tooze on @delonga€!.. Some good pointsa€! some odd onesa€!. Odda€! 
Tooze complains that the 20th century's massive exploitation of "nonrenewable resources" is left 
out of the drivers of DeLong's "grand narrative.a€D... But surely the 20th century's resource 
thirst was a consequence of the forces DeLong mentions. And it's legacy? Well, that will be 21st 
century historya€!

•  Tony Yates: a€~Extraordinary!a€™ Steve Hou: a€~The leading advocate of the Fiscal Theory of the 
Price Level rejects a most classic example of FTPL, because what? a€oetax cutsa€D?a€™ Brad DeLong: 
Theories as neither intuition pumps or filing systems, but just as ideological cudgels?! You dona€™ 
t say!!!! Nirai Tomass: a€~Very confusing substack post and even more confusing that Cochrane 
supports it. From what I understood it
argues that the fiscal news is, if anything, positive and that investors are being irrational. 
Especially the latter I wouldn't expect Cochrane to supporta€!

•  Kalyeena Makortoff and Sarah Butler: a€~The Bank of Englanda€™ s A£65m emergency intervention^! 
stabilised UK government bond prices, supported the pound, and halted a pension fund selloff that 
threatened to spark a deeper crisis across the City. a€oeAfter 35 years in the industry, Ia€™ d 
never seen anything like it,a€D Luke Hickmore, a fund managera€! said... However, markets were now 
a€oea lot caimer.a€D a€oelta€™ s good to
finally see the UK [bond] market moving at a similar pace as Europe .a€D

•  David Roberts: a€~I need to stop tweeting, but I want to do a quick thread on how the 
conservative pushback against YIMBY echoes & parallels other RW culture war grievancesa€!

• Mark Blyth: The Primacy of Politics: The Past, Present, and Contested Future of Social Democracy
Subscribe now

Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription
Give a gift subscription


Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription
Give a gift subscription

