Subscribe now

David Graeber had less idea of what a a€relaptopa€D is and when it was invented, or of what Apple 
was and how it was founded, than your average housecat:

The greater the need to improvise the more democratic the cooperation [within companies] tends to 
become. Inventors have always understood this, start­
up capitalists frequently figure it out, and computer engineers have recently rediscovered the 
principled!. Apple Computers is a famous example: it was
founded by (mostly Republican) computer engineers who broke from IBM in Silicon Valley in the 
1980s, forming little democratic circles of twenty to
forty people with their laptops in each othera€™ s garagesa€!

David Graeber offered three inconsistent and contradictory explanations of how he came to write 
this:

1. Marc Gemein on Twitter: The Strangest History Of Apple Ever. @markgimein: a€~David Graeber, 
Debt, p96: Apple was founded by engineers from IBM who
formed little democratic circles of 20a€“40 with laptops in garages. a€“HUH?!a€™ @davidgraeber: 
a€~oh ask Mr Wolffa€!. Richard Wolff the Marxist economist

whose student did a study of the origins of Apple and never published ita€!. I think he led me 
astraya€!. yeah I know I think Wolff was just kind of wrong about a lot of
this; I tried to check with him but he didna€™ t answer the emaila€! ita€™ s upsetting; ita€™ s 
also possible he was talking about a different early start-up; anyway
wona€™t be in the 2nd edition !a€™

2. David Graeber: a€~The endlessly cited Apple quote wasa€! about a whole of series of other tiny 
start-ups created by people whoa€™ d dropped out of IBM, Apple,
and similar behemoths. (Of them ita€™ s perfectly true)a€!a€™

3. David Graeber: a€~The passage got horribly garbled at some point into something incoherent, I 
still cana€™ t completely figure out how, was patched back together
by the copyeditor into something that made logical sense but was obviously factually wrong. I 
should have caught it at the proofreading stage but I didna€™ 1.1 did
catch it when the book first came out, tried to get the publisher to take it out, and have been 
continually trying since July. All to no avail. I have absolutely no idea why
a book can go through eight editions and ita€™ s impossible to pull out a couple lines of obviously 
incorrect text but they just keep telling me, no, I have to wait until
Julya€!a€™

Share

I leave to you, gentle reader, the task of explaining how Graeber can be simultaneously:

1. Misled by Richard Wolff, who is wrong about a lot of this stuff and doesna€™ t answer his email.

2. Accurately writing about a whole bunch of other little startups, none of which he has ever 
identified.

3. Betrayed by an ignorant copyeditor into publishing something that was a€oefactually 
wronga€Da€”i.e., not just getting the id of the company wrong, but everything
about the paragraph wrong. Computer engineers were never a€oemostly Republicana€D. There was no 
wave of a€rebreaking from IBMa€D. If any computer
engineers did break from IBM, they did not do so in Silicon Valley. You cannot fit twenty people in 
a Silicon Valley garage.

I think David Graeber had, way back in his mind, some very dim memories of having once read Ron 
Rosenbauma€™ s article about Capa€™ n Crunch and phone phreaking. And
was little more than ab******* artist who could never deal with what happened when he (frequently) 
found himself over his head with people calling him on his b*******.

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


