Subscribe now

Leszek Kolakowski: Main Currents of Marxism: Vol. 3: a€™ Trotsky: The years of exile: IN January 
1929, after the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union had been almost entirely wiped out by 
repressive measures, its leader, Leon (Lev) Davidovich Trotsky, who had been in exile in Kazakhstan 
for a year, was deported to Turkey, where he took up his abode on Prinkipo Island in the Sea of 
Marmara. For a long time other countries were unwilling to admit to
their territory a man reputed to be the most dangerous revolutionary in the world; during the four 
years he lived in Turkey Trotsky left it only once, to deliver a lecture in Copenhagen.

While in Turkey he wrote his vast History of the Russian Revolution, an analysis of the causes and 
development of the revolutionary process in which he sought to prove that history had confirmed the 
rightness of his predictions and especially the idea of a€~permanent revolutiona€™: i.e. that the 
democratic revolution was bound to develop continuously into a dictatorship of the proletariat, and 
could only have been successful in that form. At this time he also
wrote an autobiography and a huge number of articles, appeals, and letters for the purpose of 
supporting and developing the Left Opposition against Stalin, both in Russia and in the world at 
large.

Within a few months of his deportation he founded a journal in Russian, the Opposition Bulletin, 
which continued to appear till the end of his life: it was published by his son, Leon Sedov, first 
in Germany and, after the Nazis came to power, in Paris. As with Trotskya€™ s books in Russian, its 
main purpose was to promote the organization o fan opposition movement in the Soviet Union; before 
long, however, police measures made it almost impossible to
smuggle the journal into the country, and Trotskya€™ s contacts with remnants of the Left in Russia 
were to all intents and purposes broken off.

At the same time Trotsky devoted a large part of his untiring energy to enlisting adherents in 
other countries. Small groups of dissident Communists existed here and there, and through them he 
hoped eventually to regenerate the Comintern and revive the spirit of true Bolshevism and Leninism 
in the Communist movement. These groups, under the collective title of the International Left 
Opposition, were active from 1930 onwards and regarded themselves as a
fraction of the Comintern-an ideological fiction, since the Trotskyists had been expelled from the 
Comintern once and for all, and those who remained in Russia were mostly in camps and prisons.

A meeting of Trotskyists from several countries was held in Copenhagen during their leadera€™ s 
stay there in November 1932, and a few months later a similar meeting took place in Paris. For some 
years Trotsky had firmly opposed the foundation of a Fourth International, as he held that 
Stalinism, having no social base, must collapse at any moment and that its only possible and 
natural heirs would be the a€~Bolshevik Leninistsa€™, who would restore the
Comintern to its true purpose. In 1933, however, after Hitlera€™ s accession to power, he decided 
that a new international revolutionary organ was necessary, and set about organizing his followers 
under a new banner. The Fourth International was officially set up at a congress in Paris in 
September 1938.

At the end of 1932 Trotsky formulated the strategy and ideology of the International Left 
Opposition in eleven points:


1.        UI LIIV lllWpVLLVIVlLW UI LIIV pi VIV LOI 1 ail pal LJ , ailV 11V11VV WllWlllliaLlVll VI 
LIIV V111111LV1 liaX> 3 pVUVJ VI LIIV 17Z-V3 111 X^llllia \^V111111U111OLO JVllllJLlg LIIV 
IVUVllllllLailgy ailU UllLdlll ^LllV nilglV"l\Uddiail naw U111V11 VVlinillLLVV/,

2. the international and therefore permanent character of the revolution;

3. the Soviet Union was still a workersa€™ state despite its a€~bureaucratic degenerationa€™;

4. condemnation of Stalina€™ s policy, both in its a€~opportunista€™ phase in 1923a€“8 and in its 
a€~adventurista€™ phase in 1928a€“32;

5. Communists must work in mass organizations, especially trade unions;

6. rejection of the formula of the a€~democratic dictatorship of proletariat and peasantsa€™ and of 
the possibility of its developing peacefully into a dictatorship of the proletariat;

7. the necessity for interim slogans during the struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat, 
in cases where it was necessary to fight against feudal institutions, national oppression, or 
Fascism;

8. a united front with mass organizations, including social democrats, but not in an 
a€~opportunista€™ form;

9. rejection of Stalina€™ s theory of a€~social Fascisma€™;

10. a distinction within the Communist movement between Marxists, the center, and the Right; 
alliance with the Right against the center (the Stalinists) was ruled out, and the center should be 
supported against class enemies;

11. there should be democracy within the party.

Trotsky held to these principles until the end, but their full meaning only became clear in his 
more detailed analyses of the nature of the Soviet state, the concept of party democracy, and the 
idea of political alliances.

During his first years of exile, Trotsky deluded himself that the opposition in Russia was a 
tremendous political force, that the Stalinist bureaucracy was increasingly losing its grip, and 
that the Soviet Communist party was polarizing rapidly into true Bolsheviks on the one hand and 
a€~Thermidoriansa€™ , i.e. advocates of a capitalist restoration, on the other. When it came to a 
clash between these two forces the bureaucracy would once more have to seek help
from the Left if the Soviet system was to survive. Accordingly, Trotsky addressed letters and 
declarations to the Soviet leaders assuring them that the Opposition was prepared to join in the 
struggle against restoration and foreign intervention; he promised that he would not take revenge 
on his opponents, proposed an a€~honourable agreements™ , and offered the Stalinists his aid 
against class enemies in the hour of mortal danger.

Clearly, he imagined that when a crisis eventually came Stalin would beg him for help, and he would 
then name his conditions. This, however, was fantasy; Stalin and his followers had no intention of 
coming to terms with the Trotskyists, and would not ask them for aid under any circumstances. The 
Left Opposition in Russia did not gain in strength, as Trotsky thought it must by virtue of the 
laws of history, but was ruthlessly exterminated. When Stalin
proclaimed the a€~new coursea€™ of forced industrialization and collectivization the majority of 
oppositionists fell into line, recognizing that Stalin had taken over their policy; this applied, 
for example, to Radek and Preobrazhensky. Rakovsky, the most prominent Leftist after Trotsky, 
resisted longer than the rest, butafter a few years of persecution he too capitulated. None of 
these ever again occupied a political post of any importance, and none escaped
destruction in the Great Purge.

Trotsky continued to believe that the opposition stood for the authentic forces of the proletariat 
as against the ruling bureaucracy, which lacked any social base; the opposition must therefore 
prevail in the end, and temporary defeats and persecutions could not destroy it. Repressions, he 
wrote, might be effective against a class condemned by history, but never against a a€~historically 
progressives™ class. In actual fact the Left Opposition vanished completely
within a few years of TrotskyS™ s exile, as a result of repression, slaughter, demoralization, and 
capitulation.

It is true, however, that Stalin could hardly have done more to keep alive TrotskyS™ s hopes and 
his belief in the potential strength of the opposition. The series of campaigns against 
S'TrotskyismS™ , the show trials, and judicial murders might indeed have convinced an outside 
observer that S'TrotskyismS™ was still a powerful enemy of the Soviet state. Stalin in fact had an 
obsessive hatred of Trotsky and used his name as a symbol of universal evil, a
stigma with which he branded adversaries of all descriptions or anyone whom he wished to destroy 
for any reason. In this way he coined portmanteau expressionsS“such as a€~the Trotskyist-Rightist 
bloca€™ , a€~Trotskyist-Fascista€™ , a€~Trotskyist-imperialista€™ , a€~Trotskyist-Zionista€™ -to 
suit the purposes of his successive campaigns; the prefix a€~Trotskyista€™ served much the same 
purpose as a€~Jewisha€™ in the mouth of anti-Semites who
talk of a€~the Jewish-Communist conspiracya€™, a€~Jewish-plutocratic reactionaries^™ , 
a€~Jewish-Liberal corruption^™ , etc.

From the beginning of the thirties a€~Trotskyisma€™ had no specific meaning in Stalina€™ s 
propaganda, but was simply an abstract emblem of Satanism. As long as Stalin was opposed to Hitler, 
Trotsky was pilloried as Hitlera€™ s agent; when Stalin and Hitler made friends, Trotsky became an 
agent of Anglo-French imperialism. In the Moscow show trials his name recurred ad nauseam as the 
victims, one by one, related how the arch-fiend in exile had
impelled them to conspiracy, sabotage, and murder. This paranoid mythology of Stalina€™ s purges 
was a constant reassurance to Trotsky himself: since he was so incessantly denounced, it must be 
that Stalin was genuinely afraid of the a€~Bolshevik Leninistsa€™ who stood ready to dislodge him 
from the throne he had usurped. More than once Trotsky expressed the view that the Moscow trials 
had been organized in the hope that he, Trotsky, would be
handed back to the Soviet police: Stalin, according to some, regretted that he had expelled his 
enemy instead of murdering him without further ado. Trotsky believed, too, that the last Comintern 
congress in 1937 was called for the sole purpose of meeting the Left Opposition threat.

In short, the exiled leader played the part for which Stalin had cast him, but the duel took place 
largely in his own imagination. The International Left Opposition, like the Fourth International 
after it, was a cipher in political terms. Trotsky himself, of course, was a celebrated figure, but 
the movement which, according to the great laws of history, was bound to shake the foundations of 
the world at any moment proved to be an unimportant sect with virtually no
impact on Stalinist parties anywhere.

A few Communists who were disillusioned by Stalinism or had been associated with Trotsky in the 
Comintern came out on his side, including Chen Tu-hsiu, the former head of the Chinese party. 
Intellectuals in various countries supported Trotsky as the embodiment of the true revolutionary 
spirit, which the Soviet leaders no longer represented. But sooner or later his adherents fell 
away, especially the intellectuals; Trotsky himself was largely responsible for
this fact, as he demanded absolute obedience and tolerated no deviation from his own opinion on any 
subject.

Apart from personal issues, his dictatorial manner, and astonishing belief in his own omniscience, 
the chief disagreement was over relations with the Soviet Union. Trotskya€™ s insistence that the 
U.S.S.R. was still a dictatorship of the proletariat, and that the bureaucracy was not a class but 
only an excrescence on the healthy body of socialism, was a prime cause of argument and schism, as 
his views seemed increasingly out of touch with obvious reality. He
remained obdurate, however, on this matter throughout his life, with the result that all the 
important intellectuals abandoned his cause: Souvarine in France, Victor Serge, Eastman, and, 
later, Hook, Shachtman, and Burnham in the U.S .A.

He also lost the support of Diego Rivera, the well-known painter, who was his host in Mexico.

The doctrinaire rigidity of Trotskyist groups caused them to break up incessantly and was one 
reason, though doubtless not the chief one, why the movement never became a political force. 
Trotsky himself, whenever the complete fruitlessness of his efforts was pointed out, had the same 
answer ready: Lenin in 19 14 was almost completely isolated, and three years later he led the 
revolution to victory. What Lenin had done he, Trotsky, could do, as he too
represented the profound tendencies of historical development. This belief inspired all his 
activity and political analyses, and was the source of his indomitable hope and energy.

As to the empirical evidence on which Trotsky based his hopes of an early victory of the Left in 
Russia, from todaya€™ s viewpoint it appears amazingly slight. One or two minor Soviet diplomats 
quitted their posts and remained in the West; Trotsky cited this repeatedly as a proof that the 
Stalinist party was breaking up and that a€~Thermidorian elementsa€™ and traitors to the revolution 
were coming to the fore, which must mean that the true Bolsheviks on
the other side of the barricade were also gaining in strength. At the outbreak of war in 1939 he 
read in a newspaper that someone in Berlin had painted on a wall the slogan a€~Down with Hitler and 
Stalin, long live Trotsky !a€™ This filled him with encouragement, and he wrote that if there ever 
had to be a black-out in Moscow under Stalin, the whole city would be plastered with such notices. 
Later he read that a French diplomat had told Hitler that if France
and Germany went to war, Trotsky would be the only victor; this too he quoted triumphantly in 
several articles as proof that even the bourgeoisie understood how right he was.

He was unshakeably convinced that the war must end in a world revolution in which the true 
Bolsheviks, i.e. the Trotskyists, would be victorious. His article on the foundation of the Fourth 
International ended with the prophecy that a€~During the next ten years the programme of the Fourth 
International will be the guide of millions, and these revolutionary millions will know how to 
storm earth and heavena€™ (Writings of Leon Trotsky, 1938a€“1939, ed. N.
Allen and G. Breitman, 1974, p. 87).

In the summer of 1933, after long efforts, Trotsky finally secured permission to live in France, 
subject to various police restrictions. He stayed at different addresses for two years, his 
personal situation growing more and more dangerous: all the Stalinist parties were loudly hostile, 
and terrorist operations of Trotsky the Soviet police were on the increase. In June 1935 he was 
granted asylum in Norway, where he wrote perhaps the best known of his books, The
Revolution Betrayed', a general analysis of the Soviet system, its degeneration and prospects, and 
an appeal for the overthrow of Stalina€™ s bureaucracy by revolution.

At the end of 1936 the Norwegian Government got rid of their awkward guest by sending him to 
Mexico, where he spent the rest of his life. Much of his energy during this period was devoted to 
unmasking the forgeries of the Moscow trials, in which he was denounced as the master-mind 
behindall the conspiracies, sabotage, andacts of terrorism perpetrated bythe accused. Through the 
efforts of Trotskya€™ sfriendsan international commission of inquiry was
set up under the chairmanship of John Dewey, the American philosopher and educationist; this body 
visited Mexico and took evidence from Trotsky himself, and in due course concluded that the trials 
were a complete fabrication.

Trotsky lived in Mexico for over three and a half years. The local Stalinists organized a campaign 
of persecution, and in May 1940, together with Soviet agents, made an armed attack on his house. 
Trotsky and his wife miraculously escaped alive, but notfor long: an agent of the Soviet police, 
posing as a visitor, struck him down on 20 August. His son Leon, who actedas his fathera€™ s 
representative in Europe, diedin Paris in1938, probably poisoned by
Soviet agents. Another son, Sergey, who never left Russia or engaged in politics, disappeared in 
Stalina€™ s prisons. Trotskya€™ s daughter Zina committed suicide in Germany in 1933.

During his eleven years of exile Trotsky published innumerable articles, pamphlets, books, and 
manifestos; he issued instructions, advice, and appeals at every turn, either to the world 
proletariat as a whole or to the workers of Germany, Holland, Britain, China, India, and America. 
Inasmuch as all these documents were read only by a handful of true believers and had not the 
slightest influence on events, one might be inclined to dismiss Trotskya€™ s activity as
a game with toy soldiers.

But the fact remains that the assassina€™ s ice-pick was not a toy and that Stalin devoted much 
energy to destroying Trotskyism throughout the worlda€”a purpose in which he was largely 
successful.

Trotskya€™s analysis of the Soviet system, the bureaucracy, and a€~Thermidora€™: All Trotskya€™ s 
analyses are based on the conviction that his and Lenina€™ s policies were unfailingly right, that 
the theory of permanent revolution was abundantly borne out by events, and that a€~socialism in one 
countrya€™ was a pernicious error. In an article on a€~Three Concepts of the Russian Revolutiona€™ 
( 1939) he argued as follows. The Populists
believed that Russia could bypass capitalism altogether; the Mensheviks thought the Russian 
revolution could only be of a bourgeois character, so that there could be no question at that stage 
of a dictatorship of the proletariat. Lenin then put forward the slogan of a democratic 
dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry in the hope that a revolution conducted under this 
banner would give the impulse for a socialist victory in the West, which would make possible
a  rapid transition to socialism in Russia.

Trotskya€™ s own view was that the programme of the democratic revolution could only succeed in the 
form of a dictatorship of the proletariat, but that the latter could only maintain itself if the 
revolution spread to Western Europe. In 1917 Lenin took the same line, as a result of which the 
proletarian revolution was successful in Russia. As Trotsky shows at length in his History of the 
Revolution, none of the Bolsheviks doubted that the Russian proletariat could
only conquer if it was supported by the Western proletariat, and the pernicious idea of 
a€~socialism in one countrya€™ did not enter anyonea€™ s head until it was invented by Stalin at 
the end of 1924.

How did it happen, then, that Trotskya€™ s unquestionably correct policy, which was also Lenina€™ s 
from 1917 onwards, resulted in government by a a€~parasitic bureaucracya€™, and that Trotsky 
himself was driven from power and branded as a traitor? The answer was to be found in an analysis 
of the degeneration of Soviet power and a€~Thermidorianisma€™ .

During the first years of his exile Trotsky took the view that Stalin and his group occupied the 
a€~centrea€™ of the Russian political spectrum and that the chief danger to the revolution came 
from the a€™ Righta€™ a€”then represented by Bukharin and his followersand counter-revolutionary 
elements which threatened a a€~Thermidorian reactiona€™, i.e. the restoration of capitalism. 
Accordingly, Trotsky offered to support Stalin against counterrevolution.
Stalin, he thought, had made too many concessions to the Right, with the result, as seen in the 
successive trials of the a€~Industrial partya€™ and the Mensheviks, that saboteurs and enemies of 
the people had occupied the highest posts in the state planning organization and were deliberately 
slowing up industrialization. (Trotsky believed implicitly in the guilt of the accused, and it did 
not occur to him for a moment that these trials might be fabrications; he only
began to wonder years afterwards, when his own misdeeds and those of his friends were proved by 
equally strong evidence in the great show trials.)

In the early thirties Trotsky also spoke of a€~Bonapartisma€™ in the Stalinist regime. In 1935, 
however, he observed that in the French Revolution Thermidor had come first and Napoleon 
afterwards; the order should be the same in Russia, and, as there was already a Bonaparte, 
Thermidor must have come and gone. In an article entitled a€~The Workersa€™ State, Thermidor, and 
Bonapartisma€™ he amended his theory somewhat. He stated that the
Thermidorian reaction had taken place in Russia in 1924 (i.e. when he himself was finally removed 
from power); it was not, however, a capitalist counter-revolution but a seizure of power by the 
bureaucracy, which had begun to destroy the advance guard of the proletariat. The dictatorship of 
the proletariat had been preserved, as the state still owned the means of production, but political 
power had passed into the hands of the bureaucrats; the Bonapartist system
must                                                                                                
                                                                                                    
              soon collapse, however, as it was contrary to the laws of history. A bourgeois 
counter-revolution was possible, but it could be avoided if the true Bolshevik elements were 
properly organized.

Trotsky added, however, that he had in no way altered his view as to the working-class character of 
the Soviet state, but was merely expressing the historical analogy with more precision; in France, 
too, Thermidor was not a return to the ancien regime. The Soviet bureaucracy was not a social 
class, but a caste which had deprived the proletariat of its political rights and introduced a 
brutal despotism. Its existence in its present form, however, depended on the
system of state ownership, the supreme achievement of the October Revolution, which the bureaucracy 
was obliged to defend and did defend in its own way. It was therefore the duty of the world 
proletariat to defend the Soviet Union unconditionally as the bastion of world revolution, while at 
the same time fighting against Stalinist degeneration (Trotsky did not explain in detail how these 
aims could be combined in practice).

By 1936 he came to the conclusion that Stalinism could not be overthrown by reforms and internal 
pressures: there must be a revolution to remove the usurpers by force. That revolution would not 
alter the system of ownership, and would therefore not be a social revolution but a political one. 
It would be carried out by the advance guard of the proletariat, embodying the traditions of true 
Bolshevism which Stalin had destroyed.


The theory of a€~socialism in one countrya€™ was responsible for all the bureaucracy a€™ s failures 
at home and abroad. It meant abandoning hope of world revolution and hence of Russiaa€™ s main 
support in the world proletariat. Socialism in one country was impossible, i.e. it could be started 
but not completed: in a state closed within itself, socialism was bound to degenerate. The 
Comintern, which until 1924 had pursued a correct policy aimed at stirring
up world revolution, had been transformed by Stalin into an instrument of Soviet policy and 
espionage, reducing the worldwide Communist movement to a state of degeneracy and impotence.

Trotsky made many attempts to explain how it was that the political power of the proletariat had 
been destroyed and the bureaucracy had gained control and introduced (as he later put it more than 
once) a totalitarian system of government. These attempts, contained in various books and articles, 
do not form a consistent argument.

At times he maintained that the chief cause of degeneration was the delay in the outbreak of world 
revolution: the West European proletariat did not assume its historic mission in time. On the other 
hand, he maintained equally often that the defeat of revolution in Europe was the fault of the 
Soviet bureaucracy. It thus remained in doubt which phenomenon was the cause and which the 
effect-though later, as he pointed out, they aggravated each other.
In The Revolution Betrayed we are told that the social basis of the growth of the bureaucracy was 
the faulty policy of the N.E.P. years, which favoured the kulaks. If so, one would expect that the 
liquidation of the kulaks and forced industrialization under the first five-year plan would at 
least have weakened the bureaucracy if not destroyed it; in fact precisely the opposite happened, 
and Trotsky nowhere explains why this was so.

Later in the same book he says that the bureaucracy was originally an organ of the working class 
but that later, when it became involved in the distribution of goods, it began to place itself 
a€~above the massesa€™ and to claim privileges. This does not explain, however, whether and in what 
way the system of privilege could have been avoided, and why the working class, which was truly in 
charge, permitted such a thing to happen.
Still in the same work, Trotsky says that the main cause of bureaucratic government was the 
slowness of the world proletariat to fulfil its historic mission.

In an earlier pamphlet, Problems of Development of the USSR. (1931), he gives other reasons: the 
weariness of the Russian proletariat after the Civil War, the collapse of illusions fostered in the 
heroic days of the Revolution, the defeat of revolutionary outbreaks in Germany, Bulgaria, and 
Estonia, and the bureaucracy a€™ s betrayal of the Chinese and British proletariat.
In an article in the following year he stated that the war-weary workers handed over power to the 
bureaucracy for the sake of order and reconstruction; but he did not explain why these tasks could 
not have been carried out by a€~true Bolshevik-Leninistsa€™ under his own leadership.

From all these explanations one clear argument emerges, namely that Trotsky himself did not 
contribute in the smallest measure to the establishment of a bureaucratic regime, and that the 
bureaucracy had nothing in common with the dictatorship of the first six years after the 
Revolution, but was its exact contrary. The fact that the party apparatus exercised absolute power 
during those years had, it seems, nothingto do with the regimeof Stalin and his clique,
since the party in those days was the a€~advance guard of the proletariat^™, while Stalina€™ s 
subsequent apparatus represented nothing and no one.

In that case, we may ask, why could not the proletariat shake off the clique of usurpers who lacked 
any social backing? Trotsky has an answer to this too: the proletariat does not rebel against 
Stalina€™ s government (elsewhere, however, we read that it is in constant rebellion) because it 
fears that in the present situation a proletarian revolution might lead to the restoration of 
capitalism.

It is not clear from Trotskya€™ s arguments whether there was any means of avoiding such a 
disastrous outcome. It seems, on the whole, that there was not, since otherwise Trotsky and his 
group, who invariably pursued the right policy and a€~expresseda€™ the true interests of the 
proletariat, would surely have prevented the bureaucracy taking over. If they did not prevent it, 
it was because they could not; andif the bureaucracy continued tomaintain itself
without any visible social foundation, this must surely be due to the operation of historical laws.

Bolshevism and Stalinism: The idea of Soviet democracy Trotsky thus took every opportunity to 
emphasize that there was no continuity between true Bolshevism or Leninism, that is to say 
Trotskya€™ s own ideology and politics on the one hand, and Stalinism on the other. Stalinism was 
not only not the true heir of Leninism, but a glaring contradiction of it. In an article of 1937 he 
takes issue with Mensheviks and anarchists who were saying: a€~We told you
so from the beginning.a€™ Not at all, replies Trotsky. The Mensheviks and anarchists predicted that 
despotism and the stifling of the Russian proletariat would come as a result of Bolshevik 
government; they have indeed come, but as a result of Stalina€™ s bureaucracy, which has nothing to 
do with true Bolshevism. Again, Pannekoek and some German Spartacists say that the Bolsheviks set 
up a dictatorship of the party instead of a dictatorship of the
proletariat, and that Stalin established a bureaucratic dictatorship on that basis. This is not the 
case either. The proletariat could not take over state power except through its own vanguard, in 
which the working massesa€™ aspirations to freedom were crystallized.

In this article as in many others, Trotsky was obliged to answer the objections frequently raised 
by his adversaries and also by such supporters as Serge, Souvarine, and Burnham. Surely, they 
pointed out, the Bolsheviks had from the beginning, with Trotskya€™ s active participation, 
liquidated all Russian political parties including the socialists; they had themselves forbidden 
the formation of groups within the party, had destroyed the freedom of the press, had
bloodily suppressed the Kronstadt revolt, and so forth.

Trotsky answered these objections many times, and always in the same way: the actions complained of 
were right and necessary and in no way infringed the healthy foundations of proletarian democracy.

In a letter to the workers of Zurich, published in August 1932, he wrote that the Bolsheviks had 
certainly used force to destroy the anarchists and Left S.R.s (other parties are not even mentioned 
in this context), but they did so in defence of the workersa€™ state, and therefore their action 
was right; the class struggle could not be carried on without violence, the only question was which 
class the violence was exercised by.

In a pamphlet of 1938, Their Morals and Ours, he explained that it was absurd to compare Communism 
with Fascism, as the resemblance in their methods was a€~superficiala€™ and related to secondary 
phenomena (for example, the abolition of general elections); what mattered was the class in whose 
name such methods were used. Trotsky, it was objected, had taken hostages, including children, from 
the families of political opponents, and was nowindignant
when Stalin did the same thing to Trotskyists. But, he replied, there was no true analogy, for what 
Trotsky did was necessary to fight the class enemy and bring victory to the proletariat, whereas 
Stalin was acting in the interests of the bureaucracy.

In a letter of 1940 to Shachtman he agrees that the Cheka originated and functioned when he was in 
power-of course it did, but it was a necessary weapon against the bourgeoisie, whereas now Stalin 
was using it to destroy a€~true Bolsheviksa€™, so there was no proper comparison. As to the 
suppression of the Kronstadt revolt, how could a proletarian government be expected to give up an 
important fortress to reactionary peasant soldiers, among whom there
might be a few anarchists? As to the forbidding of party groups, this was absolutely necessary, for 
when all non-Bolshevik parties were liquidated the antagonistic interests that were still present 
in society were bound to seek expression in different tendencies within the one party.

It is clear from this that for Trotsky there was no question of democracy as a form of government, 
or of civil liberties as a cultural value: from this point of view he was faithful to Lenin and did 
not differ from Stalin. If power was wielded by the a€~historically progressive^™ class (through 
its vanguard, of course), then by definition this wasan authentic democracy, even if oppression and 
coercion in every form were otherwise the order of theday; for all this
was in the cause of progress. But from the moment that power was taken over by a bureaucracy that 
did not represent the interests of the proletariat, the same forms of government automatically 
became reactionary and therefore a€~anti-democratica€™ .

In an article of 1931 entitled a€~The Right-Left Bloca€™ Trotsky wrote:

What we mean by the restoration of party democracy is that the real revolutionary proletarian core 
of the party win the right to curb the bureaucracy and to really purge the party: to purge the 
party of the Thermidorians in principle as well as their unprincipled andcareerist cohorts who vote 
according to command from above, of the tendencies of tail-endism as well asthe numerous factions 
of toadyism, whose titleshould not be derived
from the Greek or Latin but from the real Russian word for toady in its contemporary, 
bureaucratized and Stalinized form. This is the reason we need democracya€™ (Writings of Leon 
Trotsky, 193erl931, ed. G. Breitman and S. Lovell, 1973, p. 57).

It is thus clear that by a€~democracya€™ Trotsky means government by Trotskyists, expressing the 
historical aspirations of the proletariat.

In an article of December 1939 Trotsky again answers the question whether he himself was not 
responsible for the liquidation of all political parties except the Bolsheviks. Certainly, he 
replies, and it was quite right to do so. a€~But,a€™ he goes on, a€~one cannot identify the laws of 
civil war with the laws of peaceful periodsa€™ a€”and then, it clearly having occurred to him that 
in that case the liquidated parties should have been re-legalized after the Civil
War, he adds: a€™ [or] the laws of dictatorship or the proletariat with the laws of bourgeois 
democracya€™ (Writings of Leon Trotsky, 1939a€“1940, ed. N. Allen and G. Breitman, 1973, p. 1 33).

In a statement dating from the end of 1932 we read:

Every regime must be judged first and foremost according to its own rules. The regime of the 
proletarian dictatorship cannot and does not wish to hold back from infringing the principles and 
formal rules of democracy. It has to be judged from the standpoint of its capacity to ensure the 
transition to a new society. The democratic regime, on the other hand, must be judged from the 
standpoint of the extent to which it allows the class
struggle to develop within the framework of democracy (Writings of Leon Trotsky, 1932a€‘T933,1972, 
ed. G. Breitman and S. Lovell, p. 336).

In short, it is right to be indignant and to attack democratic states when they infringe the 
principles of democracy and freedom, but one must not treat a Communist dictatorship in this way, 
because it does not recognize democratic principles; its superiority lies in the promise to create 
a a€~new societya€™ in the future. In The Revolution Betrayed we are even told that Stalina€™ s 
constitution, by proclaiming universal suffrage, made it clear that there was no
longer a dictatorship of the proletariat. (Trotsky also remarks that by introducing the secret 
ballot Stalin evidently wished to purge his regime of corruption to some extent. Incredible as it 
may seem, he evidently took Stalina€™ s elections at face value.)

Thus, while Trotsky constantly attacked Stalin and his regime and demanded a return to a€~Soviet 
democracyaC™ and a€~party democracya€™, it is clear in the light of his general principles that 
a€~democracya€™ signifies the rule of those whose policy is a€~righta€™: it does not mean that the 
a€~rightnessa€™ of a policy is determined as the result of different groups contending for popular 
support. In The Revolution Betrayed he writes of the need to
regain freedom for a€~Soviet partiesa€™, starting with the Bolsheviks (i.e. Trotsky and his 
followers); but it not clear which other parties qualify as a€~Sovieta€™. Since only the genuine 
vanguard of the proletariat is to exercise power, that vanguard must also have the right to decide 
which parties are a€~Sovieta€™ and which are counterrevolutionary. In Trotskya€™ s eyes, the upshot 
seems to be that socialist freedom means freedom for Trotskyists and no
one else.

The same arguments apply to cultural freedom. Trotsky sometimes expressed indignation at the 
gagging of art and science by Stalina€™ s regime. In The Revolution Betrayed he recalled that in 
1924 he himself had formulated rules for the dictatorship of the proletariat in art and literature: 
the sole criterion was to be whether a work was for or against the Revolution, and beyond that 
there should be perfect freedom. In July 1932 he wrote that there should be
freedom in art and philosophy, a€~eliminating pitilessly only that which is directed against the 
revolutionary tasks of the proletariate™ (Writings, 1932a€‘T933, p. 279). This, however, is the 
same principle that prevailed under Stalin: the party authorities decide what is a€~directed 
against the revolutionary tasks of the proletariate™ and must therefore be e~pitilessly 
eliminatede™ . Freedom thus defined has never been infringed in the Soviet state.

Of course, under such a general formula the degree of repression and regimentation of culture may 
be greater or less according to various political circumstances, and in the twenties it was 
certainly less than in the thirties. Since, however, the principle is that the rulers decide in 
every case what manifestations of culture are in accordance with their political needs, no degree 
of repression and enslavement can possibly offend against the dictatorship of the
proletariat.

The whole question reduces once again to the same pattern: if Trotsky had been in charge he would 
not, of course, have allowed freedoms that he thought dangerous to his authority; Stalin behaved in 
the same way, and in both cases it was a matter of self-interest. The whole difference comes down 
to this, that Trotsky believed himself to a€~represent the historical interests of the 
proletariat^™ , while Stalin believed that he, Stalin, did so.

In Their Morals and Ours Trotsky endeavoured to refute the objection of those of his followers who 
claimed that his rule of morality was simply a€~What is good for me is righta€™ and that in his 
view the end justified the means. To this he replied that if the means were to be justified by 
something other than the aims evolved by history, that something could only be God. In other words 
his questioners were falling into religiosity, just as the Russian
revisionists Struve, Bulgakov, and Berdyayev had done; they tried to combine Marxism with some kind 
of morality superior to class, and ended up in the bosom of the Church.

Morals in general, he declared, were a function of the class struggle. At the present time morality 
could be in the interest of the proletariat or in that of Fascism, and, obviously, warring classes 
might sometimes use similar means; the only important question was which side they benefited:

A means can be justified only by its end. But the end in its turn needs to be justified. From the 
Marxist point of view, which expresses the historical interests of the proletariat, the end is 
justified if it leads to increasing the power of man over nature and to the abolition of the power 
of man over man(Their Morals andOurs, 1942, p.  34).

In other words, if a policy is conducive to technical progress (the power of man over nature), any 
means which furthers that policy is automatically justified; it is not clear, however, why 
Stalina€™ s policy should in that case be condemned, since it certainly raised the countrya€™ s 
technical level.

As to the abolition of the power of man over man, Trotsky himself enunciated the principle (which 
Stalin took over) that before this power can be abolished it must be increased to the highest 
degree; Trotsky reiterated this view in an article in June 1933. But in future things will be 
different. The a€~historicalaima€™ isembodiedin the proletarian party, which therefore decides what 
is moral and what is immoral. As to Souvarinea€™ s remark that, as
Trotskya€™ s party does not exist, he must regard himself alone as the embodiment of morality, the 
prophet replies once again by pointing to Lenina€™ s example: he too stood alone in 1914, and what 
happened after that?

In a sense the criticsa€™ objection was invalid: Trotsky did not maintain that what served his 
partya€™ s interests was morally good, and what injured them was morally bad. He held simply that 
there were no such things as moral criteria, but only criteria of political efficacy: a€~Problems 
of revolutionary morality are fused with the problems of revolutionary strategy and tacticsa€™ 
(ibid., p. 35). To say that a thing was good or bad in itself, irrespective of
political consequences, was tantamount to believing in God. It was meaningless to ask, for 
instance, whether it was right in itself to murder the children of onea€™ s political opponents. It 
had been right (as Trotsky says elsewhere) to kill the Tsara€™ s children, because it was 
politically justified. Why then was it wrong for Stalin to murder Trotskya€™ s children? Because 
Stalin did not represent the proletariat.

All a€~abstracta€™ principles of good and bad, all universal rules of democracy, freedom, and 
cultural values were without significance in themselves: they were to be accepted or rejected as 
political expediency might dictate. The question of course then arises why anyone should side with 
the a€~vanguard of the proletariat^™ rather than with its opponents, or identify himself with any 
aims whatever. Trotsky does not answer this question, but merely says
that a€~The end flows naturally from the historical movementa€™ (ibid., p. 35). This presumably 
means, though he does not say so clearly, that we must first find out what is historically 
inevitable, and then support it for no other reason than that it is inevitable.

As for democracy within the party, Trotsky is quite categorical about this also. In Stalina€™ s 
party, when his own group was in opposition, he naturally demanded free intra-party discussion and 
even freedom to form a€~fractionsa€™ . On the other hand, he defended the prohibition of fractions 
enacted by himself and others at the Tenth Congress in 1921, on the ground that it was an 
a€~extraordinary measurea€™ . It is hard to interpret this otherwise than as
meaning that it is right to prohibit fractions when they are wrong, but that Trotskya€™ s group 
must not be prohibited because it expresses the interest of the proletariat. During his exile he 
also endeavoured to impose a€~true Leninista€™ principles on the small groups of his adherents: he 
unceasingly condemned all variations from his own statements, ordered the exclusion of all who 
resisted his authority on any subject, and proclaimed the doctrine of
Communist centralism at every turn.


He denounced Souvarinea€™ s group of a€~Communist democratsa€™ in Paris, saying that their very 
name showed that they had broken with Marxism (on which point he may have been right).
He reprimanded Navillea€™ s group when, in 1935, they proclaimed a programme of their own within 
the Left Opposition.

He condemned Luciano Galicia, the leader of the Mexican Trotskyists, who forgot about centralism 
and demanded full freedom of opinion within the Fourth International.

He lashed out furiously at the American Trotskyist Dwight Macdonald, who had said that all theory 
must be treated with scepticism: a€~He who propagates theoretical scepticism is a traitora€™ 
(Writings, 193frl940, p. 341).

He pronounced irrevocable sentence on Burnham and Shachtman when they finally came to doubt that 
the Soviet Union was a workersa€™ state, and talked of Soviet imperialism in invading Poland and in 
the war with Finland. On this occasion he refused to agree to a referendum within the American 
Trotskyist party (which, with about a thousand members according to Deutscher, seems to have been 
the biggest contingent in the Fourth International) on the
ground that party policy was not a€~simply an arithmetical total of local decisionsa€™ (In Defence 
of Marxism, 1942, p. 33).

The fact that this absolutism caused his movement to shrink and to become more and more like a tiny 
religious sect, convinced that its members and they only were destined to salvation, did not worry 
Trotsky at alla€”once more, what about Lenin in 1914? He also shared Lenina€™ s a€~dialecticala€™ 
view that the true or a€~underlyinga€™ majority did not consist of those who happened to be in 
larger number but of those who were right or stood for
historical progress. He seems to have genuinely believed that the working masses of the world were 
on his side in their inmost hearts, even though they did not yet know it; for the laws of history 
made clear that this must be so.

Trotskya€™ s attitude to the problems of national oppression and self-determination was on similar 
lines. His writings contain a few references to Stalinist suppression of the national aspirations 
of the Ukrainians and other peoples; at the same time he emphasized that no concessions must be 
made to Ukrainian nationalists, and that true Bolsheviks in the Ukraine must not form a 
a€~peoplea€™ s fronta€™ with them. He went so far as to say that the Ukrainians,
divided as they were among four states, constituted an international problem no less crucial than, 
in Marxa€™ s opinion, the Polish question had been in the nineteenth century.

But he saw nothing reprehensible in the socialist state bringing the a€~proletarian revolution^™ to 
other countries by means of armed invasion. In 1939a€“40 he explained indignantly to Shachtman and 
Burnham that the Soviet invasion of Poland coincided with the revolutionary movement in that 
country, that the Stalinist bureaucracy had given a revolutionary impulse to the Polish proletariat 
and peasantry, and that in Finland too the war with the Soviet
Union had awakened revolutionary feelings. True, this was a revolution of a a€~special kinda€™, 
since it was introduced at the point of the bayonet and did not spring from the depths of popular 
feeling, but it was a genuine revolution all the same.

Trotskya€™ s knowledge of what was happening in Eastern Poland and Finland was based, of course, 
not on any empirical data but on the a€~laws of historya€™: the Soviet state, degenerate though it 
was, represented the interests of the popular masses, and therefore the latter must support the 
invading Red Army. On this point Trotsky certainly cannot be accused of deviating from Leninism: as 
the a€~truea€™ national interest coincides with that of the
vanguard of the proletariat, it follows that wherever the vanguard is in power (albeit in a state 
of a€~bureaucratic degenerationa€™) the right of national self-determination has been realized, and 
the masses must support this state of affairs, for so the theory requires.

Criticism of Soviet economic and foreign policy: Since, in theory at least, industrialization and 
the future agricultural policy were a vital issue to the Left Opposition in the Soviet Union, 
Trotsky was in an awkward position when it turned out that Stalin had taken over all the 
opposition^™ s policies, and had done so in an intensified form. He solved the difficulty by 
declaring that Stalin had indeed carried out the oppositiona€™ s aims but had done so in a
bureaucratic and ill-considered manner:

The Left Opposition began with the struggle for the industrialization and agrarian collectivization 
of the Soviet Union. This fight is won in a certain sense, namely in that, beginning with 1928, the 
whole policy of the Soviet government represents a bureaucratically distorted application of the 
principles of the Left Opposition ( Writings of Leon Trotsky, 1933a€“1934, ed. G. Breitman and B. 
Scott, 1972, p. 274).

The bureaucracy a€~had been compelleda€™ to carry out these measures in its own interest, by the 
logic of government, and although it had performed the historical tasks of the proletariat in a 
distorted manner, the changes in themselves were a€~progressivea€™; moreover, it was leftist 
pressure that had forced Stalin to change his tune:

Between the creative forces of the revolution and the bureaucracy there exists a profound 
antagonism. If the Stalinist apparatus constantly comes to a halt at certain limits, if it finds 
itself compelled even to turn sharply to the left, this occurs above all under the pressure of the 
amorphous, scattered, but still powerful elements of the revolutionary party ( Writings, 
193Cra€“1931, p. 224).

As to collectivization, Trotsky criticized the haste and lack of economic preparation and 
emphasized that the Stalinists were wrong in regarding the kolkhozes as socialist institutions: 
they were no more than a transitional form. What was more, collectivization turned out to be a step 
towards the restoration of capitalism. In The Revolution Betrayed Trotsky wrote that Stalin had 
annulled the nationalization of the land by giving it to the kolkhozes, and by allowing
the peasants to cultivate private plots on the side he had strengthened the element of 
a€~individualisma€™ . Thus, when Soviet agriculture lay in ruins and millions of peasants were 
starving to death, or were kept alive only by the permission they had at last received to maintain 
private plots, Trotskya€™ s chief concern was the danger of a€~individualisma€™ that this 
represented. He even held that the fight against the kulaks was insufficiently thorough, as
Stalin had given them a chance to organize in the kolkhozes and, after the first liquidation 
campaign, had made further.substantial concessions which must lead to renewed class differentiation 
in the countryside. (This was Trotskya€™ s line in 1935, when he perceived a a€~swing to the 
righta€™ in Stalina€™ s foreign policy and therefore looked for symptoms of a similar turn in 
Soviet internal affairs.)

On several occasions, in The Revolution Betrayed and elsewhere, Trotsky condemned the 
a€~barbarousa€™ introduction of piece-work into Soviet industry. It was hard to tell from his 
arguments, however, whether he thought material incentives to productivity should be replaced by 
police compulsion or revolutionary zeal, and, in the latter case, how that zeal was to be evoked.

As to Stalina€™ s foreign policy, Trotsky harped on the theme that international revolution was 
being abandoned for the sake of a€~socialism in one countrya€™: hence the revolution had been 
successively betrayed in Germany, China, and Spain. (The Spanish Civil War, according to Trotsky, 
was a€~essentiallya€™ a proletarian struggle for socialism.) He did not say whether the Red Army 
should have been sent to aid the German Communists in 1923 (as he
himself had vainly tried to do in 1920), or to aid the Chinese in 1926. In general Trotsky opposed 
the policy of supporting the a€~national bourgeoisiea€™ in undeveloped countries.

This policy was often quite successful in weakening the great capitalist Powers; Trotsky, however, 
thought it pernicious on the ground that in colonial territories, as elsewhere, the tasks of the 
a€~bourgeois revolution^™ could only be performed under Communist leadership, which would bring the 
revolution continuously into a socialist stage. It was, for instance, absurd to suppose that India 
could gain its independence otherwise than by a proletarian
revolution; this was absolutely ruled out by the laws of history. The example of Russia showed that 
the only possibility was a a€~permanent revolutionaC™ led from the outset by the proletariat, i.e. 
the Communist party. Trotsky regarded Russian models as absolutely binding on all countries of the 
world, and he therefore had ready-made answers to all their problems whether or not he knew 
anything about their history or specific conditions.

Trotsky did not dispute that Communists in a revolutionary period must make use of transitional 
aims before they could control the situation completely. Thus in a letter of August 1931 to the 
Chinese Trotskyists he wrote that the idea of a national assembly must not be dropped from their 
programme, because when the support of the poor peasants was being canvassed a€~the proletariat 
will have to convoke a national assembly in order not to arouse the mistrust
of the peasantry and in order not to provide an opening for bourgeois demagogya€™ (Writings, 
1930a€“1931, p. 128).

On the other hand, we read elsewhere that it would be a fatal mistake to repeat Lenina€™ s 
prea€“1917 slogan of a a€~dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantrya€™ . At the outset of the 
Russian revolution the government was referred to as representing the proletariat and the poor 
peasantry. As to this, Trotsky writes: a€~True, subsequently we called the Soviet government worker 
and peasant. But by this time the dictatorship of the proletariat was already a
fact, the Communist Party was in power, and consequently the name Workersa€™ and Peasantsa€™ 
Government could not give rise to any ambiguity or grounds for alarma€™ (ibid., p. 308). In short, 
once the Communists were in power there could be no harm in fictitious and deceptive names.

Trotskya€™ s supporters and admirers, such as Deutscher, have often emphasized, as a fact greatly 
to his credit, that he opposed the slogan of a€~social Fascisma€™ . It is true that he criticized 
this slogan because it cut off the Communists from the working masses in the social democratic 
parties, but he does not seem to have had any real policy to suggest as far as the social democrats 
were concerned. He wrote that there could be no question of permanent co­
operation with organizations which did not break radically with reformism and which sought to 
regenerate social democracy. At the same period, before Hitlera€™ s accession to power, he blamed 
the Stalinists simultaneously for talking of a€~social Fascisma€™ and for capitulating to the 
social democrats. In June 1933, just after the Nazi victory, he declared that there could be no 
thought of a united front with the German social democrats, who were
Hitlera€™ s lackeys.

But Trotskya€™ s indignation was aroused in earnest by the change of Soviet policy in 1934a€“5. 
Stalinism had at last shown its Rightist countenance: the Stalinists were allying themselves with 
the renegades of the Second International and, worse still, were talking of peace and international 
arbitration and dividing states into democratic and Fascist as if that were the important 
difference. They spoke of Fascism threatening world war, yet as Marxists they
must know that imperialist war had an a€~economic foundation^™ . They even accepted at Geneva a 
formula defining the aggressor in terms which would apply equally to all wars, including those 
between capitalist states.

This was a surrender to bourgeois pacifism: Marxists could not be opposed to all wars in principle, 
they left that sort of cant to Quakers and Tolstoyans. Marxists judged war from the class point of 
view and were not interested in bourgeois distinctions between the aggressor and his victim; their 
principle was that a war in the interests of the proletariat, be it aggressive or defensive, was a 
just war, while a war between imperialists was a crime.

In reality all Trotskya€™ s earlier appeals for a change of attitude towards the social democrats 
were illusory and could have borne no fruit even if he had been in power: for he seems to have 
imagined that it was possible to maintain ideological a€~puritya€™ vis-a-vis the social democrats 
while at the same time soliciting their help in particular circumstances. When Stalin, to prevent 
France coming to terms with Nazi Germany, launched the policy of the
a€~popular fronta€™ and an anti-Fascist alliance with the socialists, he realized that he must pay 
a price, at all events in propaganda terms, if his policy was to be successful. Trotsky, on the 
other hand, thought it possible to form an anti-Nazi front with the socialists while denouncing 
them at every turn as impostors, agents of the bourgeoisie, traitors to the working class, and 
lackeys of imperialism-the only taboo epithet being a€~social Fascistsa€™ . It is
evident that if he had been in charge of the Comintern at that time, his policy would have been 
even less successful than Stalina€™ s.

Trotsky was indeed a true adherent of Lenina€™ s opinion that (as the latter repeated many times 
during the war and the Revolution) reliance on international treaties, arbitration, disarmament, 
and so on was idle reactionary chatter. It did not matter who was the aggressor, but which class 
was waging the war. The socialist state, representing the interests of the world proletariat, was 
a€~righta€™ in every war, regardless of who began it, and could not seriously
consider itself bound by treaties with imperialist governments. Stalin was concerned with the 
security of the Soviet state, not with world revolution, and therefore had to present himself on 
various occasions as an advocate of peace and a champion of international law and democracy.

Trotsky, however, believed that the main elements of the situation were still as he had seen them 
in 1918: on one side the imperialists, on the other the socialist state and the world proletariat 
waiting for the right slogans to unleash a revolution. Stalin, the exponent of Realpolitik, did not 
believe in the a€~rising tide of revolutiona€™ , and used the European Communist parties as 
instruments of Soviet policy. Trotsky was the advocate of incessant
a€~revolutionary wara€™, and his whole doctrine was based on the conviction that the world 
proletariat was, in the nature of things and by the laws of history, tending towards revolution, 
and that only the erroneous policy of the Stalinist bureaucracy prevented this innate trend from 
taking effect.

Fascism, democracy, and war: How doctrinaire and unrealistic Trotskya€™ s political thinking was in 
the 1930s may be judged from his remarks on the coming war and his recommendations for action in 
the face of the Fascist threat.
A few days after the outbreak of war he wrote:

I do not see the slightest reason for changing those principles in relation to world war which were 
elaborated between 1914 and 1917 by the best representatives of the workersa€™ movement under the 
leadership of Lenin. The present war has a reactionary character on both sides. Whichever camp is 
victorious, humanity will be thrown far behind (Writings, 1931a€“1940, p. 85).

These words written after the German invasion of Poland and the Anglo-French declaration of war, 
but before the Soviet invasion of mid September-were an epitome of Trotskya€™ s views on the 
subject of a war among capitalist states such as Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, Poland, France, 
Britain, and the U.S .A.

For many years he repeated indefatigably that it was a fatal illusion and a capitalist trick to 
suggest that there was or could be a front of a€~democratica€™ states against Fascism, or that it 
made any difference whether victory went to Hitler or to a coalition of the Western democracies, 
since neither side had nationalized its factories. The proletariat of the belligerent countries, 
instead of helping their reactionary governments to fight Hitler, should rise against
them as Lenin had urged during the First World War. The cry of a€~national defencea€™ was in the 
highest degree reactionary and anti-Marxist; what was at issue was a proletarian revolution, not 
the defeat of one bourgeoisie by another.

In a pamphlet of July 1934 entitled War and the Fourth International Trotsky wrote:

The sham of national defence is covered up wherever possible by the additional sham of the defence 
of democracy. If even now, in the imperialist epoch, Marxists do not identify democracy with 
fascism and are ready at any moment to repel fascisma€™ s encroachment upon democracy, must not the 
proletariat in case of war support the democratic governments against the fascist governments? 
Flagrant sophism! We defend democracy
against fascism by means of the organizations and methods of the proletariat. Contrary to Social 
Democracy we do not entrust this defence to the bourgeois state a€! Under these conditions, the 
support by a workersa€™ party of a€oe itsa€D national imperialism for the sake of a fragile 
democratic shell means the renunciation of an independent policy and the chauvinistic 
demoralization of the workers a€! The revolutionary vanguard
will seek a united front with the worki"ng-class organizations-against its own a€~democratica€™ 
government-but in no case unity with its own government against the hostile country. (Writings, 
1931a€“1934, pp. 306a€“7)

The Third International, Trotsky emphasized in an article in 1935, had always combated pacifism, 
not only social patriotism, and had always condemned talk of disarmament, arbitration, the League 
of Nations, etc.; yet today it was endorsing all these bourgeois policies. When La€™ Humanite 
called for the defence of a€~French civilizationa€™ it showed that it had betrayed the proletariat 
and was takinga nationaliststand, inviting workersto help their own
government to fight German imperialism. Wars were the product of capitalism, and it was senseless 
to argue that the chief danger at present was from Nazism. a€~On this road one quickly arrives at 
the idealization of French democracy as such, counterposed to Hitler Germanya€™ ( Writings of Leon 
Trotsky, 1934a€“1935, ed. G. Breitman and B. Scott, 197 1, p. 293).

A year before the war Trotsky declared that democracy and Fascism were simply two alternative 
instruments of exploitationa€”the rest was all a deceit.

Really, what would a military bloc of imperialist democracies against Hitler mean? A new edition of 
the Versailles chains, even more heavy, bloody and intolerablea€!. The Czechoslovakian crisis 
revealed with remarkable clarity that fascism does not exist as an independent factor. It is only 
one of the tools ofimperialism. a€~Democracya€™ is another of its tools. Imperialism rises above 
them both. It setsthem in motion according to
needs, at times counterposing them to one another, at times amicably conciling [sic] them. To fight 
against fascism in an alliance with imperialism is the same as to fight in an alliance with the 
devil against his claws or horns. (Writings, 1938a€“1939, p. 21)

In short, there was no such thing as a fight between democracy and Fascism. International treaties 
took no account of such pseudo-antagonisms: the British might conclude a pact with Italy, the Poles 
with Germany. No matter who the contending parties were, the coming war would bring about an 
international proletarian revolution-such was the law of history. Humanity would not endure the war 
longer than a few months; rebellions against national governments,
led by the Fourth international, would break out on every hand. In any case the war would at once 
wipe out all traces of democracy, so that it was absurd to talk about the defence of democratic 
values.


in reply to a Trotskyist group in Palestine wiio suggested mat fascism was me ciuet mreat to De 
resisted at mat time and mat it was wrong to preacii deteatism in countries combating it, Trotsky 
wrote mat tiieir attitude was no better man social-patriotism. Por all true revolutionaries, me 
cmet enemy was always at nome.

In another letter, of July 1939, he declared:

The victories of fascism are important, but the death agony of capitalism is more important. 
Fascism accelerates the new war, and the war will tremendously accelerate the revolutionary 
movement. In case of war every small revolutionary nucleus can and will become a decisive historic 
factor in a very short time (Writings, 1938a€“1939, p. 349).

The Fourth International would play the same part in the coming war as the Bolsheviks had in 1917, 
but this time the downfall of capitalism would be complete and final. a€~Yes, I do not doubt that 
the new world war will provoke with absolute inevitability the world revolution and the collapse of 
the capitalist systema€™ (ibid., p. 232).

When war actually came it did not alter Trotskya€™ s opinion on these matters, but strengthened it. 
In the manifesto of the Trotsky Fourth International, published in June 1940, he declared that a€~A 
socialist who comes out today for the defence of the a€oefatherlanda€D is playing the same 
reactionary role as the peasants of the Vendee who rushed to the defence of the feudal regime, that 
is of their own chainsa€™ (Writings, 1937a€“1940, p. 190). It was
pointless to talk of defending democracy against Fascism, for Fascism was a product of bourgeois 
democracy, and it was not any a€~fatherlanda€™ that had to be defended, but the interests of the 
world proletariat:

But the first to be vanquished in the war will be the thoroughly rotten democracy. In its 
definitive downfall it will drag down with it all the workersa€™ organizations which Served as its 
support. There will be no room for reformist unions. Capitalist reaction will destroy them 
ruthlesslya€!.

But isna€™t the working class obliged in the present conditions to aid the democracies in their 
struggle against German fascism? This is how the question is put by broad petty-bourgeois circles 
for whom the proletariat always remains only an auxiliary tool for this or that faction of the 
bourgeoisie. We reject this policy with indignation. Naturally there exists a difference between 
the political regimes in bourgeois society, just as there is a
difference in comfort between various cars in a railway train. But when the whole train is plunging 
into an abyss, the distinction between decaying democracy and murderous fascism disappears in the 
face of the collapse of the entire capitalist system a€! The victory of the imperialists of Great 
Britain and France would be no less frightful for the ultimate fate of mankind than that of Hitler 
and Mussolini. Bourgeois democracy cannot be
saved. By helping their bourgeoisie against foreign fascism, the workers could only accelerate the 
victory of fascism in their own country (ibid., p. 213, p. 221).

Here, again, is Trotskya€™ s advice to the Norwegian workers at the time of Hitlera€™ s invasion:

Should the Norwegian workers have supported the a€oe democratica€n camp against the fascist? a€! In 
reality this would be the crudest kind of blundera€!. In the world arena we support neither the 
camp of the Allies nor the camp of Germany. Consequently we have not the slightest reason or 
justification for supporting either one of their temporary tools within Norway itselfa€™ (In 
Defense of Marxism, p. 172).

Accordingly, if the workers of Poland, France, or Norway had read Trotskya€™ s proclamations and 
obeyed them they would have turned their arms against their own governments at the time of the Nazi 
invasion, as it made no difference whether they were ruled by Hitler or their own bourgeoisie; 
Fascism was an instrument of the bourgeoisie, and it was an absurdity to talk of all classes 
forming a common front against Fascism. Lenin, in the same way, had
preached defeatism in the First World War, and lo, the revolution had broken out.

Trotsky, it should be observed, thought it very likely that the war would be one of all capitalist 
states against the Soviet Union, as the former were united by class-interest. If, however, the 
Soviet Union were allied with one capitalist Power against another, the war could only be a very 
short one, as a proletarian revolution would at once break out in the defeated capitalist state, as 
in Russia in 1917, and the two hostile Powers would then unite against the fatherland
of the proletariat.

Thus, for Trotsky, the general upshot of the war was a foregone conclusion. Capitalism would 
finally collapse, Stalinism and Stalin would be swept away, the world revolution would break out, 
the Fourth International would instantly gain ascendancy over the workersa€™ minds and appear as 
the final victor. As he wrote in reply to the criticisms of Serge, Souvarine, and Thomas:

All the parties of capitalist society, all its moralists and all its sycophants will perish beneath 
the debris of the impending catastrophe. The only party that will survive is the party of the world 
socialist revolution, even though it may seem non-existent today to the sightless rationalizers, 
just as during the last war the party of Lenin and Liebknecht seemed to them non-existent (Their 
Morals and Ours, p. 4 7).

In addition Trotsky made many detailed predictions with complete assurance. It was, for instance, 
absolutely impossible for Switzerland to avoid being dragged into the war; democracy could not 
survive in any country, but must by an a€~iron lawa€™ develop into Fascism; if Italian democracy 
were restored it could only last a few months before being swept away by the proletarian 
revolution. As Hitlera€™ s army consisted of workers and peasants it was
bound eventually to ally itself with the peoples of the occupied countries, for the laws of history 
taught that the bonds of class were stronger than any other.

As to the general nature of the Fascist danger, Trotsky put forward a very interesting analysis in 
August 1933:

Theoretically, the victory of fascism is undoubtedly evidence of the fact that democracy has 
exhausted itself; but politically the fascist regime preserves democratic prejudices, recreates 
them, inculcates them into the youth and is even capable of imparting to them, for a short time, 
the greatest strength. Precisely in this consists one of the most important manifestations of the 
reactionary historic role of fascism (Writings, 1931933, p. 294).
a€~Under the yoke of the a€oefascista€D dictatorship the democratic illusions were not weakened, 
but became strongera€™ (ibid., p. 296). In other words, the threat of Fascism lies in the fact that 
people subjected to it long for democracy, and thus democratic prejudices are preserved instead of 
being dispelled; Hitler is dangerous because he makes it harder to destroy democracy.

Shortly before his death Trotsky reaffirmed his predictions as to the development of the war and at 
the same time put the question, in a rhetorical vein, as to what would happen if they were not 
fulfilled; he answered that it would signify the bankruptcy of Marxism.

If this war provokes, as we firmly believe, a proletarian revolution, it must inevitably lead to 
the overthrow of the bureaucracy in the USSR and the regeneration of Soviet democracy on a far 
higher economic and cultural basis than in 1918a€!. If, however, it is conceded that the present 
war will provoke not revolution but a decline of the proletariat, there remains another 
alternative: the further decay of monopoly capitalism, its faster
fusion with the state, and the replacement of democracy, wherever it still remains, by a 
totalitarian regime.

The inability of the proletariat to take into its hands the leadership of society could actually 
lead under these conditions to the growth of a new exploiting class from the Bonapartist fascist 
bureaucracy. This would be, according to all indications, a regime of decline, signalizing the 
eclipse of civilization. An analogous result might occur in the event that the proletariat of 
advanced capitalist countries, having conquered power, should prove
incapable of holding it and surrender it, as in the USSR, to a privileged bureaucracy. Then we 
would be compelled to acknowledge that the reason for the bureaucratic relapse is rooted not in the 
backwardness of the country and not in the imperialist environment, but in the congenital 
incapacity of the proletariat to become a ruling class.

Then it would be necessary in retrospect to establish [sic] that in its fundamental traits the 
present USSR was the precursor of a new exploiting regime on an international scalea€!. However 
onerous the second perspective may be, if the world proletariat should actually prove incapable of 
fulfilling the mission placed upon it by the course of development, nothing else would remain 
except only to recognize that the socialist programme,
based on the internal contradictions of capitalist society, ended as a Utopia. (In Defence of 
Marxism, pp. 8a€”g)

This is an unusual argument to find in Trotskya€™ s works. Naturally he states with confidence that 
the pessimistic second alternative is an unreal one, and he continues to believe that world 
revolution is inevitable, not merely as a general proposition but as a result of the war in 
progress. But the mere fact that he envisages another hypothesis seems to point to a certain 
hesitation, if we compare the above passage with the absolute confidence in victory that he
expresses elsewhere.

Trotsky did not admit the idea that capitalism might be capable of reforming itself. Roosevelta€™ s 
a€~New Deala€™ seemed to him a desperate and reactionary attempt, foredoomed to failure. He 
believed, moreover, that the United States, having reached the highest stage of technical 
development, was already ripe for Communism. (In an article of March 1935 he promised the Americans 
that when they did go Communist their production costs would be cut
by eighty per cent, and in a€~The U.S.S.R. in Wartimea€™ , written shortly before his death, he 
declared that with a planned economy they could soon raise their national income to 200 billion 
dollars a year, and so ensure prosperity for all.)

In The Revolution Betrayed we read that if anyone supposed that capitalism could thrive for more 
than a decade or two he must, by the same token, believe that socialism in the Soviet Union made no 
sense and that the Marxists had misjudged their historical moment, for the Russian revolution would 
in that case stand as a mere episodic experiment like the Paris Commune.

Conclusions: From the perspective of today, Trotskya€™ s literary and political activity in the 
1930s gives an impression of extreme wishful thinking: it is an unhappy mixture of unfulfilled 
prophecies, fantastic illusions, false diagnoses, and unfounded hopes.

Of course it is not of the first importance that Trotsky failed to foresee the course of the war: 
many people in those days made predictions, most of which were belied by events. What is important 
and characteristic, however, is that he invariably presented his speculations as scientifically 
exact prognoses, based on a profound dialectic and understanding of great historical processes. In 
fact his prophecies were partly founded on hopes that history would vindicate
his judgement, and partly on doctrinaire deductions from supposed historical laws which he believed 
must come into play sooner rather than later.

One wonders what would have happened if Stalin had foreseen the outcome of the war and had taken 
his revenge on Trotsky not by killing him but by letting him live to see the collapse of all his 
hopes and prophecies, not a single one of which came true. The war was an anti-Fascist war; no 
proletarian revolution took place in Europe or America, apart from the Soviet conquest of Eastern 
Europe; the Stalinist bureaucracy was not swept away, but became
immeasurably stronger, as did Stalin himself; democracy survived, and was restored in West Germany 
and Italy; most of the colonial territories gained their independence without a proletarian 
revolution; and the Fourth International remained an impotent sect.

If Trotsky had seen all this, would he have admitted that his pessimistic hypothesis had proved to 
be the right one and that Marxism was an illusion? We cannot tell, of course, but his mentality 
would probably not have allowed him to draw such an inference; he would no doubt simply have noted 
that the operation of the laws of history had again been somewhat delayed, but would have remained 
firm in his belief that the great moment was at hand.

Trotsky, as a true doctrinaire, was insensitive to everything that was happening around him. Of 
course he followed events closely and commented on them, and did his best to obtain accurate 
information about the Soviet Union and world politics. But the essence of a doctrinaire is not that 
he does not read newspapers or collect facts: it consists in adhering to a system of interpretation 
that is impervious to empirical data, or is so nebulous that any and every fact
can be used to confirm it. Trotsky had no need to fear that any event might cause him to change his 
mind, as his basic premisses were always in the form a€~on the one hand a€! on the other handa€™, 
or a€~admittedly a€! but neverthelessa€™.

If Communists suffered a set-back anywhere in the world, it confirmed his diagnosis that the 
Stalinist bureaucracy (as he had always said) was leading the movement to ruin.

If there was a Communist success it also confirmed his diagnosis: the working class had shown, 
despite the Stalinist bureaucracy, that it was still full (as he had always said) of revolutionary 
spirit.
If Stalin made a a€~rightista€™ move it was a triumph for TrotskyaC™ s analysis: he had always 
predicted that the Soviet bureaucracy would degenerate into reaction.

But if Stalin made a swing to the left it was also a triumph for Trotsky, who had always declared 
that the revolutionary vanguard in Russia was so strong that the bureaucracy must take account of 
its wishes.
If a Trotskyist group in some country increased its membership, that was of course a good sign: the 
best elements were beginning to understand that true Leninism was the right policy.

If, on the other hand, a group dwindled in size or underwent a split, this too confirmed the 
Marxist analysis: the Stalinist bureaucracy was stifling the consciousness of the masses, and in a 
revolutionary era unstable elements always desert the battlefield.
If Soviet Russia scored economic success it confirmed Trotskya€™ s argument: socialism, supported 
by the consciousness of the proletariat, was gaining ground in spite of the bureaucracy.

If there were economic set-backs or disasters, Trotsky was right again: the bureaucracy, as he had 
always said, was incompetent and lacked the support of the masses.

A mental system of this kind is watertight and immune from correction by the facts. Obviously, 
various forces and conflicting tendencies are at work in society, and different ones prevail at 
different times; if this commonplace truth is erected into a philosophy, there is no danger of its 
being empirically refuted. Trotsky, however, like many other Marxists, imagined that he was 
conducting scientific observations with the aid of an infallible dialectical method.

Trotskya€™ s attitude to the Soviet state is psychologically understandable: it was to a large 
extent his own creation, and it is not surprising that he could not admit the idea that his 
offspring had degenerated beyond recall. Hence the extraordinary paradox which he repeated 
incessantly and which, in the end, even faithful Trotskyists found hard to swallow: the working 
class had been politically expropriated, robbed of all its rights, enslaved and trampled on, but
the Soviet Union was still a working-class dictatorship, since the land and factories were the 
property of the state.

As time went on, more and more of Trotskya€™ s adherents left him on account of this dogma. Some, 
noting the obvious analogies between Soviet Communism and Nazism, had pessimistic forebodings as to 
the inevitability of totalitarian systems throughout the world. The German Trotskyist Hugo Urbahns 
concluded that state capitalism would become universal in one form or another. Bruno Rizzi, an 
Italian Trotskyist who in 1939 published a book in French
on a€~world bureaucratizationa€™ , held that the world was moving towards a new form of class 
society, in which individual ownership was replaced by collective ownership vested in a 
bureaucracy, as exemplified by the Fascist states and the Soviet Union.

Trotsky opposed such ideas furiously: it was nonsense to suggest that Fascism, the organ of the 
bourgeoisie, could expropriate its own class in favour of a political bureaucracy. Similarly, 
Trotsky broke with Burnham and Shachtman when they came to the conclusion that it no longer made 
any discernible sense to call the Soviet Union a a€~workersa€™ statea€~. Shachtman pointed out that 
under capitalism economic and political power could be separate, but
that this was impossible in the Soviet Union, where property relations and the proletariat^™ s 
participation in political power were dependent on each other; the proletariat could not lose 
political power and continue to exercise an economic dictatorship. The political expropriation of 
the proletariat meant the end of its rule in every other sense, and it was therefore absurd to 
maintain that Russia was still a workersa€™ state; the ruling bureaucracy was a


Trotsky to the end firmly opposed this conclusion, reiterating his single argument that the 
implements of production in the Soviet Union belonged to the state. This, of course, no one denied. 
The dispute was psychological rather than one of theory: to recognize that Russia had created a new 
form of class society and exploitation would have meant admitting that Trotskya€™ s life-work had 
been in vain, and that he himself had helped to bring about the exact
opposite of what he intended. This is a kind of inference that few are prepared to draw.

For the same reason Trotsky maintained tooth and nail that when he was in power the Soviet Union 
and the Comintern had been above reproach in every way: it was a true dictatorship of the 
proletariat, a true proletarian democracy, with genuine support from the working masses. All 
repressions, cruelties, armed invasions, etc. were justified if they were in the interest of the 
working class, but thishad nothing to do with Stalina€™ s later measures.(In exile
Trotsky maintained that there was no religious persecution in Russiaa€”the Orthodox Church had 
simply been deprived of its monopoly power, which was right and proper. On this point he was 
obliged to defend the Stalinist regime, as it had not deviated in any way from Lenina€™ s policy.)

Trotsky never suggested that the armed incursions carried out by the new-born Soviet state in 
Lenina€™ s day might have been wrongful. On the contrary, he repeated many times that the 
revolution could not alter geography; in other words, the Tsarist frontiers ought to be preserved 
or restored, and the Soviet regime had every right to a€~liberatea€™ Poland, Lithuania, Armenia, 
Georgia, and the other border states. Hemaintained that if it had not been for
bureaucratic degeneration the Red Army in 1939 would have been welcomed as a liberator by the 
working masses of Finland; but he did not ask himself why in that case, when he was in power and 
there was no a€~degenerationa€™ , the working masses of Finland, Poland, or Georgia had failed to 
greet their liberators with enthusiasm in accordance with the laws of history.

Trotsky did not concern himself with philosophical questions. (Towards the end of his life he did 
try to expound his views on dialectics and formal logic, but it was clear that all the logic he 
knew consisted of fragments recollected from high school and from youthful studies of Plekhanov, 
all of whose absurdities he repeated. Burnham advised Trotsky to drop the subject, pointing out 
that he knew nothing of modern logic.) Nor did he attempt any theoretical
analysis of the foundations of Marxism. It was sufficient for him that Marx had shown that the 
decisive feature of the modern world was the struggle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, 
and that this was bound to end in the victory of the proletariat, a worldwide socialist state, and 
a classless society. He did not concern himself to discover on what these prophecies were based. 
Being convinced of their truth, however, and of the fact that he as a politician
embodied the interests of the proletariat and the deep-seated trend of history, he maintained 
unswervingly his faith in the final outcome.

At this point we should answer an objection. It may be said that the complete inefficacy of 
Trotskya€™ s efforts and of his International do not invalidate his analysis, since a man may be 
right even if most or all of his fellows disagree with him, and force majeure is not an argument. 
Here, however, we may recall Oscar Wildea€™ s remark that whether force is an argument depends on 
what one wants to prove; and we may add, in the same line of thought, that
force is an argument if the point at issue is whether one is strong or not.

The fact that a theory is rejected by everyone or almost everyone, as has happened more than once 
in the history of science, does not prove that it is wrong. But it is a different matter with 
theories that have an inbuilt self-interpretation to the effect that they are an a€~expressiona€™ 
of great historical tendencies (or of the will of Providence); that they embody the true 
consciousness of the class which is destined soon to triumph, or that they constitute a
revelation of truth, and that therefore, simply as theories (or as a€~theoretical 
consciousnessa€™), they must inevitably prevail over all others.

If a theory of this kind fails to secure recognition, its failure is an argument against it on its 
own premisses. (On the other hand, success in practice is not necessarily an argument in its 
favour. The early victories of Islam were not a proof that the Koran was true, but a proof that the 
faith inspired by it was a powerful rallying-point because it corresponded to essential social 
needs; in the same way, Stalina€™ s successes did not prove that he was a€~righta€™ as a
theorist.) For this reason the failure of Trotskyism in practice, unlike the rejection of a 
scientific hypothesis, is also a theoretical failure, that is to say a proof that the theory as 
Trotsky conceived it was wrong.

Trotsky, with his dogmatic cast of mind, did not contribute to the theoretical elucidation of any 
point of Marxist doctrine. But he was an outstanding personality, endowed with immense courage, 
will-power, and endurance. Covered with obloquy by Stalin and his henchmen in all countries, 
persecuted by the most powerful police and propaganda machine in the world, he never faltered or 
gave up the fight. His children were murdered, he was driven out of his
country and hunted down like an animal, and was finally done to death. His amazing resistance to 
every trial was the result of his faith and by no means conflicteda€”on the contrary-with his 
unshakeable dogmatism and inflexibility of mind. Unfortunately, the intensity of a faith and the 
willingness of its adherents to undergo persecution for it are no proof that it is intellectually 
or morally right.

Deutscher says in his monograph that Trotskya€™ s life was a€~the tragedy of the precursora€™ ; but 
there is no good reason to maintain this, and it is not clear what he is supposed to have been the 
precursor of. He contributed, of course, to unmasking the forgeries of Stalinist historiography, 
and to refuting the lies of Soviet propaganda concerning conditions in the new society. But all his 
predictions as to the future of that society and of the world turned out to
be wrong.

Trotsky was not unique in criticizing Soviet despotism, nor was he the first to do so. On the 
contrary, he criticized it much more mildly than the democratic socialists, and he did not object 
to it qua despotism but only to its ultimate aims, which he diagnosed on ideological principles. 
The opposition that has found expression in Communist countries since Stalina€™ s death has no 
connection with Trotskya€™ s writings or thoughts, either factually or in the minds
of the critics themselves. His ideas play no part at all in the a€~dissidenta€™ movement in those 
countries, even among the dwindling band of those who attack the Soviet system from a Communist 
viewpoint.

Trotsky did not offer any alternative form of Communism or any doctrine different from Stalina€™ s. 
The main thrust of his attack, against a€~socialism in one countrya€™ , was merely an attempt to 
continue a certain tactical line which had become unfeasible for reasons that had nothing to do 
with Stalin. Trotsky was not a a€~forerunnera€™ but an offshoot of the revolution, thrown off at a 
tangent to the course which it followed in 1917a€“21, but which it
subsequently had to abandon for both internal and external reasons.

It would be more exact to call his life the tragedy of an epigone, rather than that of a 
forerunner; but this is not an adequate description either. The Russian revolution changed course 
in certain respects, but not in all. Trotsky advocated ceaseless revolutionary aggression and 
endeavoured to convince himself and others that if he had been running the Soviet state and the 
Comintern, the whole world would have been set ablaze without delay; his reason for so
believing was that Marxist historiosophy taught him that such were the laws of history.

However, the Soviet state was obliged by events to alter course on this point, and Trotsky did not 
cease to upbraid its leaders on that account. As far as the internal regime was concerned, however, 
Stalinism was the natural and obvious continuation of the system of government established by Lenin 
and Trotsky. Trotsky refused to recognize this fact and persuaded himself that Stalina€™ s 
despotism bore no relation to Lenina€™ s; that coercion, police
repression, and the devastation of cultural life were due to a a€~bureaucratica€™ coup da€™ etat 
and that he himself bore no vestige of responsibility for them.

This desperate self-delusion is psychologically explicable. What we have here is not merely the 
tragedy of an epigone, but that of a revolutionary despot entangled in a snare of his own making. 
There was never any such thing as a Trotskyist theorya€”only a deposed leader who tried desperately 
to recover his role, who could not realize that his efforts were vain, and who would not accept 
responsibility for a state of affairs which he regarded as a strange
degeneration, but which was in fact the direct consequence of the principles that he, together with 
Lenin and the whole Bolshevik party, had established as the foundations of socialism.

LINK: <https://archive .org/details/maincurrentsofmaOOkola>
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

