Subscribe now

This week in Say More, PS talks with J. Bradford DeLong, Professor of Economics at the University 
of California, Berkeley, and the author of Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 
Twentieth Century <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>.

J. Bradford DeLong Says Morea€!

Project Syndicate: In March, you wrote that higher inflation was a€ (inevitable and therefore not 
regrettable,a€\3because it was a€cea side effect and a consequence of the robust recovery, 
a€\3which amounts to a a€cemassive policy victory.a€E2 You also predicted that price stability 
would return in the medium term, though you also noted in June that the US
Federal Reservea€™ s ability to raise interest rates sufficiently was constrained by forward 
guidance. Are you still relatively sanguine about US inflation, and was the Feda€™ s latest 
interest-rate hike the right call? How effective will the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) be in 
supporting the Feda€™ s efforts to ease inflation?

J. Bradford DeLong: All confident predictions of a return to price stability have been upset by 
Russian President Vladimir Putina€™ s attack on Ukraine and the resulting shocks to energy and 
grain prices. With the war extremely unlikely to be brought to a rapid conclusion, a soft landing 
may no longer be possible. But we should still try for one.

Is the Feda€™ s latest interest-rate hike the right call? My strong belief is that the central bank 
ought to have moved its short-term policy rate to the appropriate level, and then paused. Instead, 
rates are below what the Fed thinks is the appropriate level, but there is uncertainty about how 
much higher the Fed believes it will end up going. That does not make for
confident markets, investors, or businesses.

As for the IRA, it will put a small amount of downward pressure on inflation in the short term and 
a slightly larger, but still small, amount in the medium term. It is welcome much more for what it 
does to expand supply and wealth than for what it does to reduce inflation.

PS: You have praised the IRA and the Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors (CHIPS) 
Act as a€cemajor legislative victoriesa€dfor the Democrats and a€cemore than enough to flip the 
narrative about [US President Joe ] BidendC™ s first two years in office.a€nif, boosted by these 
victories, the Democrats perform well in Novembera€™ s midterm
elections, what should define their economic agenda?

JBD: a€oeSupply-side progressivisma€D is a very good brand, and if given the chance, US Democrats 
should keep running with it. The United States is still massively underinvesting in the human 
capital of its non-rich residents. It is also massively behind the curve in the transition to 
renewables and in boosting the resilience of supply chains. Catching up will
require, no surprise, massive amounts of investment.

PS: In your latest PS commentary, you argue that four thinkers help explain why we have not 
a€cebecome as good at slicing and tasting the economic pie as previous generations were at making 
it big ger.a€dlf diagnosis is, as you put it, a€ceonly half the battle (and probably less),a€dwhich 
thinkers, ideas, or proposals might be able to lead us toward solutions,
especially a€ce figuring out the politics of wealth redistributiona€C2T

JBD: Ah. If I knew the answer to that question, I would be a much happier man.

My view is that all of the problems of distribution and utilization become much, much easier with 
the relatively equal income distribution of a middle-class society. So, I am inclined to put all of 
my energy into boosting the wages and productivity of the not-rich, and increasing taxes on the 
rich. If we manage to accomplish that, then we will see. But if we do not
accomplish that, I do not see much prospect for improvement.

Share

By the Waya€!

PS: In your new book, Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century, your 
a€ce grand narratived€dof the a€celong twentieth centuryd€d(1870-2010) is shaped a€“ for better or 
worse, depending on who and where you are a€“ by globalization and, more recently, neoliberalism. 
Now, we have seemingly entered an age of
de globalization, and the neoliberal orthodoxy is being widely challenged. Do these trends make you 
hopeful, worried, or something else? Are there historical lessons we should be heeding to ensure 
that our current path doesna€™ t take us in circles?

JBD: I think that the major lesson is that, at a time of rapid technological advancement, it is 
vain and counterproductive to try to revive institutions from the past. The underlying structure of 
production and work is drastically different now than it was a generation ago, so whatever 
rough-bargain set of arrangements was satisfactory then has no more than a minuscule
chance of being satisfactory now.

Attempting to revive any past solutions or approaches, whether those of Franklin D. Roosevelt or 
Ronald Reagan, is likely to be a huge waste of effort. What we should take from the likes of FDR 
and Reagan is the confidence to undertake what the former called a€oebold experimentationa€n a€“ 
something we can certainly afford a€“ and the lattera€™ s conviction
that if we do so, our best days are still in front of us.

PS: From the aCoeDevil of Malthusa€C2to a€oeMarx the propheta€U\and the a€oepatron 
saintsa€dFriedrich von Hayek and Karl Polanyi, you regularly use religious imagery in your book. Is 
this merely a stylistic choice, or a comment on the dogmatic nature of economic thought? Is the key 
to progress to break the dogma, or to develop one that leads to better
outcomes than the a€ceshotgun marriagea€\3of Hayek and Polanyi a€ “ a€ceblesseda€dby John Maynard 
Keynes a€ “ that you argue got us the closest to utopia?

JBD: It is mostly a stylistic choice. But there is this underlying message: People in the twentieth 
century have been attributing to ideas the amount of respect and commitment that people in the past 
reserved for their gods. I do not think that is terribly healthy. Even Oliver Cromwell, when 
confronted with a bunch of people whom he regarded as religious fanatics, said:
a€oel beseech you, in the bowels of Christ, consider that you might be mistaken...a€D

PS: You began Slouching Towards Utopia before the a€celong twentieth century d€Y2ended, and wrote 
tens of thousands [hundreds of thousands? ] of words that never made it into the book. When did it 
become clear to you that the end had arrived? Was there an idea, event, or anecdote that was 
particularly difficult to cut?

JBD: I would say that up until 2003,1 thought that the end of the long twentieth century had 
arrived, and it was a Francis Fukuyama a€oeend of historya€D kind of ending. In 2010, however, it 
became clear to me that the real end of the long twentieth century had just arrived a€“ and it was 
much less optimistic. We had had the chance not only to create an economy
capable of producing great wealth, but also to distribute and use that wealth effectively. But, 
unable to build the needed institutions, we had squandered that opportunity.

In between, I was confused about what was going on.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Read More

The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era By Gary 
Gerstle

Why has policy in the United States since 1980 not advanced social democracy a€“ the system that I 
would prefer, which Gerstle calls The New Deal Order? I wrestle with this question in my new book, 
Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century. Gerstle wrestles with it in 
this book, at much greater length and, I believe, more
successfully. He argues that a confluence in the 1970s of left- and right-critiques of the New Deal 
Order as overly bureaucratized and institutionally rigid caused people to reject it in favor of the 
Neoliberal Order, which they believed a€“ largely wrongly a€“ would bring economic and cultural 
freedom. The least satisfying part of the book is its ending: Gerstle hopes
that   the Neoliberal Order has fallen, raising the prospect of a better future. I am not so sure.

A Monetary and Fiscal History of the United States, 1961-2021 By Alan S. Blinder

Blindera€™ s writing is exceptionally witty and readable, and not just for an economist. This book, 
which comes out today in the US, provides an insidera€™ s perspective on what economic advisers 
recommended to politicians, and how the politicians then attempted to advance full employment and 
price stability. Blinder focuses a little too much on the
economistsa€™ arguments, rather than on what non-economists thought those arguments were or should 
have been. Only a little, to be sure. But it is often the Zeitgeist that shapes policy. Economists, 
meanwhile, may be left protesting that their ideas have been misconstrued or misrepresented.

Karl Marx: A Nineteenth-Century Life By Jonathan Sperber

Sperber takes Karl Marx very seriously. The things Marx worried about, he emphasizes, were largely 
things that we still worry about today. But Sperber looks at these issues through the lens of 
Marxa€™ s concerns and uses the intellectual toolkit of Marxa€™ s time. He shows how Marx thought 
that poverty and scarcity would not be permanent problems a€“ that
human ingenuity, together with technological advances, would eradicate them. The problem, he 
explains, was that bosses could store up crystallized past labor in the form of capital, thereby 
making present labor compete with past labor and pushing down wages. Trying to figure out how a 
society could become increasingly rich without wages rising was Marxa€™ s
lifea€™ s work, and Sperber does a very good job of putting the reader in Marxa€™ s shoes.

Leave a comment

Slouching Towards Utopia; An Economic History of the 20th Century <bit Jy/3pP3Krk>

The long twentieth century a€“ the first where the economy was no longer a painted backdrop, but 
rather revolutionized the lives of each successive generation a€“ taught humanity expensive 
lessons. The most important of them is this: only through the shotgun marriage of Friedrich von 
Hayek and Karl Polanyi a€“ a marriage blessed by John Maynard Keynes a€“
have we been able even to slouch toward utopia, and that marriage has failed its own sustainability 
tests. Whether we ever justify the full bill run up over the 140 years from 1870 to 2010 will 
depend on whether we remember that lesson.

Give a gift subscription

Project Syndicate Say More

<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/onpoint/an-interview-with-i-bradford-delong-on-us-inflation-redis
tribution-economic-dogma-2022-10>


ZUZZ-1U-U4 1U

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

