Subscribe now

FIRST: Michael Hiltzik Interview on a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D

Very nicely done by Michael:

Michael Hiltzik: Column: How did America get addicted to a policy that fails everyone but the 
rich?: a€~Social Democratic policies crafted in the 1930s succeeded in creating a long era of 
widespread prosperity, then suddenly lost their credibility in the mid-1970s. They were replaced by 
the neoliberalism of Ronald Reagan, which failed to help anyone but the rich, yet still governs 
American economic policy. The ascent of
neoliberalism and its staying power a€oeis a puzzle,a€D J. Bradford DeLong writes in his 
magisterial new economic history of the 20th century, Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>. 
Ita€™ s the central puzzle that DeLong, a professor of economics at UC Berkeley, a widely followed 
economics blogger and one of our leading critics of economic inequality, aims to examinea€!

A few of Michaela€™ s passages that made me think, and a few comments on the:

By bringing to the middle class and working class the recognition of their shared interest in a 
more inclusive economy, the [Great] Depression produced a drive for social insurance and social 
justice. Franklin D. Roosevelta€! the era of social democracy, reflecting the views of Hungarian 
economist Karl Polanyia€!. a€oePolanyia€™ s counter was that whether saying the market can do it 
all or that ita€™ s all we can have, people will not
stand for it,a€D DeLong told me during a lengthy conversation about his book. a€oeYou will get a 
large group of people wanting to elect someone who will do something about the system.a€D In the 
post-Depression era, it became understood that a€oenot only shouldna€™ t the market be left to do 
it all,a€D DeLong says, a€oeit cana€™t do it all or very much unless it is properly primed and 
aided and guideda€Da€!

Andrew, Carnegie and company had claimed that the market and allocation of wealth was "just" in at 
least three senses: (1) it rewarded the virtues of diligence and talent; (2) it was progressive for 
the race in a social-darwinist mode; and (3) it was a fair contest, in that differences in 
a€oestarting positionsa€D were either small or were fairly bought as part of the reward your 
ancestors deserved for their diligence and talent. Von Hayeka€™ s declarations that the
market allocation was unfair but that we dared not monkey with ita€”that was at least more 
clear-sighted.

Andrew Carnegie and company had great sway. Here is George Orwell, from The Road to Wigan Pier, 
writing in the mid-1930s:

I first became aware of the unemployment problem in 1928a€!. When I first saw unemployed men at 
close quarters, the thing that horrified and amazed me was to find that many of them were ashamed 
of being unemployed. I was very ignorant, but not so ignorant as to imagine that when the loss of 
foreign markets pushes two million men out of work, those two million are any more to blame than 
the people who draw blanks in the
Calcutta Sweep.

But at that time nobody cared to admit that unemployment was inevitable, because this meant 
admitting that it would probably continue. The middle classes were still talking about 'lazy idle 
loafers on the dole' and saying that 'these men could all find work if they wanted to', and 
naturally these opinions percolated to the working class themselves. I remember the shock of 
astonishment it gave me, when I first mingled with tramps and
beggars, to find that a fair proportion, perhaps a quarter, of these beings whom I had been taught 
to regard as cynical parasites, were decent young miners and cotton-workers gazing at their destiny 
with the same sort of dumb amazement as an animal in a trap.

They simply could not understand what was happening to them. They had been brought up to work, and 
behold! it seemed as if they were never going to have the chance of working again. In their 
circumstances it was inevitable, at first, that they should be haunted bya feeling of personal 
degradation. That was the attitude towards unemployment in those days: it was a disaster which 
happened to you asan individual and for which you

were to blame.

When a quarter of a million miners are unemployed, it is part of the order of things that Alf 
Smith, a miner living in the back streets of Newcastle, should be out of work. Alf Smith is merely 
one of the quarter million, a statistical unit. But no human being finds it easy to regard himself 
as a statistical unit. So long asBert Jones acrossthe street is still at work, Alf Smith is bound 
to feel himself dishonoured and a failure.  Hence that
frightful feeling of impotence and despair which is almost the worst evil of unemployment^’’far 
worse than any hardship, worse than the demoralization of enforced idleness, and Only less bad than 
the physical degeneracy of Alf Smith's children, born on the P.A.C.

The Great Depression broke this Carnegie-style pattern of thought for nearly two generations. Yet 
somehow by the late 1970s it was back, with the claim that the market rewarded diligence and 
talent, so that while the rich were lucky, the poor were not unlucky but merely undiligent and 
untalented:

It all came apart. It would have been hard to sustain annual growth of 3% under any circumstances, 
but the 1970s brought the oil shocks, which tripled the price of oil, produced high inflation and 
provoked a sharp economic slowdown. Opinion soured on redistribution of income to sustain the poor, 
and on environmental regulations. a€oeThe fading memory of the Great Depression,a€D DeLong writes, 
a€oeled to the fading of the middle
classa€™ s belief ... that they, as well as the working class, needed social insurance ,a€D The 
stage was set for what DeLong calls a€oethe neoliberal turna€Da€!. One insight that DeLonga€™ s 
approach leads us to is how little the righta€™ s attack on social justice initiatives has evolved 
in nearly a half-century. In 1980, conservative economist Martin Feldstein inveighed against 
unemployment insurance because it would produce
inflation, health and safety regulations because they would reduce productivity, and welfare 
because it would a€oeweaken family structures,a€D Medicare and Medicaid because they would drive up 
healthcare costs. Even earlier, in 1962, Nobel economics laureate George Stigler lamented the 
a€ceinsolencea€D of civil rights demonstrators. Complaints about the a€oepermissivenessa€n of 
liberal parents was a feature of Republican
critiques. Compare that to today a€™ s GOP shibbolethsa€!

It would have been possible for Marty to take a position on this, that I would have a greed with: 
that the economy needs "hard incentives", but those hard incentives must be coupled with "setting 
people up for success". Governance as as a principal task to set things up, so that nobody (or very 
few) are put in situations in which they are required to accomplish tasks impossible for them. This 
was what I call Jack Kemp right-neoliberalism. But there were never
more than a very few Jack Kemp right-neoliberals. And now I think there are none.

a€oeResurrecting social democracy is not in the cards, because it rested on technologies of 
production and social organization as they existed in the 1950s. Nor is resurrecting Reaganisma€! 
a€oe

This, I think, is an absolutely key point. Friedrich Engels thought that society had to accomodate 
itself to the changing underlying forces of production: that you could not have a gunpowder-empire 
in the feudal age without gunpowder, and that you could not have a gunpowder-empire in the 
steampower age, but that gunpowder-empires did fine in the age of the caravel and the windmill. The 
problem with Engels was that he thought that the steampower age was
the acme. He did not look forward, after 1000 years in which you had two (or maybe one and a half?) 
transitions of mode-of-production from feudalism to commercial to steam-industrial, that post-1870 
we would go from steampower to second-industrialization to mass-production to mass-consumption to 
global-value-chain to info-biotech. And no modes of social organization and relations of production 
can still be effective across any of these transitions.

a€oelf there is no left-wing alternative to neoliberalism, the right-wing alternatives are much 
more unpleasanta€”a politics of a€~you have enemies and you need to give me close to plenary power 
so I can protect you.a€™ Thata€™ s a dangerous situation, and one that we seem to be drifting 
towardsa€D. Whether the hands on Americaa€™ s economic tiller are capable of guiding us to a fair 
future remains in questiona€!

And this is the thing that makes me most pessimistic. The potential alternatives to neoliberalism 
that have energy outside of relatively small cadres seem to me to be very unpleasant indeed. We may 
well wind up wishing for the good old days of the Neoliberal Order.
Gee, Ia€™ m depressed this month, am I not?

Share

One Image: Amazon (Hardcover) Daily Sales Rank:

For Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>:

Historical Sales Rank


SLOUCHING
TOWARDS

UTOPIA

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century

Formats and editions

Hardcover, September 5, 2022

This format is currently ranked #3,064.


0? THE Tb'ENTiETH CENTURY

J. BRADFORD DELONG     As of today: 2 Weeks 1 Month 6 Months | 1 Year | 2 Years | All Available

Sales Rank

1

09/04/2022      09/07/2022      09/10/2022      09/13/2022      09/16/2022      09/19/2022      
09/22/2022      09/25/2022      09/28/2022      10/02/2022

From the weekly sales numbers, it looks as though sales are roughly proportional to l/[sales rank] 
in the relevant range from [sales rank] = 100 to [sales rank] = 2500, with total sales of roughly 
10,000 through the first two-thirds of Septembera€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Must-Read: Musk vs. Twitter:

Chancery Daily: Twitter v. Musk Spotlight dY”!: a€~What does [the Musk Parties'] letter actually 
say or attempt to do?... It offers to close the deal on the terms that Musk promised to close the 
deal back in April, which promise he has subsequently spent months and millions trying to revoke. 
Buta€! for real this time? The entirely credulous response from the media and most onlookers likely 
has some (perhaps unwitting) foundation in reality. The letter
doesna€™ t say much, it doesna€™ t do much, but it does mean something. It means that Elona€™ s 
mindset has changed.  Doing the deal has been the nearly inevitable endgame of this whole charade 
for the past several months. On its face, his claim is weak and has little known support in fact or 
law. So, the deal was going to get done. When it gets done by his acquiescence instead of the 
Courta€™ s insistence, most likely people will celebrate that the

reporting today was all accurate! See, the deal did get done! But, to me, thata€™ s not the point. 
The way ita€™ s being reported is as though the deal is now done, and I assure you, with what we 
currently know, it is not.  To me, it feels like death by a thousand cuts, not one motivating 
event. If he is really motivated, he will do a lot more than send a mealy-mouthed letter via 
overnight courier. He will put his money where his mouth is, and he will come to the

table to close. a€~Twill be quite interesting to see what tomorrow brings...

Leave a comment


Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Dave Lee: The ever-expanding job of preserving the interneta€™ s backpages: a€~A quarter of a 
century after it began collecting web pages, the Internet Archive is adapting to new challengesa€!

• David Smith: a€~Testing an Apple Watch Ultra in the Scottish Highlandsa€™

•  Michael Hiltzik: Column: How did America get addicted to a policy that fails everyone but the 
rich?

•  Frederik Gieschen: Thinking About the Next Warren Buffetta€D: a€~Munger: a€oe Young lawyers 
frequently come to me and say, a€~How can I quit practicing law and become a billionaire 
instead?a€™ a€! The next Warren Buffett, whoever they are, will not be afraid to ask the question 
that is on everyonea€™ s mind. But they will also not be sitting in the audience waiting to be 
handed enlightenmenta€!

• Emily Holland: Permanent Rupture: The European-Russian Energy Relationship Has Ended with Nord 
Streama€!

•  Kaushik Basu: All the Kinga€™ s Games: a€~Do Russians want to oust Putin and restore democracy? 
If you ask people familiar with Russia, they will most likely say that most of the population still 
supports him. I have my doubts. Tyrants always appear to have more support than they do until they 
are gone, because feigning support is a survival strategy...
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

John Ganz: The Matteotti Crisis: a€~Mussolinia€™ s success was not guaranteeda€!. The King might 
have withdrawn his mandate, his parliamentary allies could have fled, the opposition might have 
adopted a more muscular strategy, or the Fascist ultras may have launched a coup that justified 
governmental suppression of the Fascists in response. Mussolini took advantage of the 
disorganization of his opponents and the craven opportunism of his allies. It was
the sort of tactical victory he had become expert in, riding out the storms while just managing to 
keep his coalition together. The killing of Giacomo Matteotti may have been reckless in that it 
created an unstable situation and threatened his rule, but ultimately it proved to be a€oethe right 
move:a€D Mussolini removed an opponent of extraordinary courage and moral authority and created the 
conditions for consolidating controla€!

Dan Davies: A non-random walk down Lombard Street: a€~Not all market interventions are bailouts and 
not all bailouts are bada€L The idea that financial crises can be managed by mitigating the 
consequences ex post rather than preventing the problem ex ante has a bad reputation, mainly as a 
result of Alan Greenspana€™ s use of it as an excuse for not doing more during the 2000s. But ita€™ 
s not intrinsically unorthodox central banking. The optimal
frequency of crises, as Professor Richard Portes once told me, is not zero. A central bank cana€™ t 
anticipate everything and the perfect regulatory system doesna€™ t exist. Since central banks have 
the power to expand their balance sheets without limit, and so the ability to unstick frozen 
markets, why shouldna€™ t they use it sometimes? As long as people dona€™ t get into the habit of 
expecting to be rescued simply from falling markets, this is a valid part of
the toolkita€!

Joe Nye: What Caused the Ukraine War?: a€~Distinguish between deep, intermediate, and immediate 
causesa€!. Putin lit the matcha€! on February 24a€!. The intermediate cause was a refusal to see 
Ukraine as a legitimate statea€!. Putin wants to restore what he calls the a€oeRussian worlda€Da€I. 
[But] while NATOa€™ s decision in 2008 may have been misguided, Putina€™ s change of attitude 
predated ita€!. Behind all this were the remote or deep causes
that followed the end of the Cold Wara€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription

