Subscribe now

FOCUS: Reading Will MacAskilla€™s What We Owe the Future.

The robot uprising in Oxford, and Will MacAskill, by Stable Diffusion via NightCafe

I was going to write a review of Will McCaskill's What We Owe the Future 
<https://www.amazon.com/dp/1541618629>, which I liked a lot.

But it then got submerged in the mishegas surrounding my own launch of Slouching Towards Utopia: 
The Economic History of the 20th Century <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>. In short, I never got around to it. But 
last week I noticed the book on my shelves again. So here we are:

Looking back on this, this turned out to be crankier than I wanted it to be. That is a result of my 
instinctive reaction to philosophy. Philosophy is really hard! If philosophers could make with 
conviction arguments that were convincinga€”well, those philosophers who have had that success with 
their philosophy have by that token become something other than philosophers, and their philosophy 
has become some other discipline.

First, although it is a good book, it is not a great book. I dona€™ t see it as Ezra Klein 
doesa€”a€oea book that will change your sense of how grand the sweep of human history could be, 
where you fit into it, and how much you could do to change it for the better. It's as simple, and 
as ambitious, as thata€Da€”because it tries to do too much and also too little. The result is that 
it is very wide in its scope, but not that deep in any of its arguments.
It really feels to me like five 60-page book prospectuses stapled together, with a few linkage 
pages.

The five prospectuses are.:

1. Right Now the Future Is Big & Plastic: Thus we are under a strong moral geas not to say: 
sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

2. Artificial General Intelligence the Biggest Menace: Specifically, our task of developing 
artificial general intelligence without triggering The Robot Uprising is the most important problem 
facing humanity today, and one that we are not thinking nearly hard enough about.

3. On Resilience: Avoiding human extinction, recovering from civilizational collapse, and 
heading-off civilizational stagnation.

4. A Primer on Derek Parfit: Why his take on utilitarianism is right.

5. A Manual on Giving the Future Options: Empowering those who will know more than we do by being 
politically active, spreading good ideas, having children, earning to givea€”and remember: 
significance x, persistence x contingency x tract, ability x neglectedness.

I loved reading each of these five 60-page prospectus-length arguments. But ilwound up unsatisfied. 
I think each of these would be much better if Will had given him self space to spread out. I wish 
he had written five books, each of 300 pages. I would have greatly enjoyed reading them all.
This is not, of course, to say that I would have agreed with all of them (even if the odds I would 
wind up agreeing with any of them would have been higher if Will had been able to make his 
arguments at greater length.


The country strategy could entaila€l lifesciences and ITa€l a financial centera€l [as] a tax 
havena€l a European a€oebridge to Asia.a€Oa€l Current account deficita€l a challengea€l. 
Perceptions lag behind reality. The country also suffers from nostalgia for past grandeur. The 
Brexit debate reflected these realities. Yet, despite this, Britaina€™ s democracy is healthier 
than that of the USa€L Britain was hard hit by the financial crisis. GDP per head in
2019 was about 21% lower than the pre-crisis trenda€l. Following the Covid shock, the UK is the 
only G7 economy that is still below its pre-pandemic sizea€l

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

ONE IMAGE: Azis Is, I Think, A34e Best a€oeWhere We Area€C Map:

Global Population Density

The height of the spikes relotes to the number of people living in on oreo • roughly 2km x 2km


Visualising population density ( Visual Capitalist)

Leave a comment

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:


•  Arvind Subramanian and Josh Felman: Why India Cana€™t Replace China: a€~The Barriers to New 
Delhia€™ s Next Booma€!. Will New Delhi be able to seize this opportunity? The answer is not 
obviousa€!. Radical policy changes are needed before India can revive domestic investment, much 
less convince large numbers of global businesses to move their production there...

•  Doug Irwin: Most developing economies reduced tariffs voluntarily, not because of trade 
agreements: a€~The World Bank, the IMF, and the GATT/WTO: Which institution most supported trade 
reform in developing economies?a€!

•  Ethan Mollick: The Mechanical Professor: a€~Rather than automating jobs that are repetitive & 
dangerous, there is now the prospect that the first jobs that are disrupted by AI will be more 
analytic; creative; and involve more writing and communication^!. I wanted to see how much of my 
work an AI could do right now...

• Scott Lemieux: The imaginary right to post: a€~Adam Serwer explains the idiotic assumptions 
underlying the premise that it somehow violates the First Amendment to request that revenge porn be 
taken off the internet, if that revenge porn is part of a Republican ratfucking campaigna€!
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

If one is going to earn-to-give, one should first make sure that one is not a destructive grifter. 
Effective charities are good. Purchase of Wytham Abbey is a serious danger sign:

Ezra Klein: The Big Thing Effective Altruism (Still) Gets Right: a€~This is my annual giving 
column, so I wona€™ t beat around the bush. I recommend donating to GiveWella€™ s four top-rated 
charities: the Malaria Consortium, the Against Malaria Foundation, Helen Keller International and 
New Incentives. These charities distribute medication and bed nets to prevent malaria, vitamin A 
supplements to prevent blindness and
death in children and cash to get poor kids vaccinated against a host of diseases. What sets these 
groups apart is the confidence we have in the good that they doa€!. Effective altruism, the 
philanthropic movement that Give Well is part of, is undergoing a reckoning after the fall of Sam 
Bankman-Fried, its most famous financier and adherenta€! [who] became a crypto trader after 
lunching with Will MacAskill, an Oxford philosopher
whoa€™ s one of effective altruisma€™ s founders. MacAskill told Bankman-Fried he could probably do 
more good by making a lot of money and giving it away than by working in a nonprofit somewherea€! 
earn to give...

Eric Williams looks pretty good these days, no?

Stephan Heblich, Stephen J. Redding, & Hans-Joachim Voth: Slavery & the British Industrial 
Revolution: a€~We compare areas of Britain with high and low exposure to the colonial plantation 
economya€!. By the 1830s, slavery wealth is strongly correlated with economic development^!. 
Slavery investment raises the return to capital accumulation, expanding production in 
capital-intensive sectorsa€!. Weather shocks
influenced the continued involvement of ancestors in the slave trade; weather-induced slave 
mortality of slave-trading ancestors in each area is strongly predictive of slaveholding in 
1833a€!. Britain would have been substantially poorer and more agricultural in the absence of 
overseas slave wealth...

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

