Subscribe now

ONE AUDIO: Cardiff Garciaa€™s a€ceThe New Bazaara€D Podcast:

Artificial intelligence and the economy of the future DEC 20 a<... 1:07:13: Joining Cardiff for 
this episode is Avi Goldfarb, Rotman Chair In Artificial Intelligence and Healthcare At The Rotman 
School Of Management, University Of Toronto, and the co-author (with his fellow economists Ajay 
Agrawal and Joshua Gans) of an excellent new book, Power and Prediction: The Disruptive Economics 
of Artificial Intelligence.

<https://overcast.fm/+yKeuj5Oj8>

Start writing today. Use the button below to create your Substack and connect your publication with 
Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Start a Substack

ONE IMAGE: John Burns-Murdock:

UK real wages are lower today than 18 years ago,
and have fared much worse than any peer nation

Evolution of real annual average wages


$’000, constant 2020 PPPs

30 ।      ।      ।      ।      ।      ।     ।

1990 1995 7000 2005 2010 2015 2020

Change since 2009 (%)

15


’Austria, Canada, Denmark, Germany, Finland, France, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, US
Sources: FT analysis of OECD, ILO, OBR

FT graphic: John Burn-Murdoch / @jburnmurdoch

©FT

Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Liz Hempowicz & al.: How the Jan. 6 Committee Can Help Enforce the 14th Amendment: a€~Congress 
codified quo warranto in the District of Columbia Codea€!. The federal district court in Washington 
may issue a writ of quo warranto against anyone in the District who unlawfully holds a€oea public 
office of the United Statesa€D...

• Cory Doctorow: Pluralistic: What the fediverse (does/n't) solvea€!

• Dan Nexon: Microblog: a€~The microblog contains short, informal posts. These are the kinds of 
scribbles one might expect to find on Twitter or Mastodon, except here they reside at an actual 
webloga€!

• Alan Blinder: The Use and Abuse of Inflation History: a€~Inflation expectations today are 
remarkably well contained. In fact, they are nearly consistent with the Feda€™ s 2% inflation 
target for the Personal Consumption Expenditures Price Index (PCE). Of course, expected inflation 
ishigher than 2% in thenear term, because peoplecan see that inflation is running higher right now. 
But over a five- or ten-year horizon, the numbers
cluster in the 2-3% range. This matters a lota€!

• William Wolff & al.: Have Trade Agreements Been Bad for America?: a€~The trade agreements that 
the United States entered into were strongly positive for America and that policy approaches taken 
need to be built on rather than abandoneda€!

• Ellie Murray: a€~The hardest thing about pandemics for almost everyone is that infectious 
diseases are so different from everything else. All the intuition you have built up over a full & 
long fife about risk & risk management is not only useless, but often actively harmfulin a 
pandemic.Sure useCalabresia€™ sapproach if you like, but make  sure you correctlyquantify the full 
scope of a€oeaccidents preventedaCD by masks.
Transmission is exponential so therea€™ s secondary & tertiary cases etc, plus sick people cana€™t 
work (at least not without transmitting)...

•  UNESCO: Archaeological Site of Aigai (modern name Vergina): a€~Aigai, the ancient first capital 
of the Kingdom of Macedoniaa€!

•  Dan Drezner (2017): The Ideas Industry: How Pessimists, Partisans, and Plutocrats Are 
Transforming the Marketplace of Ideasa€!

•  Ethan Mollick: a€~Mechanical Turk plays a big role in research & it worked well for yearsa€! but 
there are ominous signs: Invalid data in MTurk only happened in ~10% of answers 2015-2017, but that 
went to 62% in 2018 &amp; 38% in 2019. 2022: out of a sample of 529 MTurk workers, only 14 were 
humana€!

• Plutarch: Marcus Cato Was a Cheap, Cruel Man: a€~[His] us[ing] slaves up as if they were pack 
animals and then driving them away and selling them when they were old is the mark of a deeply 
cruel character...
Get 33% off a group subscription

AJs:

Kathryn A. Edwards: America Is Choosing to Keep Children in Poverty: The Child Tax Credit worked, 
but Congress is letting it die anyway. 'Leta€™ s face it: the US is completely capable of reducing 
child poverty. It chooses not to. Americans like to think that they live in a society of endless 
potential, where anyone with enough grit and determination can pull themselves up. Yet their 
elected representatives are unwilling to remove one of the
greatest obstacles to prosperity a€” one that affects people at an extremely vulnerable stage in 
life, when they have no say in the matter. An expanded Child Tax Credit wouldna€™t solve 
everything, but killing it off is a false economy. Congress is walking away from giving nearly 
three million children a better shot at the American Dream. That dream hasna€™t failed: 
Policymakers simply lack the will to make it succeed.

Cat Valente: Three Decades of Survival in the Desert of Social Media: a€~Be each othera€™ s pen 
pals. Talk. Share. Welcome. Care. And just keep moving.... Protect the vulnerable. Make little 
things. Wear electric blue eyeshadow. Take a picture of your breakfast.  Us doesna€™ t have a web 
address. We are wherever we gather. Hello, world. Come in from the cold. This will be a good place. 
For awhile. And then wea€™ 11 make another one. Stop

buying things and start talking to each other. Theya€™ ve always known that was how they lose. And 
remember, the lightest shade goes over the browbone, as delicate as a new year...

Venkatesh Rao: The Dawn of Mediocre Computing: a€~Computers already easily overwhelm the best 
humans at chess and Go. Now they have done something far harder: achieved parity with David Brooks 
at writing. OpenAIa€™ s ChatGPT, released as a research beta two days ago, has done to the standard 
high-school essay what cameras did to photorealistic painting and pocket calculators did to basic 
arithmetical. When it comes to writing,
nobody does mediocre more mediocrely than David Brooksa€!. In the grim darkness of the far future 
where there are only extreme weather reports, civilization will be dominated by Brooks-like humans 
and Brooks-equivalent computers living together in an awkward symbiosis. And that future starts 
today. We are witnessing the dawn of mediocre computinga€!. Declarations of Ais passing the Turing 
test are a bit like declarations that Voyager 1 has
exited the solar system, but I think this event is genuinely significanta€!

Dan Nexon: Explanatory Theory as Definition: a€~Ia€™ ve been very slowly working on a post about 
whether reactionary populism is a form of fascism. Well, ita€™ s more about the debate itselfa€”and 
particularly a€cethings I find annoying,a€D One of them is when participants make arguments based 
on their theoretical priors about the causes of interwar fascisma€!. The argument is particularly 
poorly suited to ideologies and beliefs, which
routinely outlast the conditions of their production. The circumstances that produced Christianity 
and Islam no longer exist, yet that doesna€™t mean that there are no Christians or Muslims. Sure, 
modern variants of both differ in significant ways from their original forms. But no one who 
supports the a€oeita€™ s fascisma€D position thinks that reactionary populism is identical to, say, 
Nazisma€!

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

