— -Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Purchasing Power of the Consumer Dollar in U.S. 
City Average

20

1920         1930        1940         1950         1960         1970         1980         1990      
   2000         2010         2020

Subscribe now

DRAFT: Inflation Piece, Perhaps for the a€oeEconomista€d:

The first and most important thing to recognize about the macroeconomic situation in the U.S. is 
that Jay Powell and his FOMC should be taking victory laps. Two and a half years after the start of 
the Global Financial Crisis in 2007, the U.S. unemployment rate was kissing 10%, the Federal 
Reserve had found that it had no traction to speed recovery, and the Obama administration had just 
thrown away its ability to use fiscal policy to speed recovery by
promising to veto spending and tax bills that were insufficiently austere. It would, after that 
moment, take six years for the U.S. economy to approach full employment. The cumulative pointless 
and unnecessary economic losses of $7 trillion from deficient employment alone, plus a multiple 
from investments not made, business models not experimented with, and workers not trained during 
the decade of Ainemic recovery.

We have avoided all that.

Relative to the Bernanke Fed, therefore, the Powell Fed are public benefactors to the residents of 
the United States to the tune of $20 trillion dollars. We could afford to make each of the 19 
voting and alternate members of the Powell FOMC as rich as Elon Musk was at his peak, and that 
would only eat up 1/10 of the good they have done relative to the Fed, Congress, and President of a 
decade ago.
But we do now have an inflation problem. So after it finishes taking its victory laps, and after 
the cheers the Powell Fed deservesa€”but that somehow I am not hearing right now?a€”die down, what 
should the Powell Fed do to deal with the current inflation problem?

The U.S. has faced fivea€”or maybe six, depending on whether you count the 1970s as one or two 
episodesa€’’inflation problems in the past century and a bit. One, the WWII inflation brought under 
control by wartime price controls, is not relevant to our situation. That leaves four (or maybe 
five) historical parallels.

The first is the WWI-era inflation, brought under control when the newly-installed Fed raised its 
discount rate from 3.75% to 7%, and triggered a short but very deep recession accompanied by 
substantial deflation. Milton Friedman judged that the Fed had moved too latea€”should have started 
raising interest rates a year or more before it dida€”but moved too far when it did move.


The second is the post-WWII inflation. Inflation peaked at 16.7% on a trailing annual basis in May 
of 1947 as the U.S. economy reoriented itself from its wartime to its post-war structural 
configuration. The Federal Reserve did nothing. It was focused on propping up the value of all the 
U.S. Treasury bonds that had been issued to fight World War II. Inflation then declined over the 
next two years to 8%, and then went negative in 1949, when a minor recession
came.

The third is the 1951 inflation. Inflation peaked at 8.6% on a trailing annual basis in May 1951 as 
the U.S. geared up to fight the Korean War and, perhaps more important, to build up the full Cold 
War military prepared to instantly project power anywhere on the globe. Again, the Fed did nothing. 
And the inflation wave passed. By May 1952 it was below 2%. And recession was avoided until a minor 
one in late 1953.

The fourth, or the fourth and fifth, are the 1965-1984 experience, when inflation rose from 2% at 
the start of 1966 to 4.4% on Richard Nixon's inauguration in January 1969, reached a trough of 2.8% 
in August 1972, roared to 10.9% in November 1974 with the Oil Crisis, declined to 4.5% in December 
1976, and then came roaring back to a peak of 12.8% in March 1980. The Federal Reserve wished and 
washed. Arthur Burns, Fed Chair from 1970 to 1978, was
too interested in having a strong economy while his friend and patron Richard Nixon ran for 
reelection in 1972, and did not believe that Congress would let him keep interest rates high enough 
for long enough to cure inflation by monetary policy. G. William Miller, Fed Chair over 1978-9, was 
out of his depth. And Paul Volcker raised interest rates to a peak of 16.9% in December of 1980, 
and did not lower them below 10% until August of 1982.

Which of these is our current situation most like? What does macroeconomic theory tell us?

Well, macroeconomic theory tells us nothing. Macroeconomic theory is a historical analogy dressed 
up in a leotard, a tutu, and pointe shoes. There are some macroeconomistsa€”Paul Krugman comes to 
minda€”who are able to successfully use macroeconomic theories as intuition pumps. But for the rest 
of us they are, basically, nothing but boxes into which we can file historical analogies.

The thing that gives us hope that the second and third episodes, 1947 and 1951, are relevant is 
that long-term inflation expectations implicit in the bond market are still trading at their normal 
"in the long run bet that inflation will be about 2.5% range". One thing to fear is that this is 
like 1920a€”that the inflation rate would have passed on its own, but the Federal Reserve is in the 
process of tightening too much right now. The second thing to fear is that this is
indeed like the 1970s, and that the important thing is to scotch any expectations of an 
inflationary spiral before they are even formed.

It is the call of Jay Powell and his committee. Most of the time I think it would be great fun to 
be on the FOMC. But not today.
Share

AJs:

Plutarch, at least, thought that Sparta exercised remarkable reach with what seemed to hima€”and to 
mea€”to be much more the appearance than the reality of overwhelming force:

Plutarch: Life of Lycurgus of Sparta: "So, one might say, with no more than a single skytale and a 
thin cloak, Sparta ruled Greece with the willing consent of its inhabitants, dissolving unjust 
power blocks and overthrowing tyrannies in various states, mediating in wars, putting an end to 
civil strifea€”and managing to do all of this often without any military intervention at all, but 
by sending a solitary envoya€!
LINK: chttps ://www .google .com/books/edition/Greek Lives/TCFL16f JDI8C>

The writer of the story a€’’Elizabeth Weila€”and all of the editors of New York magazine, and of 
Vox Media, appear to have a major we-are-HUGE-patriarchy-loving-assholes problem:

Scott Lemieux: a€ceCancel Culturea€d& Patriarchal Entitlement: a€~Why was the primary subject of 
the story a€oecancelleda€n? Well: a€oeThen, in the middle of last summer, Diego went to a party. He 
got drunk and a€” Diego really fucked up here: Everybody, including Diego, agrees on that, so 
please consider setting aside judgment for a moment a€” showed a nude of his beautiful girlfriend 
to a few kids there.a€Da€!
Particularly in a context in which girls are implicitly and directly pressured to supply them, 
strong norms against nonconsensually sharing private nudes are a superb idea. One of the best 
reasons for someone to suffer a hit to their social status, in fact. And thata€™ s all that happens 
herea€!. My takeaway would be a€oeita€™ s encouraging that the nonconsensual sharing of nudes led 
to the ostracism of the guy who shared them rather
than   the young woman whose privacy was violateda€D rather than the umpteenth CANCEL CULTURE 
thumb-sucker. But as cancel culture, again, I have no idea what the story is supposed to be herea€!

LINK: <https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2Q22/Q6/cancel-culture-and-patriarchal-entitlement>

I cannot stress the last of these enough: your articlea€™s life does only begin at publication!

Chris Blattman: a€™Economics has a hidden curriculum for how to succeed (plus how to help others 
succeed). Marc F. Bellemarea€™ s new book pulls back the curtain. A thread on some of my favorite 
advice and insights from the book. Every opportunity to write is an opportunities to practice 
writing wella€!. One of the best things you can do for your career, service-wise, is to help 
organize your institution^™ s seminar seriesa€!.
Some of the best service is to the professional. Advising students is never a burdena€!. Your 
articlea€™ s life begins at publication! Once your article is published, publicize it online, 
through op-eds, or media. Thata€™ s how you shape the world, and also how you get citations. Sit on 
everything you write for a day, at leasta€!

LINK:

Chris Blattman @cblatts

Like an rofession, economics has a hidden curriculuma€”for how to succeed (plus how to help others 
succeed). @marcfbellemare's new book pulls back the curtain. A thread on some of my favorite advice 
and insights from the book. mitpress.mit.edu/books/doing-eca€!


4:07 PM r™ Jun 22,2022

529Likes 116Retweets

Yes, much of the time our conscious wetware module that could actually pass the Turing Test is 
simply alone for the ride in a body it is doing different things for its own reasons. Yes, often 
the pattern-matching answer is the one we wanta€”if the pattern-matching algorithm is sufficiently 
sophisticated. But I think the hyper pragmatist turn that Matt takes here is ultimately going to be 
more confusing than helpful. Yes, there is a sense in which we are all simply
Chinese-room look-up tables. But, as somebody-or-other once said, if we are Chinese rooms, then our 
rooms are each the size of the planet earth and operated by 100,000 robots moving at light speed. 
Sufficient differences in the quantity of information processed has a qualitya€”or is that a 
^waZta?a€”all its own.

Matt Yglesias: Wea€™ re Asking the Wrong Question About AI Sentience: a€~I think the real question 
isna€™ t whether LaMDAis sentient (clearly no) but whether you have any firm basis for the belief 
that you are sentient and not just a really good pattern-matching machinea€!. For a layperson, 
adopting an intentional stance vis-a-vis computers is often pretty productive, even when the system 
in question is relatively
unsophisticated^!. The more sophisticated the computer system, the wider the range of users who may 
find it helpful to adopt an intentional stance at least some of the timea€!. On the flip side, as 
we learn more about neurology and biochemistry, we have a wider range of circumstances in which it 
can be helpful to analyze human beings as physical systems, adopting a non-intentional stance and 
attributing behavior to hormonal
fluctuations, caffeine consumption, serotonin levels or what have youa€!

LINK:


Slow Boring

We're asking the wrong question about AI sentience

a€oeThe real question,a€D B.F. Skinner once wrote, a€oeis not whether machines think but whether 
men do. The mystery which surrounds a thinking machine already surrounds a thinking man.a€D That 
line has been reverberating in my head ever since the sort of wacky story of Google engineera€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 116 likes A- 155 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

I am sorry, but if there is one thing that crypto tokensa€”supposed to a€oealign network 
participants to work together toward a common goala€”the growth of the network and the appreciation 
of the token. This fixes the core problem of centralized networks, where the value is accumulated 
by one company, and the company ends up fighting its own users and partnersa€Da€”do not do is 
a€oealign (past, present, and future) network participants to work
togethera€D. Instead, we see all of the defects of multi-level marketing scheme raised to an 
exponential power, and none of the useful food-storage or skin-care products:

Chris Dixon: Why Web3 Matters'. a€~Web3a€! combines the decentralized, community-governed ethos of 
webl with the advanced, modern functionality of web2a€! the internet owned by the builders and 
users, orchestrated with tokensa€!. Centralized platformsa€! when they hit the top of the S-curve, 
their relationships with network participants change from positive-sum to zero-suma€!. The 
transition from cooperation to competition
feels like a bait-and-switcha€!. In web3, ownership and control is decentralized. Users and 
builders can own pieces of internet services by owning tokens, both non-fungible (NFTs) and 
fungiblea€!. Blockchains are special computers that anyone can access but no one ownsa€!. Tokens 
align network participants to work together toward a common goala€”the growth of the network and 
the appreciation of the token. This fixes the core
problem of centralized networks, where the value is accumulated by one company, and the company 
ends up fighting its own users and partners. Before web3, users and builders had to choose between 
the limited functionality of webl or the corporate, centralized model of web2. Web3 offers a new 
way that combines the best aspects of the previous eras. Ita€™ s very early in this movement and a 
great time to get involveda€!

LINK: <https://future .com/why-web3-matters/>

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription


snon dims one* aiRTio


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Subscribe now

