This is the DeLongTODAY Briefing.
Subscribe now


I am Brad DeLong, an economics professor at the University of California at Berkeley, and a 
sometime Deputy Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury. This is the weekly DeLongToday briefing. 
Here I hold forth here on the Leigh Bureaua€™ s vimeo platform on my guesses as to what I think you 
most need to know about what our economy is doing to us right now.
I promised Wes Neff when he agreed to provide the infrastructure for this that I and my briefings 
would be: lively, interesting, curious, thoughtful, and relatively brief.

Relatively.

I promised I would provide briefings on a mix of: forecasting, politics, macroeconomic analysis, 
history, and political economy.
Today is a political economy briefing.

Share

But first, Friday morning saw a very good employment report.


FRED

8,000

All Employees, Total Nonfarm

4,000


0

-4,000

-8,000

-12,000

-16,000

-20,000

-24,000

Jan 2020          Mar 2020          May 2020          Jul 2020           Sep 2020          Nov 2020 
         Jan 2021          Mar 2021

FRED • All Employees, Total Nonfarm

5,000

4,000


-1,000

May 2020 Jun 2020 Jul 2020 Aug 2020 Sep 2020 Oct 2020 Nov 2020 Dec 2020 Jan 2021 Feb 2021 Mar 2021

Six more months of this, and I will start to think that maybe Larry Summers and Olivier Blanchard 
have a point with their fears that perhaps Bidena€™ s $1.9 trillion Rescue plan was a bit too large 
to be optimal.

The U.S. labor market added 916,000 jobs, seasonally adjusted, comparing March to February. The 
prime-age employment-to-population rate increased by 0.3 percentage points and is now back to where 
it was in 2014, halfway through the anemic post-2009 recovery. Inadequate. But no longer totally 
disastrous. Employment growth in March was led by leisure and hospitality and education services, 
as in-person activity was able to resumea€’’alongside a
notable increase in construction. Wages fella€”but that is a good sign: it means that low-wage 
employment is coming back as herd immunity approaches. Perhaps, if anything, it is coming back too 
fasta€’’reopen prematurely, and we could have another excessive and avoidable 100,000 deaths from 
the COVID-19 plague.

Employment rotes for U.S. prime age-workers have not recovered after
falling sharply since the onset of the coronavirus recession

Share of 25- to 54-year-olds who are employed, 2000-2021. Recessions are shaded.

82.5%

80.0


72.5

70.0

67.5

2007      2009       2011      2013      2015       2017      2019      2021

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, data series LNS12300060

Equitable Growth

It had been a Latin-cession to a remarkable degree: Latin unemployment rose by' 15%-points while 
white unemployment rose by 11%-points at the nadir, but now Latin unemployment is close to back to 
having its a€cenormala€D elevation over whitea€’’things are no worse than they are usually.

Unemployment remains up for everyone, but rates of recovery differ

U.S. unemployment rote by race, 2000-2021. Recessions are shaded.

20%

15

Black

10

I ntinv


January 2019               October 2019                July 2020                  April 2021

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Labor, data series LNS14000003, LNS14000006, 
LNS14000009, and
LNS14032183

Equitable Growth

As I said, six more months of this of favorable employment reports like this, and I will start to 
think that maybe Larry Summers and Olivier Blanchard have a point with their fears that perhaps 
Bidena€™ s $1.9 trillion Rescue plan was a bit too large to be optimal.
But the $1.9 trillion Rescue plan is now law. And now the Biden administration has moved on, to 
a€oejobs"a€”the a€ce American Jobs Plan". It is infrastructure and corporate taxesa€”what I call 
a€ceRebuilda€D, in an attempt to find alliteration here.

What does it hope to do?

Let me focus first on the corporate tax parta€”on the international corporate tax parta€”since that 
is the area on which my views are somewhat better developed. Biden calls it the a€oeMade in America 
Tax Plana€d. And, yes, as a card-carrying neoliberal globalist, the a€oemade in Americaa€D part 
makes me wince. Economic nationalism, in my experience, turns what ought to be a 
win-win-countries-cooperate discussion frame into a win-lose-countries-
struggle-for-position discussion frame which winds up with lose-lose policies.

Yet when I look at the substance, it looks good. The Biden administration says that a€cethe 
President is proposing to fix the corporate tax code so that it incentivizes job creation and 
investment here in the United StatesaCD. I would say that a€oethe President is proposing to fix the 
corporate tax code to remove provisions that destructively and improperly incentivize job creation 
and investment outside the United Statesa€Da€”because that is what it does. And I
have no quarrel whatsoever with the other two objectives as they are stated:

a€oestops unfair and wasteful profit shifting to tax havens, and ensures that large corporations 
are paying their fair sharea€la€D

Let me back up to 2017. The 2017 Ryan-McConnell-Trump corporate tax cut reduced the average rate 
that corporations paid in half from 16 percent to less than 8 percent in 2018. It created 
remarkably powerfula€”and stupida€”new incentives to shift profits and jobs overseas. The economist 
shills shilling for it claimed that it would ignite another boom like the 1990sa€’’generate as 
large a shift in American spending away from current consumption and toward
investment for the future as we saw had been unleashed by and came in the wake of the Clinton 1993 
fiscal-rebalancing Reconciliation bill.

It did not deliver.

To first order, it had zero effect on investment in America. Before the COVID-19 plague hit, the 
share of national income devoted to investment spending had already begun to fall. To the extent 
that companies subject to American taxes responded to Ryan-McConnell-Trump by increasing 
investment, they did so overseas. At home, they did share buybacks and acquisitions. Nearly 
exclusively.


0.18

0.15

0.14

0.13

0.12

Potential Gross Domestic Product/1.06

Clinton-Mitchell-
Foley delivered
the investment
boom its
advocates had
hoped   for

Ryan did not
deliver what its
shills promised

0.10

0.09

2000                 2010               2020


And yet the Republican shill economistsa€”from George Shultz to John Taylor, from Mike Boskin to 
Kevin Hassett, from Casey Mulligan and John Cochrane to Jagdish Bhagwati and Douglas 
Holtz-Eakina€”all trumpeted that the bill would boost investment in America and economic growth by 
enough for the tax cut to a€oepay for itselfa€D: an extra 0.5%-points of GDP growth per year, and 
not a higher but a lower federal debt. And others who werena€™t
willing to go that fara€”the Robert Barros and the Greg Mankiwsa€”were still enthusiastic 
cheerleaders for how it would raise growth and raise after-tax wages because the growth effects 
would outweigh the adverse redistribution effects.

Of course, none of this happened.
It was never going to happen.

And now Joe Biden and his administration are trying to fix it. And they are trying to fix it in a 
smart way: not just to roll things back to how they were in 2016, but to make important tweaks to 
significantly improve the workings of the corporate tax code and system.

Biden wants to: (1) set the corporate tax rate at a moderate 28%, (2) impose a country-by-country 
minimum tax on U.S. corporations to 21 percent to capture profits in tax havens, (3) eliminate 
allowance of zero taxes on the first 10 percent of return for investments in foreign countries.
More important, and in fact the key part of Bidena€™ s proposal, is international tax 
harmonization. Cooperate with German and Japanese proposals that have already been made for 
international minimum corporate tax harmonization through multilateral negotiations.

And if a country is an international scofflawa€”if it refuses to play by the new multilateral rules 
of the game? Then any payments to corporations headquartered in such tax-haven counties will be 
denied deductions: they will be deemed as profit, and taxed as profits.
And,                                                                                                
                     of course, Biden wants to fund the corporate tax division of the IRS at a 
level so that it can do its job.

Will this all work? This all will work if the Biden administration is, in fact, able to actually 
find the Holy Grail in this issue area: able to achieve multilateral international minimum tax 
harmonization. The stars appear to be aligned: the other major industrial powersa€’’Germany, Japan, 
and so fortha€”are tired of being played for saps. The tax-haven countriesa€’’Ireland, Luxembourg, 
et ceteraa€”have no bargaining power, and depend on complaisant U.S.
legislators blocking legal provisions to enable enforcement. The only loose cannons on the deck are 
Boris Johnsona€™ s Britain, and the ability of tax-haven countries and plutocrats who benefit from 
them to block the international-negotiation process. We will see how it will work. But this time 
the stars do appear aligned: this time Democratic legislators appear to understand that it is 
important for their long-run ability to govern that Biden enact good policies
that actually work, and that they be seen to support Biden.

The problem is that Biden needs them alla€”all the Democrats. If any of them decide that they would 
rather satisfy plutocrat or tax-haven lobbyists at the expense of good policy and at the cost of 
doing significant damage to the Democratic Partya€™ s reputation as an effective party for 
responsible governance, then the Made-in-America tax act fails. It fails unless there are 
Republican legislators more interested in good policy and in reducing the deficit than in
confronting Biden with a united anti-every-tax Republican Party. As for that getting of Republican 
votes, good luck.

In my view, the best way to get Republican votes is not to need thema€”to have a clear road to 
enactment that does not require them. Recall Senator Harry Reida€™ s description of Senator Susan 
Collins: a€oealways there for a vote when you do not need hersa€D.
The stars on the Made-in-America tax act are aligned, but not very aligned. It would be a very good 
thing for America, and for the world, if it were to pass. I put its chances at no more than 50%.

Now let me turn to the a€ceinfrastructurea€D parta€!

On his SubStack weblog Friday morning, Matthew Yglesias wrote that 
<https://www.slowboring.eom/p/ioe-bidens-next-big-plan>:

I would have quietly sent an emissary to Roger Wicker and Sam Graves, the ranking members on the 
Senate and House transportation committees, and told them that Biden is really eager to get a 
bipartisan infrastructure bill done. He has a few specific priorities related to clean electricity 
and clean water that hea€™ d like to get in there, buta€! [since] a bipartisan infrastructure bill 
is a win for Bidena€! if he wants that win he needs to
defer to Republicans on the substancea€!. [Bidena€™ s] a€oeraise taxes on the rich [via their 
ownership of corporations] to fund infrastructure spendinga€Da€! means your infrastructure bill has 
to be highly partisan. And I think a highly partisan infrastructure bill is tougha€l

The big problem I see with Matt Yglesiasa€™ s alternative is that it was what Obama proposed for 
ObamaCare, the ACA: since a bipartisan universal healthcare bill was a big win for Obama, he 
decided that he needed to give a lot of ground on the substance, and so wound up enactinga€! 
nationwide RomneyCare. And he wound up enacting nationwide RomneyCare with 100% Democratic votes. 
And then partisan Republicans on the Supreme Court and in the
Congress kneecapped it. And they were only kept from killing it when they realized that it had been 
in place long enough that they would then own the destructive substantive policy fallout.

What is different now than in 2009-10 that would make the Matt Yglesias strategy work for 
infrastructure now when it did not work for healthcare then? Anybody? Anybody? Bueller?

Panin RAAIYK Rinth


Certificates and the Birth of
GOP Paranoia

How America’s center-right party started to lose its mind, as told by the man who tried to keep it 
sane.

Now you can make the argument that this time things are different. After all, also Friday morning, 
former Speaker of the House John Boehner wrote:

I also had not anticipateda€! the extent to which this new crowd hateda€”and I mean hateda€’’Barack 
Obamaa€!. When I was first elected to Congressa€! there was no Drudge Report. No Breitbart. No 
kooks on YouTube spreading dangerous nonsense like they did every day about Obama. a€oeHea€™ s a 
secret Muslim!a€D a€oeHe hates America!a€D a€oeHea€™ s a communist!a€D And of course the truly 
nutty business about his
birth certificate. People really had been brainwashed into believing Barack Obama was some 
Manchurian candidate planning to betray America. Mark Levin was the first to go on the radio and 
spout off this crazy nonsense. It got him ratings, so eventually he dragged Hannity and Rush to 
Looneyville along with him. My longtime friend Roger Ailes, the head of Fox News, was not immune to 
this. He got swept into the conspiracies and
the paranoia and became an almost unrecognizable figurea€!. Murdocha€! cared about ratings and the 
bottom linea€! wanted to make sure he was ahead of any political or policy developmentsa€!. If he 
entertained any of the kooky conspiracy theoriesa€! tak[ing] over his network, he kept it a secret 
from me. But he clearly didna€™ t have a problem with them if they helped ratingsa€!

Of course, Boehner wants to say a€oeboth sidesa€D:

Obama didna€™ t help himself much either. He could come off as lecturing and haughty. He still 
wasna€™ t making Republican outreach a prioritya€!

But he cannot maintain ita€”after all, Obama outreached to Boehner just fine. As Boehner admits:

On the other handa€”how do you find common cause with people who think you are a secret Kenyan 
Muslim traitor to America?a€!

Are things different now than they were then? The argument that they are is that things are 
different because Joe Biden is a white man and not a Black man, and that Obamaa€™ s failure to 
elicit Republican cooperation was overwhelmingly because of Republican racist-adjacency. The 
arguments against are (a) it needs to be a€oeoverwhelminglya€n and not a€oesubstantiallya€n, (b) 
that ceding substantive policy ground to the Republicans is making bad,
destructive policies, and (c) that Fox News is working as hard as possible to Obamaize Biden. Look 
at its front page as of the taping:


Exclusive Clips                HISTORIC CRISIS

Pope Francis


delivers remarks at
Good Friday service

U.S. projects number of unaccompanied migrant kids crossing
border in 2021 will double 2019 surge


AMERICA'S
NEWSROOM

Tucker talks Biden's
infrastructure plan,
church membership
ahead of Easter

San Diego teachers instruct migrant kids with higher COVID
rates than own students stuck learning virtually

Here's how a Mexican cartel smuggled 1100 lbs of meth

Cartel 'gatekeepers' controlling all illegal activity on border
amid migrant crisis: Former US marshal

Migrants being released into US without court dates

POX NATION        Join Now


AMERICA'S
NEWSROOM

Gingrich on H.R. 1,
corporate criticism
on GOP election
laws: Ifs all 'corrupt*

FOX & FRIENDS

Gen. Keane says it
will be strategic

tucker
carlson

today

ADDICTED TO JUNK

r

NEW EPISODE


failure* if Biden
admin returns to old
Iran deal

EXCLUSIVE: Picture of girls abandoned by
smugglers, rescued by Border Patrol

Hunter Biden suggests laptop purported to
show foreign deals came from Russia

America tackles a pandemic but is it food
that's killing you? One man says the food
industry is putting out products that are
more addictive than drugs.

Hunter Biden. Democrats trying to steal elections. Crisis at the border. Democrats surrendering to 
Iranian Muslim terrorists. Pope Francis celebrates Good Friday. Tucker Carlson says that tobacco is 
an effective anti-obesity medication. And below the fold Sean Hannity claiming that Joe Biden is 
a€oewaging a€~all-out assaulta€™ on American principlesa€la€D
As Boehner says of the Republican members of Congress who entered in the 2010s:

Incrementalism? Compromise? That wasna€™ t their thing. A lot of them wanted to blow up Washington. 
Thata€™ s why they thought they were elected. Some of them, well, you could tell they werena€™ t 
paying attention because they were just thinking of how to fundraise off of outrage or how they 
could get on Hannity that nighta€l. They didna€™ t really want legislative victories. They wanted 
wedge issues and conspiracies and
crusadesa€l. [A] power base thanks to fawning right-wing media and outrage-driven fundraising cash. 
Anda€l a new head lunatica€l. There is nothing more dangerous than a reckless asshole who thinks he 
is smarter than everyone else. Ladies and gentlemen, meet Senator Ted Cruza€l

Without a very different set of Republican legislators in the Congressa€”ones who work for their 
constituents rather than for Fox News and their fundraising firmsa€”no, things have to be done via 
Reconciliationa€”or under threat of Reconciliation^’’and via the Democratic caucus alonea€”or under 
threat of doing it via the Democratic caucus alone.
So what is the problem that Infrastructure Week wants to solve? This:


FRED

0.075

Gross government investment/Gross Domestic
Product


0.070

0.065

0.060

0.055

CD

0.050

CD

0.045


0.040

0.035

0.030

1960         1970         1980         1990        2000         2010       2020

With the end of the space race to the moon and of the massive spurt of interstate highway 
construction, plus a few other factors, U.S. government investment in America fell from its 
Eisenhower-Kennedy-Johnson norm of 6.5% of national income down to 4.75%, where it remained until 
the early 1990s. Then Clintonian austeritya€”the belief in the early 1990s that the U.S. had 
reached the edge of its debt capacity, and needed to stop borrowings’’pushed U.S.
governments’’all levelsS”down to 4% of national income. Back in 1993 I would have told you that 
this austerity was certainly the right thing to do. Now I will only say that it was probably the 
right thing to doS”for the time. And then after 2010 ObamaS™ s searching for a Soegrand bargainSD 
on entitlements with the Republicans opened the way to a further downward salami slice of public 
investment in America, down to only 3.5% of national

income.

This fifty-year policy move away from investment has been a horrible mistake.


FRED^

0.22

— Gross Private Domestic Investment/Gross
Domestic Product

0.21

0.20


o

o


0.12

1960         1970         1980         1990         2000         2010       2020

This mistake was mitigated by the fact that, for the most part, private investment in America has 
remained healthy. Yes, the Reagan deficits switched savings from funding investment in America to 
buying government bonds and so putting substantial downward pressure on private investment, but 
Clinton reversed that and boosted private investment spending by 5%-points of national income back 
to healthy levels. But, unfortunately, the failure to prioritize full
employment generated the anemic recovery from the Great Recession which has left the private 
nominal investment share of national income once again well-short of historical norms. If we are 
continuing to invest at a healthy rate, it is not because of the flow of spending into investment 
but because of reduced prices of products in the investment-goods sector.

Biden wants to boost investment in America back not to its 1950s and 1960s share but at least to 
its 1970s and 1980s share. Note that while Biden says that a€oepublic domestic investment as a 
share of the economy has fallen by more than 40 percent since the 1960a€D, he does not promise to 
boost it all the way back. All he says is that the a€oeAmerican Jobs Plan will invest in America in 
a way we have not invested since we built the interstate highways and
won the Space Racea€D to the moona€”note the since, not a€ceasa€D but a€cesincea€D.

Nevertheless, this strikes me as a highly good thing. Fix highways, rebuild bridges, upgrade ports, 
airports and transit systems. Deliver clean drinking water, a renewed electric grid, and high-speed 
broadband to all Americans. Build, preserve, and retrofit more than two million homes and 
commercial buildings, modernize our nationa€™ s schools and child care facilities, and upgrade 
veteransa€™ hospitals and federal buildings. Solidify the infrastructure of our
care economy by creating jobs and raising wages and benefits for essential home care workers. 
Revitalize manufacturing, secure U.S. supply chains, invest in R&D, and train Americans for the 
jobs of the futurea€”$2 trillion dollars over 8 years, 1%-point of national income switched to 
public investment, that is not nearly enough to attain all of these goals. It will, however, be a 
start. Turning a supertanker is a lengthy process. And this infrastructure deficit has
been built up over two generations now.

Perhaps the most interesting thing here is the reaction of the Republican Party to Bidena€™ s 
laundry list here. Rising a€cestara€Ua€”in quotation marksa€”Republican Governor Kristi Noem: a€oel 
was shocked by how much doesna€™t go into infrastructure. It goes into research and development, it 
goes into housing and pipes and different initiatives, green energy, and ita€™ s not really an 
honest conversation wea€™re having about what this proposal
isa€!a€D

As the very sharp Greg Sargent writes:

Thea€l distinction Noem drewa€l between a€oeinfrastructurea€n on one hand, and a€oeresearch and 
developmenta€D and a€oegreen energya€Da€l. Republican lawmakers have increasingly equated 
infrastructure with new highways that connect rural communities and promote exurban sprawla€l. They 
see most of what Biden proposed as a€oeDemocratic infrastructurea€Da€!

Things used to be very different. After the launch of Sputnik, for example, for the federal 
government to spend whatever it took to produce universities and scientists and high technology 
became priority No. 1 of the Republican Party. Education and engineering in high technology became 
the key piece of lacking American infrastructure that the Eisenhower administration wanted to 
create. IT was essential to America achieving its national purposes

Look inside i Concrete Economics: The Hamilton


STEPHEN S. COHEN

J. BRADFORD l)i:L()NG

I Economics

The Hamilton I Approach to

Approach to Economic Growth and
Policy Kindle Edition

by Stephen S. Cohen v (Author), J. Bradford DeLong (Author)

Format: Kindle Edition

* * * * 'if v 54 ratings

> See all formats and editions

Economic I Growth I and Policy                  Kindle                 Hardcover

7 R7 crime


Look inside 4,

STEPHEN S. COHEN

J. BBADEORD DKLONG

concrete economics: i ne Hamilton

Approach to Economic Growth and
Policy Kindle Edition

by Stephen S. Cohen v (Author), J. Bradford DeLong (Author)

Format: Kindle Edition

* * * * 'if v 54 ratings

> See all formats and editions


Kindle

$15.39

Read with Our Free App

Hardcover

$17.87 vprime

25 Used from $2.75
14 New from $10.68

Thata€™ s from my book, written five years ago with Stephen S. Cohen, Concrete Economics: The 
Hamilton Approach to Economic Policy. It was a plea for pragmatism rather than ideology in 
political economya€”and a sotto voce word of advice to Republicans to return their party to what it 
was before Goldwater cursed them and enslaved them to the demons of racism. Back then they thought 
the point was to make the American economy stronger, more
dynamic, and more rapidly changing, because we are a frontier people and today a€™ s frontiers are 
technological. And, yes, there would be some big winners, but (a) that was a positive point and (b) 
in the long run nearly everyone would be a winner.

Alas, nowa€”and more and more with each passing day, at least if you listen to John Boehner or with 
the Lincoln Project peoplea€”the Republican Party has become a party of plutocrats and white 
racist-adjacents who greatly fear change and dynamism, because for the plutocratsa€’’especially the 
heirs and heiressesa€’’growth, dynamism, and change are their enemies because it is their wealth 
that dynamic Schumpeterian capitalism creatively destroys, and
because for the racist-adjacents growth, dynamism, and change brings the possibility that people 
who look different will not bow heads but instead will look them in the eye.

So, once again, what ought to be an easy bipartisan lifta€’’restore Americaa€™ s public investment 
to boost productivity growth and lift all votesa€”will be a heavy lift that will have to be 
accomplished by the Democratic legislative caucuses alone, or possibly it will gain bipartisan 
support only after the Democrats demonstrate that they could do it alone.
And so, once again, I give it chances of only 50-50.

I wish I were more confident that America is getting back on track than I can convince myself that 
it is.
This is the DeLongTODAY Bradcast Briefing. Ia€™m Brad DeLong. Thank you very much for watching.
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


And so, once again, I give it chances of only 50-50.

I wish I were more confident that America is getting back on track than I can convince myself that 
it is.
This is the DeLongTODAY Bradcast Briefing. Ia€™m Brad DeLong. Thank you very much for watching.
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

