Subscribe now

SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. BRADFORD DELONG

PREORDER NOW • ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

<https: //bit .ly/3pP3Krk>

AJ 4,5, & 6: Histories of centuries, long or short, are by definition grand narrative histories, 
built to tell the authora€™ s desired story. Setting these years, 1914a€“1991, apart as a century 
makes it easy for Hobsbawm to tell the story he wants to tell. But it does so at the price of 
missing much of what I strongly believe is the bigger, more important story. It is the one that 
runs from about 1870 to 2010, from humanitya€™ s success in unlocking the gate that had
kept it in dire poverty up to its failure to maintain the pace of the rapid upward trajectory in 
human wealth that the earlier success had set in motion.[4] [k]

What follows is my grand narrative, my version of what is the most important story to tell of the 
history of the twentieth century.[1] It is a primarily economic story. It naturally starts in 
1870.1 believe it naturally stops in 2010.[m]

As the genius Dr. Jekyll-like Austro-English-Chicagoan moral philosopher Friedrich August von Hayek 
observed, the market economy crowdsourcesa€’’incentivizes and coordinates at the 
grassrootsa€’’solutions to the problems it sets.[5] Back before 1870 humanity did not have the 
technologies or the organizations to allow a market economy to pose the problem of how to make the 
economy rich enough. So even though humanity had had market economies,
or at least market sectors within its economies, for thousands of years before 1870, all that 
markets could do was to find customers for producers of luxuries and conveniences, and make the 
lives of the rich luxurious and of the middle class convenient and comfortable.

Share

Printed Endnotes:

[4] Also seeing a a€celonga€D twentieth century as most useful is the keen-sighted and learned Ivan 
Berend, in An Economic History of Twentieth-Century Europe: Economic Regimes from Laissez-Faire to 
Globalization, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.

[5] Friedrich A. von Hayek, a€oeThe Use of Knowledge in Society,a€D American Economic Review 35, 
no. 4 (September 1945): 519a€“530.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Longer Notes:

[k] Ivan Berend makes his choices for essentially the same reasons that I do. He, however, confines 
his book to Europe, and both gains and loses thereby.

Giovanni Arrighi (1994): The Long Twentieth Century (New York: Verso) 
chttps://archive.org/details/longtwentiethcen00arri>, on yet another hand, pushes the origins of 
the long twentieth century back to 1500 and medieval Genoa. There are 324 pages before his 
a€ceEpiloguea€D begins, yet it is only on page 239 that we get to:

The strategies and structures of capital accumulation that have shaped our times first came into 
existence in the last quarter of the nineteenth century. They originated in a new internalization 
of costs within the economizing logic of capitalist enterprise. Just as the Dutch regime had taken 
world-scale processes of capital accumulation one step further than the Genoese by internalizing 
protection costs, and the British regime had taken them
a step further than the Dutch by internalizing production costs, so the US regime has done the same 
in relation to the British by internalizing transaction costsa€!

Thus I cannot buy into his analysis because he sees the history of the long twentieth century as 
largely an intensified repeat of earlier cycles of internal capitalist development led by a 
hegemonic.’’Genoese, Dutch, British, and now American. That is the grand narrative he tells, 
engagingly and convincingly. But it is definitely not mine, and I definitely do not think it is the 
most important thread.

[1]    There are many other stories that others tell. Let me here simply make note of seven other 
books:

•  Thnmas Pikpffv Crmital in the 2 6’/’ntz7r\?a^”hoth broader lookincr hark tn 1600 and narrower 
lookina onlv at the nolitira! eeonomv of ineoiialitva^I


•  Edward Ross Dickinson, The World in the Long Twentieth Century: An Interpretive Historya€”a much 
more a€ceecologicala€D and less societal takea€!

•  Robert Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil 
War^’GS onlya€!

• John Lukacs, A Short History of the 20th Century^' not nearly enough on the economicsa€!

•  Robert Allen, Global Economic History: A Very Short Introduction^"goes much further back, and 
gives the political-economy essentials of economic history relatively short shrifta€!

•  Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation^"of course; written only halfway through the long 20th 
century, but got a good deal of the essentials righta€!

•  Paul Johnson, Modern Times: From the Twenties to the Nineties^"covers only the short 20th 
century, and imposes a neoconservative frame that is grossly inadequate to the taska€!

[ml Please let me delay the discussion of 2010 as the end date to much later on.
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

