Subscribe now

CONDITION: WEIRD:

My sometime student Glory Liu faces an unhinged and incompetent Wall Street Journal review of her 
new book Adam Smitha€™ s America^.

Glory Liu @miss_glory -11m

Lololol omg WSJ review of my book is unhiiiiiiinged

wsj.com/articles/adam-...


pieilllbUd 1U1 VVUcUlIl Ui IMdllUllb clIlU bllUVVb

us that the latter, more famous book doesn’t
promote atomistic capitalism and

unregulated markets at all. In this view, Smith
in “Wealth of Nations” defended capitalism,
yes, but with a lot of purportedly “moral”
regulation. The academic consensus somehow
perfectly matches the center-left consensus-
amazing!

There is one small glitch: “The Theory of
Moral Sentiments” isn’t very good. It is not a

she quickly backs away from that suggestion
by saying she is “less interested in providing a
definitive account of what Smith originally
intended                                    or meant than... in elucidating the
demands that his readers have brought to his
works and how that colorecWhe lessons they
have extracted from them.” I am not sure

▼ a ▼ !» 4- 4-l»z>4- wxnnxAn              4* T /VA41AAV A.AW* i 4- 4*1^ z>

UI^UIUVIUO                     UUl            HUW VWH 111L

argument over Adam Smith. No number of

academic monographs and journal articles
will persuade the ordinary reader that he


great work of philosophy. It’s mostly

unreadable, to my mind. What’s more
important, its thesis lacks cogency. Sympathy
as  Smith defines it is far too weak a

doesn’t understand the defense of free
enterprise and free trade in “Wealth of
Nations”    until he has first made his way
through   “The Theory of Moral Sentiments.” If

Share

FOCUS: Contra Vince Reinhart: The Fed Has Done Very Well Indeed!

I disagree pretty strongly with the extremely smart Vince Reinhart here. He says that the past few 
years have revealed a€cecracksa€D in how the Federal Reserve makes monetary policy.
But I cannot see any cracks: to date, to me, monetary policy since the plague began has been 
well-nigh perfect.

Vince Reinhart thinks that the Fed moved a€celatea€D and moved a€cefasta€C, as if those are bad 
things. But in the situation it was optimal to be late, and good to then move fast. Indeed, if I 
had my druthers and had been running things, I would have moved later and then faster. The optimal 
monetary policy strategy coming out of the plague was to:

1. delay raising interest rates until inflation was high enough to grease a rapid reopening 
recovery of and shift in economic activity into its new post-plague full-employment 
sectoral-balance configuration.

2. delay raising interest rates until there was full confidence that raising interest rates would 
not send the economy back to the secular-stagnation zero-lower-bound interest rate configuration.

3. then move rapidly to raise interest rates so that expectations of inflation did not become 
established and entrenched.

4. taking care not to overdue interest rate increases and so generate not a sfot landing but 
stagflation, quite possibly ending in a return to the secular-stagnation zero-lower-bound interest 
rate configuration.
It looks to me like the Fed has succeeded 100% at (l)-(3). (4) still hangs in teh balance, but so 
far so good.

So what re the cracks? What is there to complain about?:

Vince Reinhart: Why Inflation Took Off in 2022a€”and What Happens Next: The year was a stress test 
of the Feda€™ s new framework, and the cracks were apparent. a€~The Fed only garners such attention 
making or correcting a major mistakea€”and there was a bit of both this year. Inflation was allowed 
to hit a 40-year high. Monetary policy had to pivot forcefully to raise the target range for the 
overnight rate to 4.25% to 4.5% in
2022, including four 0.75-percentage-point installments. True, there were two outside, generational 
shocksa€”a global pandemic and a large-scale land war in Europe. However, those shocks were also a 
stress test of the Feda€™ s new monetary framework. This test revealed some significant cracksa€!. 
With inflationa€! at a 40-year high this spring, Mr. Powell and his Fed colleagues retired the word 
a€cetransitorya€Da€!. The Feda€!
[brought] the overnight rate to a target range of 4.25% to 4.5% at Wednesdaya€™ s meetinga€L The 
target range still implies a negative interest rate in real terms, even with an optimistic take on 
inflation expectations. A negative real interest rate wona€™ t slow demand growtha€!. The challenge 
here is whether the Fed will be able to defeat inflation completely and regain the confidence of 
the markets. The jury is out...

Vince is very smart, and very knowledgeable, buta€!

(1) The Fed has the confidence of the markets. As of Fridaya€™ s close, the markets are betting 
that from five to ten years in the future the CPI annual inflation rate will be 2.12%a€”and that is 
a PCE chain inflation rate of 1.6%-l .7%, below the Federal Reservea€™ s target:

FRED $$ — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate


1.0

0.5

2013           2014           2015           2016           2017           2018           2019      
     2020           2021           2022

The jury is not out. The Federal Reserve does not have to regain the confidence of the markets. It 
has the confidence of the markets. I cannot see how anyone can say otherwise without a theory 
explaining why the people trading on the markets are not a€oethe marketsa€D. And I do not know what 
such a theory might be.

(2) The target annualized rate of 4.25%-4.5% for overnight money does not a€oeimply a negative 
interest rate in real termsa€D. The 5-year, 10-year, and 20-year inflation-indexed U.S. Treasury 
securities are all hanging up there at positive annual real interest rates of 1.1%-1.5%:

FRED    Market Yield on   U.S. Treasury Securities at    10-Year Constant Maturity, Quoted on an 
Investment Basis, Inflation-Indexed
Market Yield on   U.S. Treasury Securities at    5-Year Constant Maturity, Quoted on an Investment 
Basis, Inflation-Indexed

— Market Yield on    U.S. Treasury Securities at    20-Year Constant Maturity, Quoted on an 
Investment Basis, Inflation-Indexed

Yes, the current overnight rate is less than the current inflation rate. But those sectors of the 
economy in which demand is sensitive to real interest ratesa€’’construction and, via the exchange 
rate, exports and import-competing productsa€”are governed not by any real overnight rate but by 
the real longterm interest rate. The claim that a€oea negative real interest rate wona€™ t slow 
demand growtha€D does not apply, because the relevant interest rate is not
negative.

(3) In fact, the claim that a€oea negative real interest rate wona€™ t slow demand growtha€D does 
not make any sense: a shift from a more negative to a less negative real interest rate would slow 
demand growth. (But, as I said, we dona€™ t have a negative real interest rate in any relevant 
sense.)
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: Matt Yglesias: Thoughts on Ezraa€™s take on Twitter:

Yet more proof that my stealing from William Butler Yeatsa€™ s a€oeThe Second Cominga€D for the 
title of my Slouching Towards Utopia: The Economic History of the Long 20th Century chttp: //bit 
.ly/3pP3Krk> was absolute genius:

Matt Yglesias: Thoughts on Ezraa€™ s take on Twitter: a€~Marie Kennedy: a€oeSpecifically what I 
think is the money line, a€oel think there is a reason that so little has gotten better and so much 
has gotten worse. It is this: The cost of so much connection and information has been the 
deterioration of our capacity for attention and reflection. And it is the quality of our attention 
and reflection that matters most.d€d


Give a gift subscription

ONE IMAGE: Growth or De-Growth?

Sentiment expressed in party manifestos

OECD countries, % of total phrases


1         1       1       1           -           0

— —»----1---- ---- 1---- ---- 1---- ---- 1----'---- 1 ’--------n--------

1961   70    80    90    2000    10     21

Sources: Manifesto Project; The E

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Joachim Element: Monetary policy may have a longer lag than we thought: a€~While most 
forecasters have been underestimating the inflationary pressures in 2022, the Fed may have been 
underestimating the lag with which monetary tightening influences inflation and the economya€!. 
While industrial production declines by about 0.5 percentage points in the 9 to 12 months after a 
rate hike, inflation typically bottoms after two years or latera€!

• Michael Bauer & Eric Swanson: A Reassessment of Monetary Policy Surprises and High-Frequency 
Identification^!

a€0 Ed Luce: The American lefta€™ s chronic Nimby problem: a€~US progressives correctly insist that 
global warming poses the a€oegreatest existential threata€D to humanity. That line should be 
extended to a€cea€%o.a€%o.a€%o.a€%oexcept for our wildly overdone fears of nuclear meltdowna€D, or 
a€cea€%o.a€%o.a€%o.a€%obut not if it damages our property valuesa€D. At some point, Americaa€™ s 
left must choose between having its
cake and eating ita€!

•  Bryce Elder: Herea€™ s a completely normal thing for a $70bn closed-ended unregulated 
quasi-money market fund to say read: a€~a€oe#Tether Addresses FUD Around Secured Loans, Reveals 
Plans to Reduce These to Zero in 2023 chttps://t.co/nZcPr8RiF 1 >a€□. The above is just one part of 
the generalised weirdness across the crypto space following the arrest of its slacker-in-chiefa€!

•  Ajay Rajadhyaksha: Premature pivot prayers: a€~It should be a hop, skip and jump to rate cuts. 
At least, that is what the bond market belie vesa€’’fed funds futures are now pricing in three 
quarter-point cuts next year. Not so fasta€!

• Simon Willison: a€~There is so much great #SpiderVerse behind the scenes content on Twitter if 
you start following some of the artists who created the filma€!
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

A party that feels it has to a€oegrow with Trumpa€D is a very bad and dangerous thing indeed:

Greg Sargent: Is the Liberal Bias of Mainstream Media a Myth?: a€~a€oe Aaron: What is up with the 
American right, right now?a€D Greg Sargent: One thing... is... a genuine countermovement to the 
Republican Party... the national conservatives, the post-liberals.... The post-liberals are really 
trying to... challenge the plutocratic and libertarian bent of the Republican Party.  A decision 
was made by McCarthya€”how conscious? I

dona€™ t knowa€”that there was a certain set of constituencies that the Republican Party absolutely 
needed to hold onto... [who were] Associated with Trumpa€™ s insurrection.... Lindsey Graham... 
provided... the perfect encapsulation.  a€oeLiz Cheney has made a decision that the Republican 
Party cana€™ t grow with Trump. Ia€™ ve made a decision that the Republican Party cana€™ t grow 
without Trump.a€D I think thata€™ s

the fundamental thing that happened with McCarthy, with Graham, with a lot of the institutional 
players who decided that they were going to do everything they could to apologize for, propagandize 
away, minimize and so forth the insurrection, and continue to hang onto these constituencies...

Advertising-supported social media considered very harmful:

Noah Smith: The internet wants to be fragmented: Throwing the whole world into a single room 
together doesn't work. a€~I said aCceYou knowa€ [fifteen years ago, the internet was an escape from 
the real world. Now the real world is an escape from the internet.a€D a€oeTweet that!a€D, Dayv 
said, so I did. That banal observation became most popular tweet of all time, and the quote has now 
been posted ad infinitum on content mills
all over the weba€!. Facebook became an all-conquering corporate behemoth, and Twitter managed to 
stay profitable and secure from competition in spite of being notoriously poorly managed. But 
almost immediately after the great centralization of the 2010s, I started noticing that something 
was wrong with the internet I had come to know and lovea€!. Community moderation works. This was 
the overwhelming lesson of the early
internet. It works because it mirrors the social interaction of real lifea€!. From Twitter, 
however, there seemed to be no exita€!. And the people who ran Twitter on the corporate side had no 
intention of changing this at all.a€! What they really wanted was to keep making money. They 
tinkered at the edges of the platform, but never touched their killer feature, the quote-tweet, 
which Twittera€™ s head of product called a€oethe dunk
mechanism,a€□ Because dunks were the business model a€” if you dona€™ t believe me, you can check 
out the many research papers showing that toxicity and outrage drive Twitter engagement^!

Kinda scary obvious true things like this are up for debate:

Alan Wm. Wolff, Robert Z. Lawrence, & Gary Clyde Hufbauer: Have Trade Agreements Been Bad for 
America?: a€~A false narrative has gone mainstream in America. It claims that trade agreements the 
United States entered into over the last 40 years, perhaps for nearly a century, were a mistake. 
There is no nuance to this narrative.a€! Relatively open markets bring international competition, 
and in all competitions some players
come out ahead and some behind; in extreme cases, the losers suffer serious harma€!. We do not 
think that 13 American presidents, from Franklin Roosevelt to Barack Obama, got it wronga€!. The 
trade agreements that the United States entered into were strongly positive for America and that 
policy approaches taken need to be built on rather than abandoneda€!

This is just plain weird: When you become President of the United States, you take an oath that you 
will faithfully execute the laws. One of the laws is that presidential papers go to the National 
Archives (and then to your Presidential Library) in order to preserve the historical record. As 
near as I can see, Clive Crook is not saying that Trumpshould notbe imprisonedbut just fined for 
violating the Presidential Records Act: he issaying that whether people obey
the Presidential Records Act should be up to them, with no sanctions for violations whatsoever. It 
is not like Trump did not know that the letters and papers were not his. There is an argument for 
not prosecuting people who accidently and unintentionally violate records-preservation laws. But 
that is not what we have here, is it?:

Clive Crook: Would Locking Up Trump Serve the Public Interest?: a€~You might well ask: How can 
investigation and prosecution of crimes ever fail to be in the public interest? Very easily. A 
conscientious effort to prosecute every crime to the fullest extent of the law might leave 
surprisingly few Americans at liberty. Thiscountryhas built sucha vast constellation of 
criminaloffenses that prosecutorial discretion a€”that is, choosing
not to prosecute a€” is not so much a function of limited resources as something that justice 
actually requires. According to reports, the crimes Trump possibly committed might include such 
heinous acts as keeping a letter former President Barack Obama left for him in the Oval Officea€!

Sounds like this was fun:

Matt Dinan: The Single Book Course: a€~My own little act of protest in coming back to teaching 
after the pandemic and sabbatical was thus to teach a course on a single book: Platoa€™ s 
Republican. The single book course is good because of its simplicity. There is no real question of 
competing priorities: we are going to read Platoa€™ s Republic and then get together and talk about 
ita€!. It was an unmixed pleasure to watch my
students attracted and repelleda€’’sometimes from one moment to the nexta€”by Socratesa€™ 
communism, his vision of equality according to nature, his scheme for philosophical rulers, and the 
outrages required to bring it about. The imposition of complete forma€”with its mirror image in the 
formlessness of tyrannya€’’cannot be justice. Why do we want it? Because the complexity and the 
messiness of human life make unity
impossible, and really do produce no end of troubles for human beingsa€!



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

