Subscribe now

J. Bradford DeLong (2006): The Box That Changed the World'. It is 40 feet long, 8.5 or 9.5 feet 
high, and eight feet wide. It carries up to 29 tons in its 2,000 cubic feet of
recommended available spacea€“goods worth roughly $500,000 (or more) when sold at retail. It, and 
what it carries, can be transported in a month anywhere in the world where
there   are suitable harbors, railways, locomotives, flatcars, truck tractors, diesel fuel, and 
roads.

Share

It is the modern cargo container, and it is able to move non-fragile, non-perishable goods from any 
modern factory with a loading dock to any modern warehouse anywhere in the
world for about 1% of retail value. Indeed, it can be transported for a marginal cost of perhaps 
$5,000a€“less than the price of a first-class airplane ticket, as Marc Levinson, author
of the excellent The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World Economy 
Bigger, puts it.

All of this has happened since 1960 or so. Back then, the costs of international trans-ocean 
shipment for most commodities could easily amount to between 10% and 20% of retail
value. The cargo container has changed everything.

When my family bought a German-made washing machine from a warehouse store in San Leandro, 
California, more of its cost was absorbed in the ten minutes the saleswoman
spent telling us about it than in the entire journey from the factory in Schorndorf, Germany, to 
the loading dock in San Leandro, or in forklifting it from the loading dock to its place
in the serried ranks of washing machines which filled that corner of the warehouse. In the end, it 
cost to us of getting our washing machine to our front door was about eight times
the cost of the machinea€™ s voyage from the German factory to the warehouse where we purchased it.

The world is certainly not a€ceflat,a€D as the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman believes. 
But, in an economic sense, it is extremely small for non-perishable, non-
fragile goods. Every modern factory with outgoing volume large enough for container traffic and a 
suitable loading dock is next door to every modern warehouse with similar
features.

Yet it is not the whole world that is so small, but only that part of it that is attached to the 
global container-handling network. Areas that lack the necessary infrastructure are still far
away from the global trading system that carries high-end German manufactured washing machines from 
Westphalian factories to California warehouses for just a penny a pound.

For example, if your electricity is unreliable, so that you cana€™ t count on being able to pump 
the diesel into the truck tractor, you are not attached to the network. If the volume of
your production is too small to fill 2,000 cubic feet of space headed for a single country, you are 
not attached to the network.

Likewise, if the money to fix your roads was embezzled, so that nobody wants to risk their tractors 
on them, you are not attached to the network. If your courts function so badly
that few outsiders are confident that what you say is theirs really is theirs, you are not attached 
to the network. If nobody has yet noticed what your workers can produce, you are not
attached to the network. If your entrepreneurs cannot build organizations at container-scale 
without attracting politically well-connected extortionists, you are not attached to the
network.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

For any poor segment of the world economy, getting attached to the global container network is an 
immense opportunity. But it is an opportunity that requires that everything a€“
infrastructure, scale, public administration, governance, and foreign knowledge of your production 
capabilities a€“ work just right. And if you have not first built up the social
networks   that enable your workers and their bosses to know what kinds of manufactured goods would 
generate high demand in the rich post-industrial core of the world economy, it
doesna€™ t matter even if you are attached to the global container network.

Many have written about how telecommunications technology is bringing about the a€oedeath of 
distance.a€D Indeed, nowadays, you can talk to anybody, anywhere. But it is the
cargo container that appears to have brought about a more effective and a€“ so fara€“more 
significant a€oedeath of distance .a€D For, in a commercial sense, at least, the goods we
ship across oceans still far outweigh the words we chatter around the world.

LINK: <https://www.proiect-syndicate.org/commentarv/the-box-that-changed-the-world>
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


