Please become a paid subscriber to some a€~Stacka€”even if not this one. We badly need to build a 
better public sphere, and they are trying hard to be part of the solution rather than profiting by 
worsening the problema€!

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

How about my friends Noah Smith <https://noahpinion .substack.com> or Matt Yglesias 
<https://www.slowboring .com> or Matt Klein <https://theovershoot. co> or Robert Reich 
<https://robertreich.substack.com> or Charlie-Jane Anders <https://buttondown.email/charliejane> or 
John Ganz <https://johnganz.substack.com>; or Alexandra Hudson <https://wwwxivic-renaissance.com>?

FIRST: Paul Krugman Joins Team Wea€™re-at-&-Probably-Above-Full-Employment:

FRED   — Labor Force Participation Rate • 25-54 Yrs.

KI

Labor force participation, 55-64


66

65.5

65

64.5

64

63.5

63

ronjQjf^^ororoQjcorDQjrorOQjrD

Paul Krugman: Whatever Happened to the Great Resignation?'. a€~Does the declining plausibility of 
the Great Resignation narrative have any policy implications ?a€! It does seem to reinforce the 
case for higher interest rates. Until recently, it was fairly common for monetary doves to argue 
that we werena€™ t really at full employments!. Thata€™ s now a hard case
to make; the U.S. economy now looks overheateda€!. which means that it needs to be cooled off a 
bita€!. If we want to revive U.S. economic vitality, we really should try to re-establish our 
nationa€™ s historic role as a destination for ambitious immigrants. But thata€™ s not a policy 
idea likely to get much traction, given the American righta€™ s anti-immigrant
hysteria. Anyway, you should know that all of those stories about how Americans are no longer 
willing to work seem to have evaporated. The Great Resignation now looks like a Great 
Misunderstandings!

LINK: <http://tinyurl.com/dl20220406a>

This seems broadly right to me. The last six months have made a substantial difference, and so it 
is time for the Fed to move. But how fast and how far?

The Fed should be data-dependent, and it should remain very conscious of the asymmetries of the 
situation: without a sea-change in the willingness of the Republicans to work for the American 
people rather than Fox News on fiscal policy, there is no way to recover from too much monetary 
tightening too early, but there are lots of ways to recover from waiting until the case is 
crystal-clear. The
Federal Reserve can cool off the economy easilya€”at least the housing, export, and import 
competing sectors.

Oscar Jorda & aZ.a€”whose estimates of the effect of 2021 fiscal stimulus in the context of 
monetary ease are somewhat larger than what I had expecteda€”make this point well:

A’scar JordA & al.: Why Is U.S. Inflation Higher than in Other Countries?: a€~U.S. inflationa€! 
compare it witha€! Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the 
United Kingdoma€! [conclude] U.S. income transfers may have contributed to an increase in inflation 
of about 3 percentage points by the fourth quarter of 2021a€!.
However, without these spending measures, the economy might have tipped into outright deflation and 
slower economic growth, the consequences of which would have been harder to managea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/publications/economic-letter/2022/march/whv-is-us-inflation
-higher-than-in-other-countries/>


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:

Henry Sotheran Ltd

@Sotherans

because it's the weekend, and I clearly have too much
time on my hands


I present Battle of the Brontes, the rpg about dismal
weather and incredibly talented sisters

(RATTLE

BRONTES         A one page RPG by Oliver Darkshire


You are one of several sisters

in a family blessed with talented writers

secretly you know you are the most gifted
and you'll prove it. by any means necessary.

RULES

You have three scores, which start at 0:

Tragedy, Masterpiece, & Brother

TRAGEDY ||

MASTERPIECE QI

BRONTE EVENT... (ROLL A D6)

lor 2 A Quiet Day at Home

3,4 or 5 A Walk on the Moors

6 Gain +1 MASTERPIECE

A QUIET DAY AT HOME...

You practice with pistols,
like father taught you

2  Your aunt is here for a visit.
She is the thief of joy.

3  Another house fire?
Unlikely, yet true.

You spill tea all over your

♦1 TRAGEDY

♦1 BROTHER

- 1 MASTERPIECE

♦5 BROTHER

-X kJ A CTrnnirre


BROTHER

IT LOOKS LIKE RAIN...

-r  notes. They are ruined.

You have a nightmare. It's

5  good source material.

Your brother is drinking. Too

6  much. Again.

♦2 MASTERPIECE

♦2 BROTHER

♦1 TRAGEDY


To start the game, you generate a new Event by
rolling a six-sided die (d6). Adjust your scores as
directed by the table (or subtable), then roll a new
event. Keep rolling new events until one of the

A WALK ON THE MOORS...

1  You meet a cursed hound       ♦1 TRAGEDY

Your brother almost runs you


following occurs:

•  If your Tragedy reaches 10, then you meet a
suitably gothic fate, which is almost certainly
bronchitis. A tasteful (and modest) funeral is
held, at which your sisters try not to look too
pleased at the diminished competition.

•  If your Masterpiece reaches 5, then you finish

2  down. He's stolen the horse.

You drink from the well near

3  the graveyard

Nothing like the howling

4  wind to get the ink flowing

5  Your brother is on...the roof?

6  It's raining. You may catch cold.

♦2 BROTHER

♦2 TRAGEDY

♦1 MASTERPIECE

♦2 BROTHER

♦1 TRAGEDY


a novel and submit it to a publisher. Roll a d6.
On a 1-5, your novel is rejected and you reduce
this score to 0. On a 6, your novel is accepted
and you are remembered as a literary great.

•  If your Brother reaches 5, then your brother
causes a debacle, perhaps by setting fire to
something, and the resulting chaos sets you
back                             weeks - reduce your Masterpiece score
to 0. The third time this happens, he dies or
vanishes in dubious circumstances and you
scrub him from the family portrait. You can

SPECIAL RULE: GIFTED CHILD

When you create your Bronte, choose one of the
following powers:

•  you can see perfectly in the dark

•  you make no sound when you walk

•  you can speak to corvids

•  your dreams are prophetic

•  you can turn translucent

At any point you can increase your TRAGEDY by

two in order to reroll a single die result you don't
like. Determine how vou use vour soecial cower to


tyriure crus btuie jrum now un.

change your fate.

1:59 PM • Apr 2, 2022 • Twitter Web App

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Jonathan M. Gitlin: Affordable Electric Cars Coming in 2027from New GM/Honda Project. a€~The EVs 
will use Ultium batteries and include a sub-$30,000 EV for North Americaa€! 
<https://arstechnica.com/cars/2022/04/honda-and-general-motors-will-collaborate-on-affordable-evs-fr
om-2027/>

• Bryce Elder: Can David Solomon DJ? An investigation: a€~FT Alphaville seeks to understand the 
growing appeal of Goldman Sachsa€™ s tune-dropping CEOa€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/446fl6d2-7d20-42aa-b26b-fcfeffc9ba71>

• Tim Bradshaw: Virtual Worlds Are Still More Minecraft than Metaverse 
<https://www.ft.eom/content/030f55f4-0b95-4e89-a903-6b9a48070f4c>

• Matt Levine: Elon Musk Bought Some Twitter. a€~Also Berghain, GameStop and the delia€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2022-04-04/elon-musk-bought-some-twitter>

• Paul Glastris: A Second Chance for Liberalism 
<https://washingtonmonthlv.eom/2022/04/03/a-new-bipartisanship/>

•  Pim de Zwart & al.: Forced Labour & Mortality in Nineteenth-Century Java: a€~A higher number of 
workers called up for labour in the Cultivation System is related to a higher mortality ratea€! the 
immediate effects on the Javanese population were highly negativea€! 
<https://voxeu.org/article/forced-labour-and-mortalitv-nineteenth-centurv-iava>

•  Rashad Ahmed & al.: Monetary Policy at Very Low Rates: a€~The observed flattening of the 
Phillips curve has gone hand in hand with a corresponding steepening of the IS curve. If so, 
monetary policy trade-offs have become more challenginga€! <https 
://voxeu.org/article/monetarv-policv-verv-low-rates>

• Paul Krugman (2009): A Dark Age of Macroeconomics <https://krugman .blogs .nytimes .com/2009/0 
l/27/a-dark-age-of-macroeconomics-wonkish/>

•  Brad DeLong (2007): Lecture Notes for September 13: After World War I: Weber and Keynes: 
Political Economy 101: d€ ceModer na€\3Political Economy <https ://delong .typepad 
.com/sdi/2007/09/lecture-notes-f ,html>

•  Steve M.: Wea€™ re Sorting Ourselves Into Two Americas, One of Which (Guess Which One) Is More 
Troubling: a€~In The New York Times, Shawn Hubler and Jill Cowana€! assure us that a lot of this is 
probably theater, so I guess we should all just stop worryinga€! 
<https://nomoremister.blogspot.eom/2022/04/were-sorting-ourselves-into-two.html>

•  Zsuzsanna SzelA©nyi: How Viktor OrbA/n Built His Illiberal State: a€~Fidesza€™ s victory Sunday 
was the culmination of many events that, once upon a time, we thought couldna€™t happen herea€! 
<https://mailchi.mp/tnr/how-viktor-orbn-built-his-illiberal-state?e=a9e3ae3dd2>

•  William Burr: A Cold War Mystery: a€~Did Truman Meet with NATO Foreign Ministers on 3 April 
1949?a€!. If the document is the genuine record of an important meeting, it has exceptional 
significance^! <https://nsarchive2.gwu.edu/nsa/DOCUMENT/200008/>

•  Benjamin Mazer: COVID Is More Like Smoking Than the Flu: a€~Choosing not to get vaccinated 
against COVID is, right now, a modifiable health risk on par with smoking, which kills more than 
400,000 people each year in the United Statesa€! 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2022/02/covid-anti-vaccine-smoking/622819/>

• Anatol Lieven: Inside PutinaC™ s Circle: The Real Russian Elite 
<https://www.ft.com/content/503fbllQ-f91e-4bed-b6dc-0d09582dd007>

• Steve M.: Relax, Politics Has No Real-World Consequences! 
<https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2022/03/relax-politics-has-no-real-world.html>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Michael Girdley: a€™ Generation X is weird. These 42a€“57 year-olds are so strange it presents 
golden opportunities. Here are 10 mind hacks to usea€! <

Michael Girdley @girdley

Generation X is weird. These 42-57 year-olds are so strange it presents golden opportunities. Here 
are 10 mind hacks to use with Gen X:

12:15 PM r™ Apr 5,2022

4,359Likesl ,122Retweets

•  Robert Reich: Why B ide nd€™ s Plan to Tax the Super Rich Is Moving from Unlikely to Likely: 
a€~As wealthy boomers expire over the next three decades, an estimated $30 trillion will go to 
their children. Those children will be able to live off of the income these assets generate, and 
then leave the bulk of thema€! to their own heirs, tax-freea€!. Unless Joe Bidena€™ s new tax plan
is enacteda€! <


Robert Reich

Why Biden's plan to tax the super rich is moving from unlikely to likely

Listen now I America is on the cusp of the largest inter-generational transfer of wealth in 
history. As wealthy boomers expire over the next three decades, an estimated $30 trillion will go 
to their children. Those children will be able to live off of the income these assets generate, and 
then leave the bulk of them a€“ which in the intervening years will have grown fa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 229 likes A- 127 comments A- Robert Reich

Aaron Rupar: DeSantis'. a€~a€oeThe ultimate agent for the normalization of extremisma€D: a€™ a€oeHe 
seems to have learned the lessons of Trump the best, absorbed them, and made clear he wants to 
surpass the mastera€D a€” Ruth Ben-Ghiata€!



Public Notice

An authoritarianism scholar on DeSantis as "the ultimate agent for the normalization of extremism11

Early polling indicates Donald Trump remains the frontrunner for the 2024 Republican presidential 
nomination, but Ron DeSantis is clearly the second-strongest contender and has recently gained some 
momentum. Ita€™ s unlikely a cult member could best the cult leader in a primary, but therea€™ s a 
possibility DeSaa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 21 likes A- 1 comment A- Aaron Rupar

• Chad Orzel: All-Purpose College Advice'. a€~Educationa€! is a thing that they provide you the 
resources to do for yourselfa€!. As long as you go in knowing that ita€™ s on you to do that work, 
youa€™ 11 be fine in the enda€!

SN S<b>-


Counting Atoms

All-Purpose College Advice

Ia€™ ve spent a bunch of time over the last several days trying to convince high school seniors 
(and their families) who have been accepted to Union College to come here (and give us significant 
sums of money). I did a simulated class on Saturday, then lunch with families, then a reception and 
dinner on Sunday night, then a panel on a€ceimmersive experiencesa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- Chad Orzel

• Josh Barro: Lael Brainard Is Preparing Liberals for Inflation-Fighting'. a€~Lael Brainarda€! was 
out on Tuesday morning making a progressive case for inflation fightinga€!. She noted that people 
with low incomes are much less able than higher earners to adapt to inflation, other than by 
consuming lessa€! LINK: <

Lael Brainard Is Preparing Liberals for Inflation-Fighting

Dear readers, The Federal Reserve has two statutorily mandated jobs to do when it sets monetary 
policy: ita€™ s supposed to promote both stable prices and maximum employment. And these goals can 
be in tension with each other. In the current environment of high inflation, the Fed has embarked 
on a series of interest rate hikes, which will tend to push inflatia€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 10 likes A- 2 comments A- Josh Barro
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

The example of the New York Time sa€” in this case, Kevin RooseaC’’working entirely for his sources 
and editors and not at all for his readers. Fortunately, Molly white and company are on the case:

Annotations by Molly White & al.: The Edited Latecomera€™ s Guide to Crypto: a€~On March 20,2022, 
the New York Times published a 14,000-word puff piece on cryptocurrencies, both online and as an 
entire section of the Sunday print edition. Though its author, Kevin Roose, wrote that it aimed to 
be a a€oesober, dispassionate explanation of what crypto actually isa€D, it was a thinly-
veiled advertisement for cryptocurrency that appeared to have received little in the way of 
fact-checking or critical editorial scrutiny. It uncritically repeated many questionable or 
entirely fallacious arguments from cryptocurrency advocates, and it appears that no experts on the 
topic were consulted, or even anyone with a less-than-rosy view on crypto. This is grossly 
irresponsible. Here, a group
of around fifteen cryptocurrency researchers and critics have done what the New York Times 
apparently wona€™ta€!

LINK: <https://www.mollvwhite.net/annotations/latecomers-guide-to-crypto>

Standardized tests are only bad things to include in admissions decisions when they are part of a 
first screen that says: "we throw your case away if your record is not perfecta€D. MIT now agrees:

Stu Schmill: We Are Reinstating Our SAT/ACT Requirement for Future Admissions Cycles: a€™ 
Standardized tests help us better assess the academic preparedness of all applicants, and also help 
us identify socioeconomically disadvantaged students who lack access to advanced coursework or 
other enrichment opportunities that would otherwise demonstrate their
readiness for MIT. We believe a requirement is more equitable and transparent than a test-optional 
policya€!. Not having SATs/ACT scores to consider tends to raise socioeconomic barriers to 
demonstrating readiness for our education, relative to having them, given these other 
inequalitiesa€!

LINK: 
<https://mitadmissions.org/blogs/entrv/we-are-reinstating-our-sat-act-requirement-for-future-admissi
ons-cycles/>

The ratio of "Oh wow! Inflation!" takes to "Wow! What a recovery! Time to take a serious victory 
lap!" takes is way, way out of balance, and out of line:

Emily Stewart: What Is Causing Inflation & How to Fix It, Explained to the Extent Possible: a€~A 
bunch of industries saw slowdowns and shutdowns when Covida€“19 hit, which made it hard to produce 
and maintain business as usuala€!. What consumers want has shifted, moving spending from 
servicesa€! toa€! goodsa€!. Skanda Amarnatha€! a€oelt all stems

back, to me, that a lot of underinvestment has been exposed at a time when the economy is 
recovering ,a€D he said. That recovery part is important. As much as many people say that they feel 
bad about the economy right now, the economy is actually pretty decent. Unemployment is relatively 
low, many people still have quite a bit of money to spend, and the recovery, in
a lot of ways, looks pretty solid. But again, therein lies part of the problem: People have money 
to spend, but not so many places to spend ita€!. Brad DeLong, an economist at UC Berkeley, has a 
modestly more relaxed view on inflation. a€oeMy answer is calm down, ita€™ s by and large a 
desirable part of adjustments. We look out at what people are expecting in the
future, and in five to 10 years from now, people are expecting inflation to quiet down. The Fed 
will do its job,a€D he saida€!

LINK: <https://www.vox.com/the-goods/22994731/inflation-rate-russia-gas-prices-jerome-powell>

Sigh. Blake Hounshell and Leah Askarinam used to people worth respecting, and listening to. No 
more. They cover the horserace, only. And they work for whatever of their sources give them the 
juiciest morsels, only:

Steve M.: Relax, Politics Has No Real-World Consequences!: a€~I was inclined to worry about the 
conduct of Republicans during the Senate Judiciary Committeea€™ s hearings on Ketanji Brown 
Jacksona€™ s Supreme Court nomination. But the a€oeOn Politicsa€D newsletter [by Blake Hounshell 
and Leah Askarinam] at The New York Times assures me that I
should relaxa€”ita€™ s all just a sporting event for four senators on the committee, and what I 
really need to be truly informed is a scouting report on their strengths and weaknesses as the big 
game gets underwaya€!. Who cares if Cruz used his opening statement to argue that Democrats want to 
use the Supreme Court to subvert democracy? It doesna€™ t matter. All
that matters is the horseracea€!

LINK: <https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2022/03/relax-politics-has-no-real-world.html>


±11V 111VOL UVllVIVUd LI 1111g auuui ^UHtpLlLt LV±Ll^Ll^f^ 13 LliaL LI IV11 lllLVlliai OL1UVLU1V 
liadd LV UV a llUViai V11V. IL 13 LI IV Mill J waj, 111WW, 1V1 L11V111 IV ail 11VV LVgVLllVl 
WllllVUl V11V VI LI IV11 laVLIVllO 3UppiV33111g aim puiglllg L11V V Lil VI3.

Eric Levitz: Compact Magazine Makes a Strong Case For Liberalism: a€~A grand coalition between 
Americaa€™ s disparate anti-liberal intellectuals would have no coherent program, let alone a 
popular onea€!. The magazinea€™ s incoherence derives in part from failures of quality controla€!. 
Alex Gutentag explains that COVID-era public-health restrictions were
never about containing the spread of a fatal virus, but were a€oeactually part of a broader scheme 
to undermine the middle and working classes, normalize a€~papers, pleasea€™ societies, and end the 
fiat currency system as we know it.a€D What follows is an eclectic set of conspiratorial ravings 
that make only peripheral contact with reality, and none at all with
obvious objectionsa€!. Other pieces betray a similar tendency to start with a conclusion 
(generally, that some strand of liberal orthodoxy is in fact a fig leaf concealing a betrayal of 
the common people) and then stick by it, irrespective of evidence. Sohrab Ahmaria€!. Edwin 
Apontea€!. Nina Powera€!. Adam Lehrera€!. Compact is even ambivalent about its own
animating populism. While it routinely derides liberalism as elitist, the magazinea€™ s authors 
intermittently characterize the majority of Americans as sheeple, hoodwinked by liberal propaganda 
about Ukrainea€™ s victimhood or the efficacy of CO VID vaccinesa€!. All this dissonance might be a 
virtue in a purely literary project. In a magazine that hopes to prosecute
the  case against liberalising! gesture toward an alternative dispensation^! it is fatal. In the 
end, Compact adds up to a strong argument for the very thing it aims to indicta€!

LINK: 
<https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2022/03/compact-magazine-makes-a-strong-case-for-liberalism.html>

The tactical dance of professional modern warfare, if you could be seen, or if your location could 
be inferred and pinpointed within a sliding-scale amount that depended on opponentsa€™ firepower, 
you were dead. The response has to be: cover and concealment. Movement? Only in very short bursts, 
when the enemy firepower can be temporarily suppressed. Stay still? That does not work
either. For when, your firepower is traced back to your position and pinpointed, then you are dead 
as well, unless you have moved beforehand. Attackers creeping forward in small mutually-supporting 
combined-arms on the ground, and defenders dancing backward, abandoning each position just before 
attacking artillery registers on it. And in the air above are the eggshells-armed-with-hammers
that must rely on their own speed and on the suppression of enemy fire to stay alive themselves. 
How do you build and train a force to do this?:

Noel Williams: Insights for Marine (& Beyond) Force Design from the Russo-Ukrainian War: a€~The 
Russo-Ukrainian War provides compelling evidencea€! that Marine Corps Force Design 2030 is on 
tracka€I. The Ukrainian military has shown that small, widely distributed infantry formations 
equipped with precision-guided munitions can operate effectively against
armor and mechanized forces without air superiority, or even a traditional air forcea€!. Drones 
provide important alternatives to manned tactical aviationa€!. a€oeLoitering munitions will impact 
the character of warfare more substantially than the introduction of the machine gun.a€D If Ukraine 
had enough loitering munitions such as the Hero 120 or Switchblade 600,
the                                                                                                 
                                                                    now infamous Russian convoy 
north of Kyiv may have been turned into a highway of deatha€!. Ukrainian forces equipped with 
shoulder-fired anti-armor weapons, loitering munitions, and armed drones demonstrate the increasing 
vulnerability of armor and mechanized vehiclesa€!. To have any chance for success, armored or 
mechanized employment on the future
battlefield will require exceptionally well-trained crews and the latest active protection systems 
(especially top-down protection)a€!

LINK: 
<https://warontherocks.com/2022/03/insights-for-marine-and-beyond-force-design-from-the-russo-ukrain
ian-war/>

The cruelty is the point: enduring cross-rA©gime patterns of Muscovite state governance. The 
massacres in Ukraine going on are horrible, but the principal victim of the Muscovite state and its 
patterns of governance has always been the people ruled from Moscow themselves:

Tom Fallows: Bucha, Katyn, & Srebrenica: a€~In such a short time (the war began only in late 
February), Putina€™ s Russia has come a long way to returning to Soviet standards. Putin has 
already set up an internal regime of totalitarian legal and police-based control of the population, 
with full restrictions on the media and total propaganda by state-owned media outlets
which monopolize news information for most of the Russian population. And now we have another 
example of a repeat of the USSR story: mass criminal executions done by Russian soldiers against 
their enemya€!. The Katyn massacre wasa€! enormousa€! over 20 thousanda€!. But if we add the number 
of other Ukrainian civilian victims of Russian violence (witness
the devastation of Mariupol), we start to come close to the magnitude of the Katyn atrocities. So 
perhaps the numbers are not so different. But what is different about Bucha is that the execution 
of these Ukrainians serves no interest whatsoever for grander political/strategic considerations. 
Stalin at least had a rationale to order the execution of future Polish leadership who
could threaten the USSR after the war. But what in the world is the benefit for Vladimir Putin to 
kill all these civilians in towns under control of Russian soldiers?a€!

LINK:


Breaking the News

Guest Post: Another Katyn Massacre, Another Srebrenica

Last month I put up two posts about Ukraine and Russia by my brother, Tom Fallows, a life-long 
scholar of Russian affairs. They were a€oeKiev in the 1970s, and Kyiv a€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 18 likes A- 4 comments A- James Fallows

Learning how to read ROTI3. Contrary to what David Maclver says, it is usefula€”at least in some of 
the circles I travel in. And it is parable about learning that, quite possibly, has a wider range 
of applicability than you usually think:

David Maclver: Ubj gb ernq EBG13: a€~So what have we learned? Well wea€™ ve learned to read ROT13 
of course. Which there was no good reason to do. But hopefully wea€™ ve also learned a few other 
useful things. The first is that the key to learning to do something fluently is often to first 
learn it in a way that can never achieve fluency. You cana€™ t do
mathematics fluently if you have to rederive everything from first principles each time, but being 
able to rederive everything from first principles gives you the scaffolding on which you can build 
fluency because you know that what youa€™re looking for will be there, even if it might be slow to 
access, so you can come to trust in it, and rapidly build up to the point
where you remember it. We learned ROT 13 not by brute force memorising the letters, but by learning 
to understand how the cipher worked and how they fit together, allowing us to work out the 
conversion from first principles. Another interesting thing about the experience of learning ROT 13 
is how fast it goes. ROT 13 text very rapidly comes, if not perfectly
transparent at least easily decipherable. Ita€™ s easy to think of skill acquisition as being hard, 
and it usually is, but ita€™ s worth remembering that there are many small skills that you can pick 
up in a day or soa€!


Breaking the News

Guest Post: Another Katyn Massacre, Another Srebrenica

Last month I put up two posts about Ukraine and Russia by my brother, Tom Fallows, a life-long 
scholar of Russian affairs. They were a€oeKiev in the 1970s, and Kyiv a€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 18 likes A- 4 comments A- James Fallows

Learning how to read ROTI3. Contrary to what David Maclver says, it is usefula€”at least in some of 
the circles I travel in. And it is parable about learning that, quite possibly, has a wider range 
of applicability than you usually think:

David Maclver: Ubj gb ernq EBG13: a€~So what have we learned? Well wea€™ ve learned to read ROT13 
of course. Which there was no good reason to do. But hopefully wea€™ ve also learned a few other 
useful things. The first is that the key to learning to do something fluently is often to first 
learn it in a way that can never achieve fluency. You cana€™ t do
mathematics fluently if you have to rederive everything from first principles each time, but being 
able to rederive everything from first principles gives you the scaffolding on which you can build 
fluency because you know that what youa€™re looking for will be there, even if it might be slow to 
access, so you can come to trust in it, and rapidly build up to the point
where you remember it. We learned ROT 13 not by brute force memorising the letters, but by learning 
to understand how the cipher worked and how they fit together, allowing us to work out the 
conversion from first principles. Another interesting thing about the experience of learning ROT 13 
is how fast it goes. ROT 13 text very rapidly comes, if not perfectly
transparent at least easily decipherable. Ita€™ s easy to think of skill acquisition as being hard, 
and it usually is, but ita€™ s worth remembering that there are many small skills that you can pick 
up in a day or soa€!

LINK:

Overthinking Everything

Ubj gb ernq EBG13 (How to read ROT13)

Hi everyone, Today Ia€™ d like to teach you an interesting skill: How to read (and maybe write) 
ROT13! I taught myself how a while ago, and I thought the process was illuminating, and maybe you 
will too. Should you learn this skill? No, absolutely not. There is no reason to learn to read 
ROT13. It is at best useless, and if you ever actually encounter ROT13 a€!
Read more

10 months ago A- David R. Maclver


Overthinking Everything

Ubj gb ernq EBG13 (How to read ROT 13)

Hi everyone, Today Ia€™ d like to teach you an interesting skill: How to read (and maybe write) 
ROT13! I taught myself how a while ago, and I thought the process was illuminating, and maybe you 
will too. Should you learn this skill? No, absolutely not. There is no reason to learn to read 
ROT13. It is at best useless, and if you ever actually encounter ROT13 a€!
Read more

10 months ago A- David R. Maclver

