Subscribe now

Language-Path: Arbwyth->Trade 24->Cherguelen->Triskw
From: Twirlip of the Mists

Subject: Blighter Video thread
Keywords: Hexapodia as the key insight
Distribution: Threat of the Blight
Approved:   yes

Date: 8.68 days since Fall of Relay

I haven't had a chance to see the famous video from
Straumli Realm, except as an evocation. (My only
gateway onto the Net is very expensive.) Is it true
that humans have six legs? I wasn't sure from the

Key Insights:


Share

1. Paul Feyerabend was righta€”science is whatever scientists do: anything goes. But what healthy 
sciences that survive and flourish and good scientists do is put first and foremost
discovering what actually is and making theories to understand reality. So Kuhn and Popper are also 
right.

2. Economics has not been much of a science. But this Card, Angrist, Imbensa€”and Kruegera€’’Nobel 
Prize marks a very big possible improvement in this respect.

3. Keep at it! Keep doing your work no matter the brickbats, and you may, someday, look back and 
recognize that you have changed the world.

4. Pets are good: they drive you to a€oebecome the person your dog thinks you already area€D.

5. Hexapodia!

References:

• The London Economist has an excellent interview with two of our three Nobel Prize winners this 
yeara€”David Card and Josh Angrist. If you want to know why we economists
respect them so much and are cheering their Nobel Prizes so loudly, follow the link: Joshua 
Angrist, Ryan Avent, David Card, & Rachana Shanbhogue : A Real-World Revolution
in Economics'. a€~THIS YEARa€™ s Nobel prize celebrates the a€oecredibility revolutionaCD that has 
transformed economics since the 1990s. Today most notable new work is not
theoretical but based on analysis of real-world data. How their work has brought economics closer 
to real lifea€!<https://www.economist.com/nobelpod2021 ?

utmcampaign=editorial-social&utmmedium=social-organic&utm source=twitter>

• This is, I think, the best single thing to read about the Card, Angrist, Imbens Economics Nobel 
Prize: Noah Smith: The Econ Nobel We Were All Waiting for. a€~To predict who will
win the Econ Nobel... list the most influential people in the field who havena€™ t won it yet.... 
Assume... micro theorists wona€™ t win... two years in a row. The ones whose

influence is the oldest are the most likely to win. For years, this method led lots of 
peoplea€’’including mea€”to predict a Nobel for David Card. His 1994 paper with Alan Krueger

on the minimum wage was a thunderbolt.... Since then, Card has been at the forefront of empirical 
labor.... Angrist and Imbens a€™ impact... though also high... came later. I

wouldna€™t have been surprised had they won the prize in later years. But Card was clearly overdue. 
Perhaps the reason it took this long was that Carda€™ s conclusions in his
famous minimum wage paper were so hard for many in the field to swallow.a€! At the time, Card and 
KruegeraC™ s finding seemed revolutionary and heretical. In fact, other
researchers had probably been finding the same thing, but were afraid to publish their results, 
simply because of their terror of offending the orthodoxy...


Noahpinion

The Econ Nobel we were all waiting for

a€ceAnd new philosophy calls all in doubt, The element of fire is quite put out, The sun is lost, 
and th'earth, and no man's wit Can well direct him where to look for it.a€D a€” John Donne The
2021 Econ Nobel went to David Card, Joshua Angrist, and Guido Imbensa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 56 likes A- 86 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Tim Noah: Tragedy Kept Alan Krueger From Claiming a Nobel Prize, but Hea€™ s Not Forgotten'. 
a€~Paying tribute to the late economist who, with David Card, changed
Americaa€™ s mind about the minimum wagea€! 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/163994/david-card-alan-krueger-nobel-prize>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

