Subscribe now
Share

FOCUS: Aze Deceptive a€oeThucydides Trapa€d:

I realize that Graham Allison has important things to say about the dangers of catastrophic 
conflict posed when a rising power threatens to disrupt a pre-existing hegemony. But I am irritated 
at the way that the trope of the a€oeThucydides Trapa€D has been used.

a€oeThucy dides Trapa€D claims to be shorthand way of describing the grand-strategic dilemmas of 
the Classical Greek city-states of Athens and Sparta in the second half of the -400s. But it is a 
bowdlerized version. The actual complexities of the situation have been elided.
Thus important parts of the lessons that can be drawn from Thucydidesa€™ s description in The 
Peloponnesian War of the start of the war have been ignored.

And lessons can be drawn. For, as Thucydides said, he had tried to write his history as:

a treasure for all timea€! [because] knowledge of the pasta€! [is] an aid to the interpretation of 
the future, which in the course of human things must resemble if it does not reflect ita€!

The situation in the second half of the -400s in the Greek world was thus:

The Spartan oligarchy had held preeminence. It had conquered and continued to dominate Laconia and 
Messenia. Its enserfment of their populations meant that Sparta alone, among major city-states, had 
a large and rich enough class of landlords who could train intensively for war, since they not have 
to assist in the farming themselves.

But there was a big problem with the Spartan system, as Aristotle was to note: Rich Spartan men 
tended to marry rich Spartan women. Thus, over time, wealth inequality grew. This diminished the 
size of the pool of Spartan landlords who could afford the full training rA©gimen. The number of 
full Spartans in the military phalanx was dropping steadily, by perhaps a quarter in each 
generation.


Start writing today. Use the button below to create your Substack and connect your publication with 
Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


ONE IMAGE: Now Azt I Think of It: of Course:

chatgpt     NFTs


Color intensity represents percentage of searches LEARN MORE

Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

•  John Thornhill: Year in a word: Chip choke: a€~Major powers have realised the critical 
importance of semiconductors to the global economya€!

•  Eric Carlson, Adam Ozimek, and & Fikri: CHIPS off the Federal Funding Block: Using Data to 
Inform the Location of the 20 New Regional Innovation Hubs: a€~Top metropolitan area contenders on 
the index include Greenville, SC; Provo, UT; Tucson, AZ; Toledo, OH; and Greensboro, NC...

•  Nouriel Roubini: More War Means More Inflation: a€~Advanced economies and emerging markets are 
increasingly engaged in necessary "wars" a€“ some real, some metaphorical a€“ that will lead to 
even larger fiscal deficits, more debt monetization, and higher inflation on a persistent basis. 
The future will be stagflationary, and the only question is how bad it will bea€!

•  Dylan Beattie: a€~Thought Leaders: a€ceProgramming will be obsolete within 5 years. All business 
software will be generated by AIsa€D. Actual Businesses: a€oeActually we're mainly still 
on-premise, running on Windows Server 2003 and VBScript ASP, but our two-year plan to migrate 
everything into a cloud kicked off in 2015 and we're making steady progressa€Da€l

• Frank Herbert: Dune: "Treachery within Treachery within Treacherya€D: a€~On the left hip !a€!

•  Monique Judge: Bring back personal blogging: a€~Bring back personal blogging in 2023. We, as a 
web community, will be all that much better for ita€!

•  Curmudgeon: a€~First they came for the journalists, who were very surprised to find themselves 
in a giant warehouse filled with minorities, immigrants, disabled, trans, and gay peoplea€!

• Doug Jones: Logarithmic Historya€!
Get 33% off a group subscription

AJs:

Frank Leroy: a€~Luke Dash, one core developers of Bitcoin just got all his Bitcoins stolen. But 
let's pretend anyone can safely store their life savings in crypto. Luke Dash Jr.: a€oeMy PGP key 
is compromised, and at least many of my bitcoins stolen. I have no idea how. Help pleasea€!. What 
the heck @FBI@ic3 why cana€™t I reach anyone??? Nevermind many. Ita€™ s basically all gonea€!

Ben Klemens: Mastodona€”and the pros and cons of moving beyond Big Tech gatekeepers: 
a€~Standards-based interoperability makes a comeback, sort ofa€!. The most common metaphor is 
emaila€!. The current W3C Activity Streams 2.0 standard used by Mastodon and friends, offer a 
grammar for expressing things a user might do, like "create a post" or "likedY‘D a post with a 
given ID" or  "request tobefriend acertainuser.a€Da€! The ActivityPub
standard is an actor-based model which specifies that servers should have a profile for each actor 
providing a universal resource indicator (URI) for each actor's inbox and outbox. Actors can send a 
GET request to their own inbox to see what the actors they follow have been posting, or they can 
GET another actor's outbox to see what that specific actor has been posting. A POST request to a 
friend's inbox places a message there;a POST request to the user's own
outbox posts messages for all (with the right permissions). The standard specifies that these 
various in- and outboxes hold activities in sequential order, much like our familiar social media 
timelinesa€!. In theory, they all intercommunicate; in practice, not so mucha€!

Steve Viadeck: The Chief Justice's Year-End Report: a€~Justice Gorsucha€™ s two-page dissent 
(joined by Justice Jackson) has it exactly righta€!. Justice Gorsuch and I might disagree about 
whether the pandemic still justifies other public health-related measures. But the notion that 
expelling migrants is necessary to prevent the spread of COVID has no factual predicate today 
(assuming it ever had one). And because it doesna€™ t, therea€™ s just no case for
granting a staya€!

David Glasner: You Say Potato, I Say Potahto; You Say Tomato, I Say Tomahto; You Say Distribution, 
I Say Expectation - Uneasy Money: a€~Olivier Blancharda€! expressing fears about an impending 
wage-price spiral that cannot be controlleda€! unless the monetary authority is prepared to 
imposea€! substantially higher unemployment^!. Unless the deep systemic forces that cause inflation 
are addressed politically rather than left, by default, to be handled
by the monetary authority, inflation will remain a persistent and vexing problema€!. Inflation may 
sometimes be triggered by the attempt of a particular sector of the economy to increase the 
relative price of the goods or services that it provides, thereby increasing its share of total 
income at the expense of other sectors, I seriously question whether this is a typical, or even 
frequent, sourcea€!. a€oeln the end, forcing the players to accept the outcome, and thus
stabilizing inflation, is typically left to the central bank. By slowing down the economy, it can 
force firms to accept lower prices given wages, and workers to accept lower wages given prices. It 
is a highly inefficient way to deal with distributional conflicts. One can/should dream of a 
negotiation between workers, firms, and the state, in which the outcome is achieved without 
triggering inflation and requiring a painful slowdowna€Da€l

Doug Jones: GPT3 and me (Instructora€™ s edition): a€~For short answer questions with clear cut 
answers, students can do pretty well if they just let GPT3 do the work. Teachers in the future may 
have to give up on short answer questions, or make them in-class rather than take home. For longer 
answer questions, students might or might not eek out a passing grade by just letting GPT3 do all 
the work. But a student might do better than that by combining GPT
answers with her own knowledge, e.g. evaluating the GPT answers, getting multiple GPT answers, 
inputting the question in different forms, editing and supplementing the responses. For many 
students this could work better than just trying to answer questions on their own. Teachers will 
have to come up with creative responses to this challenge. For my part, next semester I may or may 
not try some version of having students consult GPT3 and comment on the
answersa€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

