Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Image: Now on Sale!

Look inside i          Slouching Towards Utopia: An


AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

Twentieth Century Hardcover -

September 6, 2022

by J. Bradford DeLong v (Author)

7 ratings

#1 New Release    in Biography & History


J. BRADFORD DELONG        See all formats and editions

Kindle

$19.99

Hardcover

$22.77 ✓ prime


SlMfcHIH

Listen

Read with Our Free App

19 Used from $23.60
22 New from $22.77

Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Sophie Roell: Nonfiction of 2022: Fall Roundup: 'Some notable new nonfiction books published 
since June.... Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century by Brad 
DeLong...

•  Daily Culture Picks: Slouching Towards Utopia: a€~: Brad DeLong on why the years from 1870 to 
2010 were humanity a€™ s most importanta€l

• Aspen Security Forum: Weakly Leafa€D: a€~Book of the weeka€! Slouching Towards Utopia: An 
Economic History of the Twentieth Centurya€\

•  Alex Shephard: Peter Thiela€™ s Handpicked Candidates Are Train Wrecks: a€~The tech billionaire 
wants to remake the Republican Partya€”and America. But Blake Masters and J.D. Vance are lagging in 
the polls, and struggling to raise moneya€!

•  Tim Duy: Fed Watch, 9/12/22: aC~The Fed is on track to raise rates 75bp next week, with more to 
follow. Simply put, now that we are past peak recession fears, the inflation data remains too 
little and too tenuous for the more hawkish part of the Fed, which includes the all-important Board 
members, to step back to 50bp. This weeka€™ s inflation data wona€™t play into next weeka€™ s FOMC 
decision. Watch it
instead for clues about the future path, particularly the December meeting and beyonda€!

• Philip Maldari: Sunday Show: September 11,2022 a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia" and "Low Income 
Housing for $135,000/Year

•  Jan Lodal: The Part of the Espionage Act That Matters: a€~Subparagraph (d)a€! makes a 
straightforward action a crime: namely, failing to return classified documents if properly directed 
to give them back. No proof of the level of classification, or the intentions of the document 
holder, or the content of the documents, is requireda€!


•  Joseph E. Stiglitz and Dean Baker: The Fed Should Wait and See: a€~With recent data showing that 
both inflation and inflation expectations have eased, it would be irresponsible for the US Federal 
Reserve to create much higher unemployment. Amid so much uncertainty, it should instead pause 
interest-rate hikes until a more reliable assessment of macroeconomic conditions is possiblea€!

• Social Studies: A Brief History

•  Cory Doctorow: Pluralistic: Spotify Is a Ripoff, a Spotify Exclusive: a€~Spotify steals from 
artists, a Spotify exclusive: More Chokepoint Capitalism stunt-publishinga€!

• J. Bradford DeLong and Lawrence H. Summers: The a€~New Economya€™: Background, Historical 
Perspective, Questions, and Speculations 
<https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/6793328.pdf?utm_source=substack&utm_medium=email>

• Jeff Herf: Reactionary Modernism: Technology, Culture, and Politics in Weimar and the Third Reich

• Stefan Link: Forging Global Fordism: Nazi Germany, Soviet Russia, and the Contest over the 
Industrial Order

• Glory Liu: Adam Smitha€™ s America: How a Scottish Philosopher Became an Icon of American 
Capitalism

AJs:

Noah Smith: Liberalism Is Resilient: a€~Ukrainian victories are sending us an important messagea€!. 
There is a clear difference between acting tough and actually being tough. The former is all about 
outward fierceness and savagery, while the latter is about the inner ability to endure hardship and 
pain and fear and still keep fighting effectively. In fact, this difference is a reason why 
authoritarian, illiberal regimes traditionally
underestimate more liberal ones. The Nazisa€! Imperial Japana€! the Confederacya€!. The rhetoric of 
Putin and his cronies regarding the Westa€™ s supposed weakness echoes those earlier allegations. 
So does the rhetoric of Xi Jinping and his cronies in Chinaa€!. What we instinctively mean when we 
say a€celiberala€D and a€oeilliberala€na€!. A lot of it is simply about conquerors vs. defenders. 
Therea€™ s a clear difference
between  the vision of a world where a€oethe strong do what they can, and the weak suffer what they 
musta€D, and the vision of a world where every country is free to determine its own destinya€!. 
Ukrainea€™ s successes have sent us messages about whata€™ s worth fighting for. But they have also 
sent us a message about how to most effectively prosecute that fighta€!

Giles Wilkes: a€~In 2001, two extremely bright people, DeLong and Summers,, wrote this very 
readable piece <https://t.co/4UH99VyAbM> found via Ryan Avent. But it contained two wrong 
forecasts: that new tech would struggle to gain monopoly rents, and its economic weight would grow. 
Fascinating. I would never have foreseen the first. Lina Khan's piece was 16 years away. Nor the 
second. The point about economic
salience is well puta€”I have really struggled to articulate this insight about rapidly declining 
costs and weight in GDP. Since Moore's Law HASN'T stopped, by implication the marginal usefulness 
of computers etc has diminished. Maybe this is right! Our first uses were emailing important 
documents, our last were giant server farms to host 30 second viral videos of kids lip-synchinga€!

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your email 
inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


I kJ CL ii ie dpp

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your email 
inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

