Yesterday all the past. The language of size

Spreading to China along the trade-routes; the diffusion
Of the counting-frame and the cromlech;

Yesterday the shadow-reckoning in the sunny climates.

Yesterday the assessment of insurance by cards,
The divination of water; yesterday the invention
Of cartwheels and clocks, the taming of

Horses. Yesterday the bustling world of the navigators.

Yesterday the abolition of fairies and giants,

the fortress like a motionless eagle eyeing the valley,
the chapel built in the forest;

Yesterday the carving of angels and alarming gargoyles;

The trial of heretics among the columns of stone;
Yesterday the theological feuds in the taverns
And   the miraculous cure at the fountain;

Yesterday the Sabbath of witches; but to-day the struggle

Yesterday the installation of dynamos and turbines,
The construction of railways in the colonial desert;
Yesterday the classic lecture

On the origin of Mankind. But to-day the struggle.

Yesterday the belief in the absolute value of Greek,
The fall of the curtain upon the death of a hero;
Yesterday the prayer to the sunset

And the adoration of madmen, but to-day the struggle.

As the poet whispers, startled among the pines,

Or where the loose waterfall sings compact, or upright
On the crag by the leaning tower:

a€oeO my vision. O send me the luck of the sailor.a€D

And the investigator peers through his instruments
At the inhuman provinces, the virile bacillus

Or enormous Jupiter finished:

a€oeBut the lives of my friends. I inquire. I inquire.a€D

And the poor in their fireless lodgings, dropping the sheets
Of the evening paper: a€oeOur day is our loss. O show us
History the operator, the

Organiser. Time the refreshing river.a€D

And the nations combine each cry, invoking the life
That shapes the individual belly and orders

The private nocturnal terror:

"Did you not found the city state of the sponge,

a€oeRaise the vast military empires of the shark

And the tiger, establish the robina€™ s plucky canton?
Intervene. O descend as a dove or

A furious papa or a mild engineer, but descend.a€D

And the life, if it answers at all, replied from the heart

And the eyes and the lungs, from the shops and squares of the city
"O no, I am not the mover;

Not to-day; not to you. To you, Ia€™ m the

"Yes-man, the bar-companion, the easily-duped;
I am whatever you do. I am your vow to be
Good, your humorous story.

I am your business voice. I am your marriage.

a€oeWhata€™ s your proposal? To build the just city? I will.
I agree. Or is it the suicide pact, the romantic

Death? Very well, I accept, for

I am your choice, your decision. Yes, I am Spain.a€D

Many have heard it on remote peninsulas,

On sleepy plains, in the aberrant fishermena€™ s islands
Or the corrupt heart of the city.

Have heard and migrated like gulls or the seeds of a flower.

They clung like burrs to the long expresses that lurch

Through the unjust lands, through the night, through the alpine tunnel;
They floated over the oceans;

They walked the passes. All presented their lives.

On that arid square, that fragment nipped off from hot
Africa, soldered so crudely to inventive Europe;

On that tableland scored by rivers,

Our thoughts have bodies; the menacing shapes of our fever

Are precise and alive. For the fears which made us respond
To the medicine ad, and the brochure of winter cruises
Have become invading battalions;

And our faces, the institute-face, the chain-store, the ruin

Are projecting their greed as the firing squad and the bomb.
Madrid is the heart. Our moments of tenderness blossom
As  the ambulance and the sandbag;

Our hours of friendship into a peoplea€™ s army.


To-morrow, perhaps the future. The research on fatigue

And the movements of packers; the gradual exploring of all the Octaves of radiation;
To-morrow the enlarging of consciousness by diet and breathing.

To-morrow the rediscovery of romantic love,
the photographing of ravens; all the fun under
Libertya€™ s masterful shadow;

To-morrow the hour of the pageant-master and the musician,

The beautiful roar of the chorus under the dome;

To-morrow the exchanging of tips on the breeding of terriers,
The eager election of chairmen

By the sudden forest of hands. But to-day the struggle.

To-morrow for the young the poets exploding like bombs,
The walks by the lake, the weeks of perfect communion;
To-morrow the bicycle races

Through the suburbs on summer evenings. But to-day the struggle.

To-day the deliberate increase in the chances of death,
The consious acceptance of guilt in the necessary murder;
To-day the expending of powers

On the flat ephemeral pamphlet and the boring meeting.

To-day the makeshift consolations: the shared cigarette,
The cards in the candlelit barn, and the scraping concert,
The masculine jokes; to-day the

Fumbled and unsatisfactory embrace before hurting.

The stars are dead. The animals will not look.

We are left alone with our day, and the time is short, and
History to the defeated

May say Alas but cannot help nor pardon.

LINK: 
https://sites.google.eom/a/upr.edu/modernpoetry/Student-Blogs/ivan-andres-rodriguez/spainbywhauden

