d€\e wrong?

From <http ://.delongtoday.com>

On Tuesday, January 26,2021, Tesla CEO Elon Musk tweeted out one worda€”GameStonk! !a€”with two 
exclamation points, and with a link to a board on the internet discussion site Reddit, a board that 
describes itself as: a€oe WallStreetBets: Like 4chan found a Bloomberg terminala€D. The word
a€oeGameStonka€D is a mashup of a€cestonka€D, a misspelling of a€cestocka€D, and 
a€ceGameStopa€Da€”the Dallas-headquartered U.S. bricks-and-mortar videogame retailer with 5000 
stores, $1 million of annual revenue per store, and currently $200 million a year of losses. The 
misspelling of
a€cestocka€D means that Musk wants his readers to know that he is adopting a pose of enthusiasm and 
excitement: the pose is that he must communicate, and cannot be bothered to spellcheck anything 
before he sends his words out to the internet. a€oeGameStonk! !a€D could therefore be translated 
thus:
a€oeexcitement, enthusiasm, and approval for (or perhaps for what is currently going on with) the 
stock of the company GameStop .a€D

The price of GameStop (ticker $GME) immediately rose 60%.

The stock had doubled earlier in the day. The supposed trigger was early Facebook executive and 
current venture capitalist Chamath Palihapitiyaa€™ s tweeting that he had bought call options on 
GameStop, betting the stock would go still higher than it had before. The total equity value of 
GameStop was

$5.5 billion Tuesday morning, $11 billion Tuesday afternoon, $17 billion Tuesday evening, a peak 
(so far) of $26 billion Wednesday, and $18 billion Thursday as I am taping this.
OK. So what is going on? And what does this mean?

Wikipedia tells us that GameStop is headquartered in suburban Dallas, TX, near to a LEGOLAND:

GameStop is an American video game, consumer electronics, and gaming merchandise retailer. The 
company is headquartered in Grapevine, Texas, United States, a suburb of Dallas, and operates 5,509 
retail stores throughout the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and
Europe as of February 1,2020. The company's retail stores primarily operate under the GameStop, EB 
Games, ThinkGeek, and Micromania-Zing brands. In addition to retail stores, GameStop also owns Game 
Informer, a video game magazine.

GameStop last made a profit in calendar 2017: $35 million. It lost $673 million in 2018, lost 20% 
of its revenue in 2019 down to $6.46 billion for a loss of $471 million, looks to realize $5.26 
billion in revenue and lose $200 million, and is forecasta€”but tracking analysts forecasts are 
usually
optimistica€”at revenues of $5.84 billion and break-even in 2022. Up until September, it was worth 
some $5 per share, $350 million for the 70 million shares outstanding.

The stock jumped in September and Octobera€’’roughly tripled, boosting the companya€™ s equity 
valuation from about $350 million to about $1 billion. Why? Because of Ryan Cohen. Ryan Cohen had 
founded online pet retailer MrChewy in 2011 at the age of 25. He had made a success of it, selling 
it
to PetSmart for $3.35 billion and stepping down from the CEO position in 2019. He had bought 10% of 
GameStop. He hoped to turn it around: a€ceGameStop needs to evolve into a technology company that 
delights gamers and delivers exceptional digital experiencesa€”not remain a video game retailer
that overprioritizes its brick-and-mortar footprint and stumbles around the online ecosystema€!a€D 
he wrote.

Before Ryan Cohena€™ s appearance, the consensus was that GameStop would be closed in a decade. The 
marketa€™ s valuation was that of the $50 billion in revenue the firm might collect before it 
closed, it would be generous to think that 1% of that might be ultimately paid out to shareholders.
Afterwards, the market was more optimistic: maybe with Ryan Cohen involved, there was a 20% chance 
GameStop could, instead, become an internet property as valuable as MrChewy was when Cohen sold it 
to PetSmart. Maybe Ms. Market was right here; maybe Ms. Market was wrong. I tend to think
that   Ms. Market was being too enthusiastic about the ability of one charismatic 35er with 
successful experience in an adjacent market segment to make a big difference. But I would not say 
that I was at all sure that Ms. Market was wrong.

One other thing happened in September-October: an extra 35 million shares or so were shorted. As of 
August, there were 100 million shares in long positionsa€’’people who stood to gain if GameStop 
went up or paid dividendsa€”and 30 million shares in short positionsa€’’people who stood to gain if
GameStop went down. By the end of October there were 135 million shares in long positions in 65 
million shares in short positions. And then nothing happens until January 12,2021.

So what happens in the two weeks between the end of January 12 and dawn on January 26? The 
stock-market valuation of the company then went from $1 to $5.5 billion. Why and how?

One part of it is a a€cetechnicala€D story. The technical story has two parts. The first part is 
the a€oeshort squeezea€D part. Suppose that you are a short seller. And suppose that the price of a 
stock you have shorted goes upa€”goes way up. What do you do? On the one hand, the profits from 
your short, if
it comes in, are now much bigger, so you hold on to and may well increase your short position.

On the other hand you are now poorera€’’perhaps a lot poorera€”and your tolerance for risk goes 
down. Moreover, you are in this as a business: you cannot get yourself into a situation where one 
bet going wrong will destroy your ability to make other bets in the future, no matter how big a 
winner this one
bet looks. And, in addition, the fact that the stock has moved against you is evidence that your 
initial analysis of the situation was, to some degree at least, not accurate. Those will tend to 
make you shrink your position.

The net effect of these factors is that, for short sellers, their demand curve may well slope the 
wrong way. Markets are stable because when price goes up demand tends to go down. But if 
short-sellers decide to cover rather than increase their positions when the price rises, their 
component of the demand
curve does not slope down but slopes upa€’’unless and until much bigger short sellers with much 
deeper pockets and much greater risk tolerances are attracted into the market.

The second part of the technical story is the call option part. Suppose you want to bet on Ryan 
Cohena€™ s successa€”or bet that it might look like he might possibly be a success. You could buy 
the stock. Or you could amplify your potential winnings by buying a way-out-of-the-money call 
option on the
stock. That way you can make a bet that might come in really big, and make it cheaply. If you think 
you have more knowledge than capital, and yet you want to limit your downside exposure by not 
borrowing to buy stock and hence being on the hook if the stock goes bankrupt, a call option can 
look
attractive.

The question is: who do you buy the call option from? If you can find somebody who wants to make 
the opposite beta€”to bet that Ryan Cohen will not succeeda€”well and good. But odds are you will 
buy the call option from somebody who does not have strong views about Ryan Cohen and GameStop.
They simply want to collect some money for making a market up front, and then be out of the game. 
They do not want to gamble. They want to hedge their position.

How do they hedge their position? Well, they sell you a call option and then they buy a little bit 
of the stock at the market price. If the call option price goes up, it must be because the stock 
price has gone up. When the call option is way out-of-the-money, a $1 increase in the stock price 
produces only a very
small increase in the value of the option, so you do not need to buy much stock. But as the stock 
price approaches the option strike pricea€”the price at which you get to buy the stock if you 
a€oecalla€n your optiona€”the proper delta hedge requires more and more of the stock. And at the 
limit, as the
option comes into the money, the delta hedge amount becomes one.

Thus as the stock price goes up, your counterparty who has sold you the option must increase his or 
her long position in the stock in order to stay hedged. From your perspective, you are not doing 
anything as the stock price rises. You have an option. You are just letting it ride as the stock 
bounces around.
But the combination of you-and-your-counterparty-who-has-hedged-their-position as a unit is another 
positive-feedback trader: somebody else whose demand curve slopes the wrong way, with your 
collective demand for the stock not falling but rising as the stock price rises.

And, of course, as the stock price rises, it gains more mindshare. And some of those whom news 
about the stock touches will decide to buy.

So far we have three factors: short-sellers who can be squeezed, and thus turned into 
positive-feedback traders; counterparties of call option purchasers, who are positive-feedback 
traders as well; and the fact that news and buzz is a source of stock demand. There are also three 
more factors: call them YOLO
(as Matt Levine does), rage-against-the-(financial)-machine (as John Authers does), and 
pump-and-dump.

Let me quote from Matt Levine on YOLO:

The people on the WallStreetBets subreddit sometimes all get into a stock at once. This is fun, a 
nice social outing in an age of social distancing, a risky but potentially lucrative collective 
entertainment. Recently they decided to do GameStop. Because, I dona€™ t know,
theya€™re gamersa€! ita€™ s a little comical to pump the stock ofa€! mall video-game stores during 
a pandemic, or becausea€! professional investors are short GameStop and they thought ita€™ d be 
funny to mess with them. Or, especially, because their friends on Reddit were
buyinga€!. Take one person whoa€™ s long for fundamental reasons, add 100 people who are long for 
personal-amusement reasons like a€oelol gaminga€D or a€oeleta€™ s mess with the shorts,a€D and then 
add thousands more who are long because they see everyone else long,
and   the stock moves: a€oea€~It was a meme stock that really blew upa€™ , said WallStreetBets 
moderator Bawsela€!. GameStop seemed so utterly doomed that the current situation was actually sort 
of funny to the subreddita€™ s denizens. Banded together, WallStreetBets
members bought in big enough to move the stocka€!. Here is a seven-hour YouTube video from Friday 
in which a guy called a€oeRoaring Kittya€D dips a chicken tender in champagne to celebrate his 
GameStop wins. a€oeThis is the thing, overbought can stay overbought, remain
overbought, even get more overbought,a€D he says, which is as good a summary of the situation as 
anything elsea€!

And let me quote from John Authers on rage-against-the-(financial)-machine:

I argued that it was misplaced to take pleasure at the pain for the short-sellers who had attacked 
GameStop stock, and then been subjected to a a€oeshort squeezea€D for the ages by traders 
coordinating on Reddit. I received a bumper crop of feedbacka€! leaving out many with
unprintable expletives): a€oeHow much did [GameStop short-position hedge fund] Melvin pay you to 
write this garbage? shill. Literally trying to protect an industry trying to fleece jobs from low 
income workers. Sleep well chumpa€!a€D a€oeWatching entitled institutional shorts
whinea€! that millennials equipped with margin accounts & zero fees are collaborating on Reddit to 
target them is my new favorite sport. Looks perfectly healthya€! plus 1 for the little guys.a€D 
a€oeNormal isn't putting the retail trader down for being independent while organized
hedge funds force you to take their way or suffer in fear. Normal is the American dream and being 
able to make your own way. This isn't a casino. This is a riota€!a€D

We coordinated our purchases on Reddit, and we got rich, and in the process we made a bunch of 
overrich institutional Wall Street plutocrats sad and poorer. What is not to like?a€”that seems to 
be their view.

Well, what is not to like is that ultimately all the money there is is the dividends that will be 
paid by GameStop and the price that will be paid by its acquirer whenever the GameStop corporate 
shell is dissolved and its assets are repositioned. At the moment those who have sold GameStop on 
its ride up have
collected perhaps $14 billiona€”$7 billion from the shorts and $7 billion from current GameStop 
holders who were late into their long positions. The short-sellers have lost $7 billion. Current 
stockholders of GameStop have an asset

worth $14 billion that they paid $7 billion fora€”and so a paper profit of $7 billion right now. 
But the only value to back GameStop is the money that will be flowing out of the firm as 
distributed profitsa€”and that is likely to be $400 million only, or maybe $700 million, or maybe 
$1 billion at best.
Current GameStop shareholders are thus looking to lose at least $6 billion of the $7 billion they 
have paid for the stocka€”unless they find greater fools willing to take their shares off their 
hands at something like its current $14 billion paper-profit valuation.

And here we get to the pump-and-dump question: How much do those who have already received $14 
billion in profits from GameStonk so far overlap with those who currently hold a $14 billion paper 
position in GameStonka€”a position that was $28 billion at one moment Thursday afternoon? And how
much have those who have profited already dumped their positions? And what role did those who have 
profited play in pumping up the stock in the first place?

Combine pump-and-dump, rage-against-the-(financial)-machine, YOLO, hedged call options as strong 
sources of positive-feedback trading, and the short squeeze with the excitement provoked by the 
hope that Ryan Cohen could repeat his success with MrChewy, and you have the stage set for Elon Musk
and Chamath Palihapitiya to trigger the quintupling of Tuesday and Wednesday. It is hard to know 
why they did what they did. It seems likely to be YOLOa€”for if they had positions, they are likely 
to spend the rest of their lives enmeshed in nets of lawsuits.


The story is really reminiscent of the bad old days of Gilded Age Wall Streeta€”the Harlem corner, 
the stats bearcat corner, the Northern Securities panic. (The family story is that one of my 
great-great grandfathers killed himself with his revolver because he could not face telling his 
family the scale of his
losses in Northern Securities).

There is, however one big difference. In previous search episodes of short squeezes, corners, and 
massive immediate fast-moving bubble divergences of market prices from fundamentals, there was 
considerable uncertainty about what those fundamentals really were. Was the stock being pumped 
above its
value by cynics who wanted to dump it later? Or were people who had learned that there was about to 
be great news about the business trying to quietly buy it up in advance? And were the rumors that 
there was a pump-and-dump going on false-flag diversions to keep the general public from getting in 
on a
good thing?

Before there was always a universe to be understood and mastered, or Masters of the Universe who 
you could profit be emulating. Knowledge either about what fundamental values really were or about 
the plans of insiders. But this time there is no knowledge, there is no pattern.
Just as Donald Trump was a reality-TV simulacrum of a president, so this feels like a reality-TV 
version of financial Robber Barons. A going-through-the-motions for the camera, but, somehow, not 
the real thing. Then there was a reason to think things might work out as planned.
Now there is only: GameStonk!!

Market Summary > GameStop Corp.

NYSE: GME

239.01 USD-107.36 (31.00%)

Jan 28, 1:47 PM EST • Disclaimer

1 day      5 days      1 month     6 months      YTD       1 year      5 years       Max

500

400

300

200

Jan 25           Jan 26            Jan 27           Jan 28


Open
High
Low
Mkt   cap

265.00

483.00

112.25

16.60B

Div yield
Prev close
52-wk high
52-wk low

0.64%

346.37

483.00

2.57


P/E ratio

Market Summary > GameStop Corp.

NYSE: GME

237.42 USD-108.95 (31.45%) +

Jan 28, 1:49 PM EST • Disclaimer

1 day      5 days     1 month     6 months               1 year      5 years

400

300

200

100


0—1

2021


Open
High
Low

P/E ratio

265.00

483.00

112.25

16.60B

Div yield
Prev close
52-wk high
52-wk low

0.64%

346.37

483.00


100

2021


Open
High
Low
Mkt   cap

P/E ratio

265.00

483.00

112.25

16.60B

Div yield               0.64%

Prev close              346.37

52-wk high              483.00

52-wk low               2.57

$GME GameStop short interest vs. share price - a story of
console cycles

Stocks

GME Shan Pncmg : 16 9 GME Sharts Soid Short: 6745mm | GME Sharts Outstanding: 65 16mm | GME 
Volume:8 97mm

Ml 1 ■ *S


