Subscribe now

Brad DeLong tells his story of the 20th century.



Noah Smith

Noahpinion

Book review: "Slouching Toward Utopia"

a€oelta€™ s beautifula€!even if ita€™ s where everybody died.a€D a€” Nakagawa Noriko This may 
actually be the first book review Ia€™ ve done before a book has actually been released! 
Fortunately, I was able to secure an advance copy of the book from my podcast co-host, Brad DeLong. 
The book comes out September 6th, so hopefully this review can tide you over until thena€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 103 likes A- 55 comments A- Noah Smith



AN ECONOMIC HISTORY


J. BRADFORD DEUM

d€oeltd€™ s beautifuld€\even if itd€™ s where everybody died.d€Uld€” Nakagawa Noriko

This may actually be the first book review Ia€™ ve done before a book has actually been released! 
Fortunately, I was able to secure an advance copy of the book from my podcast co-host, Brad DeLong. 
The book comes out September 6th, so hopefully this review can tide you over until then!

Brad DeLong has an encyclopedic command of modern economic history, and an inimitable writing style 
a€” it was his blog, back in the mid-2000s, that first inspired me to want to become an econ 
blogger myself. Reading his book will immerse you in the DeLongiverse a€” the swirl of fun facts, 
key phrases, and unifying narratives that comprises DeLonga€™ s brain. It may feel a little strange 
at first, but once you get used to it, ita€™ s a rewarding
experience.

But although DeLong is an economic historian, Slouching Toward Utopia is only partly an economic 
history book. Mostly, ita€™ s a political-economic history book. There are many books about why the 
world industrialized and got rich a€” Mark Koyama and Jared Rubina€™ s How the World Became Rich, 
Gregory Clarka€™ s A Farewell to Alms, Joel Mokyra€™ s A Culture of Growth, Robert Allena€™ s The 
British Industrial Revolution in Global
Perspective, and Robert Gordona€™ s The Rise and Fall of American Growth, to name just a few. But 
Slouching Toward Utopia is only slightly about how the world became rich; ita€™ s mostly about what 
humanity decided to do with the riches it received, and what sort of systems it developed to try to 
keep growth going. In other words, ita€™ s about political economy.

Why did the world become rich? DeLong argues that only after 1870 did technological progress 
accelerate to the point where it managed to outstrip human population growth, thus freeing humanity 
from Malthusian constraints. He attributes this acceleration to three key innovations: the 
industrial research lab, the modern corporation, and steamship-driven globalization. I would have 
liked a bit more definitive proof that these were the key causal factors, but
DeLonga€™ s arguments in favor of them are fairly persuasive.

With these pieces in place, DeLong shows that total factor productivity a€” which he calls the 
a€oevalue of knowledge indexa€D a€” accelerated dramatically right around the time that these 
things appeared. That acceleration, according to DeLong, continued up until the mid-2000s; thus, he 
conceives of 1870-2010 as a a€oelong 20th centurya€D characterized by rapid productivity growth and 
the social and political upheavals it caused.

Most of the book is actually focused on those political upheavals. DeLonga€™ s a€oelong 20th 
centurya€D saw the development of various ideologies, including liberal democracy, free-market 
libertarianism, communism and fascism. This was completely natural; thanks to rapidly accelerating 
growth, humanity was rapidly confronted with newfound wealth beyond their previous imaginings, new 
possibilities for social organization, new problems, new
opportunities, and new distributions of economic power. Of course there were going to be lots of 
big ideas for how to handle all this, and of course some of those ideas were going to be crazy and 
bad.

DeLong narrates the rise and (sometimes) fall of these ideas through the lens of two 20th century 
political-economic thinkers a€” Friedrich Hayek and Karl Polanyi. Hayek is a market fundamentalist, 
who basically argues that markets are the best that society can do. Polanyi argues that markets 
need to be tempered by social protections, in order to protect certain universal values a€” job 
security, decent wages, and a feeling of community. If you squint hard,
perhaps you can see these two poles as rough stand-ins for the Republicans and Democrats of the 
1980s. But DeLong doesna€™t see Hayek and Polanyi as dialectical opposites a€” instead, he uses 
their frameworks to examine and evaluate all the other political-economic ideas that people came up 
with in the 20th century.

Thus, DeLong establishes a sort of rhythm for modern history. Hayekian free markets create growth, 
but people want more a€” they want their Polanyian social protections. So they create systems like 
communism, fascism, or liberal democracy, designed to temper the marketa€™ s natural inequality and 
bring about a better society. Sometimes these systems work out; often, they end in catastrophe and 
tears. At the end of the story, in 2010, liberal democracy
more or less prevails, and people are fabulously rich by the standards of any previous age. But 
theya€™re still not satisfied; all this wealth and freedom has not made them feel like theya€™re 
living in a utopia. Perhaps all it would take is another vast leap in wealth to finally make human 
beings satisfied, but this may not be in the offing; productivity growth has slowed down, and ita€™ 
s not clear if wea€™ 11 ever see anything like the 20th century again.

The book therefore ends on an ominous note a€” humans are still deeply unsatisfied with their 
society, and will doubtless try to create new big political-economic ideas as a result. If history 
is any guide, this path will be fraught with danger.

Slouching Toward Utopia is not a book that advances a central thesis; instead, ita€™ s a book that 
encourages us to look at our recent past though a certain lens. DeLong narrates a set of events 
that most of us know well by now a€” European imperialism, the world wars, decolonization, 
globalization, the Great Recession, and so on. You will probably learn a few interesting historical 
tidbits from this book a€” DeLong has a frankly superhuman ability to
remember and regurgitate endless fascinating little anecdotes and facts. But overall, the reason to 
read Slouching Toward Utopia is to re-frame your understanding of modern history a€” to see rapid 
economic growth as the unifying master narrative of the world since 1870.

I think that re-framing is a useful exercise. Ia€™ m no materialist, but I think ita€™ s clear that 
changes in material circumstances create a new set of conditions that humankind has to adapt to. Of 
course ita€™ s a two-way process a€” social organization can affect technological progress too. But 
technology is kind of magical in that it spreads very quickly around the globe. So as long as, say, 
refrigerators are inventedsomewhere, prettysoon people all around
the world are going to want refrigerators. Sure, a single very important country can push progress 
forward a€” as happened with the U.S. in the 20th century. But overall, technology is global enough 
that its progress doesna€™ t depend too much on any one societya€™ s choices about how to organize 
itself.

This, in a nutshell, is why I often call myself a a€oetechnological determinista€n. Not because 
tech determines everything in society (it obviously doesna€™t), but because it stands mostly above 
any one society, and it sets the constraints under which every society must operate. I see 
Slouching Toward Utopia as encouraging readers to see history through the lens of this sort of 
technological determinism.

DeLonga€™ s vision of history is also a powerfully optimistic one. For many, ita€™ s hard to look 
at the horrors of the 20th century a€” the concentration camps, the bombed-out cities, the 
despoiled landscapes a€” and not see a narrative of the Fall of Man. What use is technology, some 
ask, if it simply gives us better ways to murder each other and destroy our world? But to DeLong, 
all the 20th centurya€™ s monsters are merelymaladaptive responses toa
fundamental, underlying positive trend a€” the de-immiseration of the human race and the final 
conquest of the Malthusian demon (final because lower fertility rates will make the human race 
sustainable even if technological progress peters out).

Yes, many people were slaughtered and brutalized during the 20th century. But a great many more 
were able to enjoy material standards of living of which their ancestors could only dream. In a 
nutshell, this happened:

Global income distribution in 1800,1975, and 2010  Our World


between countries (purchasing power parity (PPP) adjustment).

These estimates are based on reconstructed National Accounts and within-country inequality 
measures.

Non-market income (e.g. through home production such as subsistence farming) is taken into account.

$0.2    $0.5  $1    $2     $5   $10   $20    $50   $100 $200

Daily consumption per capita

(in international-$ in 2011 prices; log axis)

Daily consumption per capita

(in intemational-$ in 2011 prices, log axis)

2015


Daily consumption per capita

(in international-$ in 2011 prices; log axis)


Data source: Gapminder

Daily consumption per capita

(in international-$ in 2011 prices, log axis)

The visual tialicr. is available a! OurWorkjmOata erg you fiixJ mo?© visualizations and research on 
global development         Licensed under CC-BY-SA by the author Max Rose/

No, this didna€™ t make Earth a paradise. But for most people, it made it no longer a hell. Thata€™ 
s not the end of humanitya€™ s journey, but ita€™ s a triumphant narrative nonetheless. Perhaps 
this progress is sustainable, perhaps not; we will certainly fight to make it so. But even if that 
fight ultimately fails, at least for a short time a whole lot of human beings got to five a life 
that wasna€™ t complete crap.
I call that a win.

In any case, I highly recommend Slouching Toward Utopia. The 20th century a€” even its a€celonga€D 
version a€” is now decisively over, and ita€™ s a good occasion to reflect back and think about 
what it all meant.

