Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth

1)A brand-new very interesting and very well-done working paper. Having government announced three 
openings during the plague year not only accelerated the spread of the
virus but did increase spending and thus employment. a€oeReopenings" were thus not a completely 
pointless mistake, but rather a trade-off:

Raissa Dantas & Jacob Robbins: Covidd€“19 Businesses Reopenings & Consumer Spending: a€~This paper 
studiesa€! Covida€“19 retail and
restaurant shutdownsa€!. We find reopening policies substantially increased he dramatic a€~Va€™ 
shaped pattern of consumer spending spending for
categories directly impacted by the laws: a 68.4 p.p. increase in non-essential in-store spending 
and a 16.7 p.p. increase in full-service indoor dining. For
sectors not directly impacteda€’’essential retail, limited-service restaurants, and onlinea€”we 
find a limited impact of reopenings. We estimate that retail
reopenings are responsible for 34% of the total trough-to-peak recovery in spending, while 
restaurant reopenings are responsible for 15% of the
recoverya€!

LINK: 
chttps://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/covid-19-businesses-reopenings-and-consumer-spending/>

2) I am greatly looking forward to this, because it is important and it is an area in which my 
ignorance is great. Tu June 15,2:00 PM EDT. I do find myself curious that Austin
Clemens is now a a€oeComputational Social Scientista€Da€”that is not an occupation classification I 
have ever seen before:

Equitable Growth: Data Infrastructure for the 21st Century: A Focus on Racial Equity. a€~Largea€! 
racial divides in income, wealth, employment, and
other markers of economic well-beinga€! have a tragic human costa€!. Pay discrimination, barriers 
to wealth accumulation, and other forms of systemic
racism prevent people from developing and fully deploying their human capital. The Biden 
administration hasa€! an Equitable Data Working Group.

Across many domains, federal data collection and reporting can be improved to better reflect the 
diversity of our economy. These improvements could then
guide policymakers in implementing more finely tuned policies to address the legacy of systemic 
racism and the differential impacts of recessions and other
economic shocks on communities of color. This event will convene a panel of academics to discuss 
some actionable areas of policy where the Biden
administration could take steps to increase the quality and utility of economic data disaggregation 
and how these steps will lead to better policy outcomes.
Please  direct questions related to event content to Computational Social Scientist, Austin 
Clemensa€!

LINK: <https://web.cvent.com/event/443b4018-f6b5-49c5-8ec9-37389d827977/summary>

3) I discover that Bloomberg Opiniona€™ s Noah Smith and myself are both remarkably optimistic 
about the future of employment, as long as we can maintain a relatively
egalitarian income distribution and thus a middle-class society. In a middle-class society in the 
future, care work will be in very high demand and will be highly valued. Our goods-
manufacturing productivity will mean that even a middle-class care-work wage will enable the 
purchase of enormous quantities of goods. And advanced worker-aiding technologies
will   mean that the care worka€”from psychotherapy to legal services to life coaching to changing 
bedpansa€”will be of very high quality and value. What is not to likea€”if we
maintain a relatively egalitarian income distribution and thus a middle-class society?:

Noah Smith & Brad DeLong: PODCAST: a€oeHexapodiaa€dIs the Key Insight XVII: What Will the Jobs of 
the Future Be Like?: a€~If we get an
relatively egalitarian income distribution, the care-centered service economy will give us at least 
as many interesting jobs to do in the future as we could
possibly wanta€”at least for a€cefuturea€D meaning a€oenext two hundred yearsa€Da€! Who controls 
the consumption spending decisions is key to
answering the question of what the future of work will be like: it really matters whether it is a 
few rich people, a broad base of humanity, or the robotsa€!
The  market economy is very efficient at crowdsourcing solutions to and then organizing the 
implementation of the problems that it sets itself. But the major
problem the market economy sets itself is how to maximize the amount of necessities, conveniences, 
and luxuries delivered to the people who control
valuable property rights who think they need stuffa€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/podcast-hexapodia-xvii-what-will>

4) Going outside my wheelhouse, again. But this is very important. China is best seen not as a 
country but as a civilization. And a civilization needs to have institutional and
governance diversity so that it is always exploring optionsa€”and then copying successes and 
deep-sizing failure. The right model for China in the future will not be that of a
centralized empire obeying authoritative commands from the center, but rather something highly 
federalized like the European Union:

J. Bradford DeLong: Xia€™ s Historic Mistake: a€~Consider an alternative history in which the 
Peoplea€™ s Liberation Army had overrun both Hong
Kong and Taiwan in 1949; Sichuan had not been allowed to pursue pilot reform programs in 1975, when 
Zhao Ziyang was appointed provincial party
secretary; and Chinaa€™ s centralization had proceeded to the point that the Guangzhou Military 
District could not offer Deng refuge from the wrath of the
Gang  of Four in 1976a€!. Rather than enjoying a rapid ascent to economic superpower status, China 
would [now] find itself being compared to the likes of
Burma or Pakistan. When Mao Zedong died in 1976, China was impoverished and rudderless. But it 
learned to stand on its own two feet by drawing on
Taiwan and Hong Konga€™ s entrepreneurial classes and financing systems, emulating Zhaoa€™ s 
policies in Sichuan, and opening up Special Economic
Zones in places like Guangzhou and Shenzhen.a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-syndicate.org/commentary/xi-jinping-quest-for-centralization-destined-for-failu
re-by-i-bradford-delong-2021-06>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)I need to find time to try to do a deep dive into where this anomalous construction number is 
coming from. That also means I need to do a very deep dive into the current state of
the aggregated and disaggregated seasonal adjustment factors as well. It is excellent that leisure 
and hospitality are growing so rapidly. But this pace of job growth is not going to
get us to full employment this year:

Mike Konczal: Leisure and hospitality: +292,000; within that: Accommodation and food services: 
+220,600 I just dona€™t see the service sector
labor supply crisis here. Again, these numbers are on (or above) the expectation; ita€™ s the 
a€“20,000 workers in construction that leaves me puzzleda€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/rortybomb/status/1400794183380746249>

2) A very nice video talk from Markus Brunnermeiera€™ s series over at Princeton. But it lacks 
explicit consideration of the end-stage of what Larry Summers started us calling
a€oesecular stagnation^□. What happens when the era of a safe-asset shortage ends? How can we make 
it end? And should we now be attempting to do so? Kicking the
government   debt can down the road is indeed a very profitable and good thing to do when interest 
rates are at their current values. And perhaps they will stay at their current values
for    so long that we will look back and see debt accumulation as a very effective way of boosting 
societal well-being, and wish that we had done more of it. But what happens if
interest rates start to normalize is still a relevant question. My view is that it will require 
action, but that the costs of high debt if interest rates normalize cannot be greater than
moderate, if only because the situation can always be handled by financial repression, and while 
the costs of financial repression are positive, they are moderate. However, I would
like smarter people than me thinking about this, and then telling me what I should believe:

Olivier Blanchard: Fiscal & Monetary Policy After Covid

LINK: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WwM7qI4g44o>

3) A very nice, very concise, and very balanceda€”both optimistic and pessimistic, in different 
waysa€’’take on the current state and evolution of the American labor market from


me wise jay onamoaugn;

Jay C. Shambaugh: a€™ While below expectations, seems worth remembering this is a top 10 monthly 
job gain in history. If you throw out months with

>4 million on temporary layoff in the previous month (April a€“ October 2020), then it is top 5. It 
is hard to get job gains over 1 million with new job
matches. The disappointing part is at 500k per month, will take a couple years to get back to 
trend. Possible optimism is [that] on May 12, [there were] still
not  so many fully vaccinated in 16a€“64 age range. Possibility for gains to increase June a€“ 
August. (See <https ://brookings.edu/blog/up-
front/2021/06/03/examining-the-uneven-and-hard-to-predict-labor-market-recovery/>a€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/JayCShambaugh/status/140079910020809933Q>

4) Princetona€™ s Markus Brunnermeier explains his personal framework for thinking about safe 
assets, and why the fiscal theory of the price level is badly broken right now, and
thus not to be relied on. Start here if you want to approach these issues from the theoretical 
side:

Markus Brunnermeier: Inflation, Safe Assets & Debt Sustainability: a€~The Fiscal Theory of [the] 
Price Level[a€™ s]a€! key equation is the nominal
value of government bonds divided by the price level equals the discounted present value of the 
primary surplusesa€!. [But] a bubble term needs to be
addeda€! Japanese experience provides a nice case studya€!. Countries can have a primary deficit 
all the timea€! if the interest rate on the government
bond   is smaller than the growth rate of the economya€!. Interest is low if the government debt is 
a safe asset, i.e. it allows precautionary self-insurance via
retrading and gains in value in times of recessionsa€!. The risk-free rate for a log-utility 
setting is the sum of the time preference rate (valuing future
utility),   the expected growth of consumption (higher rates for future wealth), and negative 
precautionary savings components consisting of the variance of
aggregate and idiosyncratic consumption growth risk. A risk premium is added to the risk-free 
ratea€! inflation risk and the loss of safe asset status risk.
Finally, the convenience yield is subtracteda€! becausea€! government bondsa€! [can be] 
collateral^!

LINK: 
<https://bcf.princeton.edu/events/markus-brunnermeier-on-inflation-self-asset-and-debt-sustainabilit
y/>

5) Bloomberg Opiniona€™ s Noah Smith tries to account for popular distaste for inflation by 
claiming that there is an inverse correlation between inflation and real-wage growth.
And there isa€”for supply hock caused inflation. But Noah, the claim is that people hate inflation, 
not that people hate supply-shock caused inflation, which is the kind that reduces
worker well-being. But there are other kinds of inflation as well: wage-push inflation, and 
demand-pull inflation. Wage-push inflation is definitely associated with higher real wages
for the working class and thus for the overwhelming bulk of the electorate. Demand-pull inflation 
produces wealth for those who find themselves holding positions at bottlenecks,
but also tends to boost wages because it squeezes non-bottleneck profits when the labor market gets 
tight. And yet the claim I see in the public discourse is that demand-pull
inflationa€”the kind we are hoping to get over the next eighteen monthsa€”is massively unpopular as 
well. Why? North does not have an answer:

Noah Smith: Why Do People Hate Inflation?: a€~I dona€™t think we should be panicking about 
inflation yet. Buta€! why do we even carea€! in the first
place?a€! Inflation really made people very very upset from maybe around 1974 to around 1983. That 
roughly coincides with when inflation was actually
high  in Americaa€!. When you look at a graph of nominal wages, it sure looks like inflation 
doesna€™ t affect it very mucha€!. Now look at a graph of
real wages! Ita€™ s all over the place!a€! It sure looks like nominal wages are sticky, meaning 
that inflationa€”if it happens for the wrong reasonsa€”can
reduce workersa€™ wages and real purchasing powera€!.. Why is it so hard for workers to negotiate 
cost-of-living raises? Why was this so hard even in
the  late 60s and 70s, when unions were much stronger than they are today? What is broken in our 
wage-setting process? If we can answer that question, we
might have a chance of fixing ita€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/whv-do-people-hate-inflation>

6) In 1453 the Muslim-Turkish empire ruled by the Osmanli dynasty is the most powerful, best 
organized, potentially richest state and society in the world. And, indeed, up to 1688
it is the Turkish armies of the Ottoman Empire that are periodically besieging Vienna, not Austrian 
armies that are periodically besieging Constantinople. And yet 1453 is the
fundamental power zenith: thereafter the Ottoman economy and society fail to take pace with growth 
and innovation in Western Europe. Why? This is a deep puzzle. Here the very
sharp Anton Howes takes a look at a small piece of it, and concludes that it is inequality and 
centralization, plus frictions, that blocked the Ottoman Empire from copying European
innovations in printing with movable type:

Anton Howes: Why Didna€™ t the Ottomans Print More?: a€~There was not, then, necessarily any 
particular obstacle to the introduction of Arabic-
character printing presses to the Ottoman Empire. Ita€™ s just that, given the much higher costs 
involved in both establishing and running them, it really
needed an active interest from the Sultan. He was the one person able to afford the up-front costs 
and commercial risks, which in western Europe could
otherwise be borne by a much broader group of elites, among whom would-be printers could expect to 
find at least a handful of interested people to
become patrons. The reason for the non-adoption of the printing press in the empire may thus have 
been as simple as apathy, which was only overcome in
the 1720s when MAUteferrika forcefully made the case for printinga€™ s benefits. There may, of 
course, have also been many reasons for earlier sultans
to not want to encourage printing either, and the tales of European travellers are replete with 
supposed justifications for its absence in the empire. But I
suspect that the sultana€™ s mere apathy was probably enougha€!

LINK: <https://antonhowes.substack.eom/p/age-of-invention-why-didnt-the-ottomans>

7) Cryptocurrencies are not just a bizarre exhibition of the madness of crowds in finance. They are 
a menace. So says Ken Rogoff. And I believe he is correct:

Ken Rogoff: A Curse Worse than Cash: a€~Although prominent cryptocurrency advocates are politically 
connected and have democratized their base,
regulators simply cannot sit on their hands forever. Malicious ransomware attacks targeting growing 
numbers of firms and individuals could prove to be the
tipping pointa€!. The view that cryptocurrencies are just an innocent store of value is 
stupefyingly naive. Sure, their transaction costs can be significant
enough  to deter most ordinary retail trade. But for anyone trying to avoid stringent capital 
controls (say, in China or Argentina), launder illicit gains
(perhaps  from the drug trade), or evade US financial sanctions (on countries, firms, individuals, 
or terrorist groups), crypto can still be an ideal option. After
all,  the US government has for many decades turned a blind eye to the role its $100 bills play in 
facilitating weapons purchases and human trafficking, not
to mention undermining poor-country governmentsa€™ ability to collect tax revenues or maintain 
domestic peace. Although Bitcoin and its crypto

variants have by no means surpassed the dollar in facilitating the global underground economy, they 
are certainly on the risea€!. Cryptocurrencies offer a
way to invest in the global underground economya€!. Crypto investors sometimes argue that the 
sector has become so big, and attracted so many
institutional investors, that politicians will never dare regulate it. Perhaps they are right. The 
longer it takes for regulators to act, the harder it will be to get
private digital coins under controla€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/ransomware-attacks-mav-trigger-crvptocurrencv-regulati
on-by-kenneth-rogoff-2021-06>

8) I do not know whether our legislators are actually bad guys, or think that they must posture in 
front of us because too many of us voters are bad guys. But the pose of the cackling
villaina€”we abandoned the moral high ground long ago, ha-ha! Now we can act evilly and do 
evil!!a€”is very disconcerting:

James Medlock: a€™ Little known fact: when you lose the moral high ground, that precludes you from 
acting morally going forward: Ted Lieu: "I
strongly disagree with the Biden Administration on their global vaccine rollout. We should help our 
allies first instead of letting a third party decide where
vaccines should go. Since there are not enough vaccines, should we help India or Iran? We should 
help India first. We lost that moral high ground the
moment  we decided to prioritize Americans first when it came to vaccines. Now we need to make sure 
American interests are protected firsta€Da€!

Not So Blind Caesar: a€~Medlock, stop bullying the 19 year old intern who kinda forgot how policy 
communications goa€!

James Medlock: a€~I sorta feel like this is Ted himself, he strikes me as a very online persona€!

Bernie Prat: a€~I lost the moral high ground back in a€~87 and havena€™ t looked back. Ita€™ s 
liberating, honestly. Ia€™ m surprised Ted waited so
longa€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/idcmedlock/status/140065824470Q278786>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Realitv


Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

