Subscribe now

FIRST: Trying to Stir the Pot for a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D

Brad DeLong: To: @zachdcarter. May I please order up a strongly critical review of Slouching 
Towards Utopia chttps://bit.ly/3pP3Krk> from you for publication in Jacobin in September?

Zachary D. Carter: Unfortunately, Brad, I like it very much, and am writing it for Dissent.

Brad DeLong: Come on! It has an overly-simplistic stripped-down pseudo-Polanyiesque Grand Narrative 
at its heart. That may have been adequate for a 1940s understanding of the dynamic of fascism, 
really-existing socialism, and classical (or, rather, pseudo-classical semi-liberalism then, but it 
is wholly inadequate for grasping the political-economy dilemmas of
the world today!

Zachary D. Carter: Starting to see why it took you so long to writea€!

Brad DeLong: At the very least, a satisfactory book would deal:

•  (a) with the role played by the fiduciary institution of modern science (a la Michael Polanyi) 
and the failed attempts to extend it into technocracy;

• (b) with the fine-grained advance of technology (a la David Landes);

•  (c) with the interaction of technology and the creation of businesses and industries (and 
destruction of same) (a la Joseph Schumpeter);

•  (d) with the construction of institutions that were more truly liberal and democratic as 
attempts to approximate what an open society (a la Poppera€™ s hopes) might be;

•  (e) with managerialism (a la Peter Drucker but also Alasdair MacIntyre) as an attempt to 
reconcile individual freedom with community purpose;

• (f) with taming the market via wealth equalization and public provision (a la William Beveridge);

•  (g) with Coasian hopes to make the market sovereign and beneficent by carving property rights at 
the joints;

• (h) with Pigovian realities that made that impossible; and

•  (i) with a much deeper dive at the failure of social democracy (under the trinity of Keynesian 
full employment and rentier-euthanasia, Pigovian externality correction, and Beveridgean 
redistribution) to pass its own sustainability test under pressure from the neoliberal challenge; 
and also

•  (j) with a much deeper dive into the extraordinary persistence of neoliberalism in spite of its 
failure to keep any of its promises about how it was going to promote the public good.

The a€oewhat is to be done?a€D message of the book is, to the extent that there is one, 
a€oedouble-down on social democracyaCD. But that did not work in the 1970s, is unlikely to work 
now, and yet the book cannot suggest a better path because of its inadequate pseudo-Polanyiesque 
Grand Narrative frame.
Vincent Palumbo: This imagined critical review makes me curious about contents of the booka€! I 
dona€™t usually preorder, but I might for this. Tons of long history books coming my way this 
summer & fall. Finished one: Rise & Fall of Neoliberal Order, which supplements tech aspect 
highlighted herea€!
LINK:

Zachary D. Carter @zachdcarter

@ delong starting to see why it took you so long to write
6:00 PM r™ May 18,2022

Quite seriously: I would, at this point, substantially prefer a critical review to one that is 
simply unalloyed praise. I am arrogant enough to know that the book is very good indeed. But the 
only way I am going to learn more quickly is to engage with smarter people who think that the book 
is fundamentally flawed. And the only way that the book will actually have an
impact, and matter, is it for those who do not agree with the main thrust of it read it and 
consider it. If they do not do that, it might as well not have been written cola it will be as if 
it were balefired out of the Pattern.

And I am willing to listen. So, please, critics: tell me where the book is wronga€!
Share

One Image:


The

World's Biggest

268.7


snipping MUDS

Shipping volume of the biggest
container ports in the world in
2005 & 2021 (in million TEU*)

ip bnangnai

Singapore


North America

Europe

- Ningbo-

Asia                                         •Zhoushan

Shenzhen


Singapore A

Hong Kong Q

Guangzhou

Qingdao


Shenzhen

>* Busan


Busan *•*
Kaohsiung
Rotterdam

Hamburg •

Dubai £
Los Angeles =

2005                  2021

Tianjin

Q Hong Kong
Rotterdam

* 1 TEU = one 20x8x8 foot standard shipping container equilavent
Source: Marine Department (Hong Kong)

® ©©                   statista 5

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Edward Luce: Trump Is Losing His Stranglehold on Republicans 
<https://www.ft.com/content/4601bl52-83e0-4fae-baa9-18965c48af73>

• Scott Chipolina & George Steer: The Terr a/Luna Hall of Shame 
<https://www.ft.com/content/40cQ6a4f-3586-40be-b5ad-b836b5dcdc0d>

• Timothy B Lee: Rising Interest Rates Are Hammering Tech Stocks: a€~They could be especially bad 
for startups looking to raise capitala€! 
<https://fullstackeconomics.com/rising-interest-rates-are-hammering-tech-stocks/>

• Andreas Kluth: Putin Is Losing the War But He Will Escalate to Show Hea€™ s Still in Charge 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-04-28/putin-is-losing-the-war-but-he-will-escalate-
to-show-he-s-still-in-charge>

• Tim Duy: Fed Watch, 5123122: a€™ Forward guidance has already effectively pulled forward much of 
the policy tightening this cyclea€!

• Duncan Black: Rolling Coal: a€~a€oeOwning the libsa€D and a€oeabsolute deep disgust at the 
existence of other people who are in any way differenta€D have been the prime motivators of 
conservatism and glibertarianisma€!. Even the existence electric trucks is an assault on my freedom 
to not live in a world with electric trucks. Suck it, woke
trucksa€! <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2022/05/rolling-coal.html>


• Russell Moore: This Is the Southern Baptist Apocalypse'. a€~The abuse investigation has uncovered 
more evil than even I imagineda€! 
<https://www.christianitvtoday.com/ct/2022/may-web-onlv/southern-baptist-abuse-apocalypse-russell-mo
ore.html>

•  M. Massenkof & al.: SWage Stagnation and the Decline of Standardized Pay Rates, 1974a€ “1991: 
a€™ Increasingly, wages for blue-collar workers were not standardized by job title or seniority, 
but instead subject to managerial discretionaCI <https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/k5ezy>

• Falk BrAouning & al.: Cost-Price Relationships in a Concentrated Economy. a€~The increase in 
industry concentration over the past two decades could be amplifying the inflationary pressure from 
current supply-chain disruptions and a tight labor marketa€l 
<https://www.bostonfed.org/publications/current-policy-perspectives/2022/cost-price-
relationships-in-a-concentrated-economy.aspx>

•  Melody Schreiber: How Rapid Reinfection Has Changed the Covid Fight: a€™ New variants can infect 
people who had Covida€“19 as recently as a few months agoa€! 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/166573/reinfection-ba2-omicron-covid>

•  Patrick McKenzie : Tether Required Recapitalization in May 2022'. a€~In 2019, after years of 
following along, I described Tether as a€oethe internal accounting system for the largest fraud 
since Madoff.a€D This remains truea€! 
<https://www.kalzumeus.com/2022/05/20/tether-required-recapitalization/>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• D. Will: The key^C\ is the end of the Malthusian trapa€!. Will we produce a global order of 
abundance, reason, and realized human potential, or create a world of oligarchs and serfsa€!. The 
Polanyi-Hayak poles of frame-setting seems key to me, with Keynes, Galbraith, Rostow, & others 
trying to administer their way to some form of utopia, a political
economy more democratic and free than dictatorial and restrictivea€! <

d will @DwilloCa

@ delong Long for an elevator pitch. The key problem, it seems to me, is the end of the Malthusian 
trap, and a new dilemma: will we produce a global order of abundance, reason, and realized human 
potential, or create a world of oligarchs and serfs, and destroy the planet.
6:09 PM r™ May 17,2022

5Likes3Retweets

• Doomberg: Where Stuff Comes From'. a€~Take polyethylene, which is the highest volume production 
plastic in the worlda€!

Doomberg

Where Stuff Comes From

a€oethis dovetails in sinister fashion with the basic idea that any sufficiently advanced 
technology cannot be distinguished from magic, highly evolved capitalism becomes such a technology 
and the largess and plenty it produces gets mistaken for a property of the universe rather than a 
made thing, a thing that must be created rather than simply reapeda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 220 likes A- 32 comments A- Doomberg

•  Ed Zitron: IfYouaC™ re Not A Skeptic, Youa€™ re A Sucker: a€~I recognize that a lot of 
cryptocurrency fans feel somewhat unworthy of your sympathya€! [but] millions of people interact 
with these chaotic, manipulated, and kleptocratic systems because they feel they have no other 
choicea€!


d Zitron's Where's Your Ed At

If You're Not A Skeptic, You're A Sucker

Earlier today, I answered a question about why I am so troubled by cryptocurrency after all of 
these years, and I came up with a simple answer: people are getting hurt, and ita€™ s only going to 
get worse. I am absolutely guilty of laughing at the many people who have lost thousands or 
hundreds of dollars by a€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 58 likes A- 26 comments A- Ed Z

•  Davis Kedrosky: The Last Crusade: a€~What caused the Industrial Revolution?a€!. No matter how 
good you are at inventing things, prototypes dona€™t get turned into productivity unless you can 
make machines that worka€!

Davis Kedrosky


economic History Research

The Last Crusade

What caused the Industrial Revolution? That questiona€™ s almost always in the back of my mind. And 
if you werena€™t paying attention, therea€™ s an exciting new paper out in the Journal of Political 
Economy that, for perhaps the first time, takes a dedicated modern econ approach to answering it. 
Written by Morgan Kelly, Joel Mokyr, and Cormac
Oa€™Grada, a€oeThe Meca€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 1 like A- 1 comment A- Davis Kedrosky

• James Palmer: a€™I think therea€™ s room for a good piece on why so many people want to 
believea€! they have worse lives than a medieval peasanta€!

James Palmer @BeijingPalmer

I think there's room for a good piece on why so many people *want* to believe the transparently 
untrue idea that they have worse lives than a medieval peasant.
11:33 PM r™ Apr 17,2022

6,425Likes583Retweets

•  Addison del Mastro: Coffee Shop Kind of Day. a€~Which impulse will ultimately win out: larger 
houses with real home offices, or flexible offices, coworking spaces, and a€ce third placesaCD like 
coffee shops?a€!

IORTHTSOUTI


■                   .The Deleted Scenes

Coffee Shop Kind of Day

My grad school, University of Maryland College Park, had a program earlier this year for graduates 
of the School of Public Policy (thata€™ s me) to informally mentor a new student for the fall 
semester. I signed up, partly because I thought it would be fun, and partly because I thought I 
might actually have good advice for a new studenta€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 5 likes A- 1 comment A- Addison Del Mastro
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

A Few Thoughts on a€ceHexapodiaa€da€;

I thought this went very well indeed:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

PODCAST: "Hexapodia" is AMe Key Insight! XXXVIII: Crypto & "Web3"

Listen now (42 min) I Key Insights: The most recent round of Tech elephants, rhinoceroses, 
unicorns, and spiny lizardsa€’’Netflix, Shopify, etc.a€”are very unlikely to payoff for those 
investors who stay on the ride to the very end. That said, they were very much worth doing even if 
they never make their shareholders any money. The growth of communities of
engineering, entrepreneura€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 4 likes A- 3 comments A- Brad DeLong

The more I think about it, the more completely I become convinced that there is virtually nothing 
in common between Web3 the aspiration, decentralized a€oeByzantine Generalsa€D technologies, and 
the current bunch of grifters and grifted who are holding today's crypto assets.

Chris Blattman directed me to a very interesting conversation at 
<https://www.theverge.com/23138465/decoder-ukraine-war-crvptocurrencv-michael-chobanian-interview-bi
tcoin-usdt> on cryptocurrency in Ukraine. Basically, where you do not have a functioning banking or 
payments system, Tethera€”at least until it collapses because it is not properly
collateralizeda€”can substitute. You can send electronic messages. You can be reasonably confident 
that you will get the money to where it is supposed to go. And the frictions, while large compared 
to what we are used to, are small compared to what goes on in Ukraine.

But there is the big underlying problem with Tether: the potential profits to those who run the 
system come not from enabling cheap electronic dollar-denominated transactions using a stable 
electronic asset; the potential profits come from issuing Tether, and then taking the money paid 
and using it not for collateral and backing but for themselvesa€!

Paragraphs:

Natural gas you cannot do much with. Yes, it is only about half as bad for global warming as is oil 
or coal, but already, I think, we are burning more natural gas for energy than we can afford. But 
the truly insane thing is burning the more complicated hydrocarbon chains. Complex organic 
molecules are relatively rare and valuable things. They should be feedstocks.
They should not be burned up for energy:

Doomberg: Where Stuff Comes From\ a€~Take polyethylene, which is the highest volume production 
plastic in the world. To say polyethylene is ubiquitous is an understatement. Milk jugs, garbage 
bags, food packaging, wire and cable applications, pipesa€”polyethylene is everywhere. 
Industrially, polyethylene is made by sliding down the
ladder: ethane is converted to ethylene, which is then polymerized. Ethane is close to natural gas 
on our [energy] ladder, while polyethylene has virtually the same inherent energy as oil. In 
theory, polyethylene could be made from corn, but that involves climbing the ladder with big 
stepsa€!. Stuffa€! mostly comes from unwanted byproducts
of the oil and gas industrya€!. Many natural gas fields producea€! [as] the predominate product is 
methane, but a little ethane, propane, and heavier cats and dogs are includeda€!. Thesea€! natural 
gas liquids and are a critical feedstock that enables much of the chemical industrya€!

LINK:


Doomberg

Where Stuff Comes From

a€oethis dovetails in sinister fashion with the basic idea that any sufficiently advanced 
technology cannot be distinguished from magic, highly evolved capitalism becomes such a technology 
and the largess and plenty it produces gets mistaken for a property of the universe rather than a 
made thing, a thing that must be created rather than simply reapeda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 220 likes A- 32 comments A- Doomberg

a€oeAn illusion of proximity to successa€n is a very good line here. When real upward mobility is 
hard to find, people are easy prey to grifters:

Ed Zitron: IfYoua€™re Not A Skeptic, Youa€™re A Sucker: a€~I recognize that a lot of cryptocurrency 
fans feel somewhat unworthy of your sympathya€! [but] millions of people interact with these 
chaotic, manipulated, and kleptocratic systems because they feel they have no other choicea€!. We 
are throwing regular people into a financial
meat grinder in one of the most desperate financial eras in history. Thanks to the years of media 
attention given to millennial millionaires that have hit it big on crypto, the average person has 
an illusion of proximity to success, driven by endless advertising and marketing that tells them 
that theya€™ re part of the future, and ita€™ s a future
where theya€™re going to be richa€!. This is why I find those who call people worried about 
cryptocurrency a€ceskepticsa€D so annoy inga€’’because the alternative is only zealotrya€!. By 
humoring Bitcoin as a valid store of value or investment, you are tacitly approving of the fact 
that there is no valid reason why it is worth anything, let
alone tens of thousands of dollars. By having superstars talk about how this is a€oethe future ,a€D 
you are tricking the average person into believing that there is hope, all while throwing them into 
markets that are almost purpose-built to exploita€!

LINK:

If You're Not A Skeptic, You're A Sucker

Earlier today, I answered a question about why I am so troubled by cryptocurrency after all of 
these years, and I came up with a simple answer: people are getting hurt, and ita€™ s only going to 
get worse. I am absolutely guilty of laughing at the many people who have lost thousands or 
hundreds of dollars by a€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 58 likes A- 26 comments A- Ed Z

As Ed admits, this is the wrong headline. Trump may or may not be losing his stranglehold on 
Republicans. But Trumpist Fascism is tightening its:

Edward Luce: Trump Is Losing His Stranglehold on Republicans: a€~When Trump was president, his 
incompetence outstripped his malevolence. Trump could have won re-election by backing sensible 
advice to contain the pandemic and agreeing to a stimulus that would have put more money in 
votersa€™ pockets. He might well be
president now if he had listened to people around him. Trump had become a prisoner of the Kraken 
that he unleashed, however. That meant disdaining masks, rubbishing the medical establishment and 
refusing to take calls from Democrats offering him money on a platter. Now he is the one following 
the base more than the other way round.
At   a rally last December, Trump sang the praises of the Covid vaccine only to be shouted down by 
his own crowd. He has since kept silent on the vaccine, which was arguably his administration^™ s 
biggest feata€!. [But] Trumpism cannot be uninvented. Democrats should not be consoled. The spirit 
that carried Trump to the White House is
far more dominant among Republicans today than it was in 2016. Trump may care for little more than 
his drive to rewrite Americaa€™ s election rules. But the party of the traditional Republican 
elitea€! is now a museum piecea€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/4601bl52-83e0-4fae-baa9-18965c48af73>

I am finding myself much more sympathetic to Allen's core argument than is Davis here. Yes, the 
British economy moved heaven and earth in the industrial revolution era to expand the labor force, 
and pulled in many new workers who were cheaper than prime-age males. But that is not a sign that 
labor was not scarce and expensive. It is a sign that it was. Yes,
engineers and technicians are key. But they were part of the potential supply of resources for 
industrialization. You also needed a demand for industrialization, and that is what I think Allen 
has nailed:

Davis Kedrosky: The Last Crusade: a€~What caused the Industrial Revolution?a€!. Morgan Kelly, Joel 
Mokyr, and Cormac Oa€™ Grada, a€oeThe Mechanics of the Industrial Revolutiona€Da€! that artisanal 
skill explains why Britain invented and adopted mechanized technology during the late eighteenth 
century. Simply put, Britain had a
larger pre-existing stock of workers with enough mechanical proficiency to implement the designs of 
inventors and maintain and refine the machines. France, which had plenty of inventors but fewer 
engineers, was forced to import them from Britaina€!. No matter how good you are at inventing 
things, prototypes dona€™t get turned into
productivity unless you can make machines that worka€!.I think that this paper, while not quite 
getting at the biggest a€cewhya€D question about the Industrial Revolutiona€™ s origins, offers a 
pretty compelling explanation of how the process actually happeneda€!

LINK:


Davis Kedrosky

Economic History Research


economic History Research

The Last Crusade

What caused the Industrial Revolution? That questiona€™ s almost always in the back of my mind. And 
if you werena€™t paying attention, therea€™ s an exciting new paper out in the Journal of Political 
Economy that, for perhaps the first time, takes a dedicated modern econ approach to answering it. 
Written by Morgan Kelly, Joel Mokyr, and Cormac
Oa€™Grada, a€oeThe Meca€!

Read more

9 months ago A- 1 like A- 1 comment A- Davis Kedrosky

Recognition of Russian conquest and annexation of part of the Donbas end of Crimea. Immediate 
accession of Ukraine to the European Union into NATO, plus a Marshall Plan, plus NATO 
a€cetraininga€D brigades nearby Kharkiv, Kyiv, Dnipro, and Odesa. That is, I think, the best deal 
that could be done right now. And every single Russian power broker should be
pressing Putin to do it, and we should be pressing Zelenskyy to do it. Yes, it is a second Yalta. 
Yes, it is a betrayal. But a bad peace is better than a good war because there is no such thing as 
a good war:

Andreas Kluth: Putin Is Losing the War But He Will Escalate to Show Hea€™ s Still in Charge: 
a€~Vladimir Putin is failing so spectacularly, ita€™ s making him even more dangerous. Running out 
of ways to de-escalate while saving face, he appears to think that he has no choice but to 
escalate. What will that look like?a€! His atrocities
have ensured that Ukrainians will forever feel distinct and hate Russia. He pledged to restore 
Russia to imperial greatness; instead, hea€™ s turned it into an international pariah. The list 
goes ona€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-Q4-28/putin-is-losing-the-war-but-he-will-escalate-
to-show-he-s-still-in-charge>

I think Tim Duy is correct here: the policy tightening has already been accomplished via forward to 
guidance, and appropriate policy for the Fed is to stay the course and wait for that to come in to 
tell us whether it has done enough, too much, or not enough:

Tim Duy: Fed Watch, 5123122: a€™ If the labor market comes off the boil as expected later this 
year, spending growth will slowa€!. Granted, recessions are difficult to predict, but I dona€™ t 
think a recession is imminent. In my opinion, thata€™ s still more of a 2023a€“2024 story, assuming 
the Fed cana€™ t execute the soft landing. For
now, the story remains one of deceleration^!. The near-term path for rates remains unchanged. Fed 
speakers consistently endorse the consensus view of 50bp rate hikes at the June and July F0MC 
meetings. The September meeting is a potential opportunity to transition back to 25bp rate hikes if 
the data allows. If the Fed cana€™ t find
sufficient cover in the data to see a path back to 2% inflation within the forecast horizon, it 
will press forward with another 50bpa€!. Although the Fed will keep raising policy rates, we may 
already be at what is at least an effective pause in the tightening cycle. Fed speakers point to 
the two-year Treasury rate as the correct measure of the
Feda€™  s policy stance, and that rate has plateaued in the last few weeksa€!. Forward guidance has 
already effectively pulled forward much of the policy tightening this cycle. Another illustration 
of this dynamic is the sharp divergence in the steepening between three-month and ten-year rates 
versus the flattening of the 2s 10s spreada€!

There are people who think the peasants were happy, and that it was industrialization that produced 
the Dickensian landscape. But they are wrong:

James Palmer: a€™ I think therea€™ s room for a good piece on why so many people want to believe 
the transparently untrue idea that they have worse lives than a medieval peasant. Part of it is the 
sheer detachment of most first-world lives from the household labor done by our great-grandparents, 
never mind distant ancestors. Easy to
forget how backbreaking much of it was. Equally, the assumption that free time in and of itself is 
pleasurable leisure time is to some degree a product of the digital age. I can remember having 
nothing to do as a teenager, and how absolutely tedious it wasa€! Keen Observer: a€™ Just ask them 
simple questions like this about their favorite
classics: Mark Hoofnagle: a€™ Like, why do people think all the Bronte sisters died before 40, and 
that was normall Where are all these orphans in Dickens coming from? Why did it seem like Jane 
Austen characters died whenever it rained? Health was fragile before protection from routine 
infectious diseasea€!

LINK:

James Palmer @BeijingPalmer

I think there's room for a good piece on why so many people *want* to believe the transparently 
untrue idea that they have worse lives than a medieval peasant.
11:33 PM r™ Apr 17,2022

6,425Likes583Retweets
Subscribe now


now, the story remains one of deceleration^!. The near-term path for rates remains unchanged. Fed 
speakers consistently endorse the consensus view of 50bp rate hikes at the June and July FOMC 
meetings. The September meeting is a potential opportunity to transition back to 25bp rate hikes if 
the data allows. If the Fed cana€™ t find
sufficient cover in the data to see a path back to 2% inflation within the forecast horizon, it 
will press forward with another 50bpa€!. Although the Fed will keep raising policy rates, we may 
already be at what is at least an effective pause in the tightening cycle. Fed speakers point to 
the two-year Treasury rate as the correct measure of the
Feda€™ s policy stance, and that rate has plateaued in the last few weeksa€!. Forward guidance has 
already effectively pulled forward much of the policy tightening this cycle. Another illustration 
of this dynamic is the sharp divergence in the steepening between three-month and ten-year rates 
versus the flattening of the 2s 10s spreada€!

There are people who think the peasants were happy, and that it was industrialization that produced 
the Dickensian landscape. But they are wrong:

James Palmer: d€™ I think thered€™ s room for a good piece on why so many people want to believe 
the transparently untrue idea that they have worse lives than a medieval peasant. Part of it is the 
sheer detachment of most first-world lives from the household labor done by our great-grandparents, 
never mind distant ancestors. Easy to
forget how backbreaking much of it was. Equally, the assumption that free time in and of itself is 
pleasurable leisure time is to some degree a product of the digital age. I can remember having 
nothing to do as a teenager, and how absolutely tedious it wasa€! Keen Observer: a€™ Just ask them 
simple questions like this about their favorite
classics: Mark Hoofnagle: a€™ Like, why do people think all the Bronte sisters died before 40, and 
that was normall Where are all these orphans in Dickens coming from? Why did it seem like Jane 
Austen characters died whenever it rained? Health was fragile before protection from routine 
infectious diseasea€!

LINK:

I think there's room for a good piece on why so many people *want* to believe the transparently 
untrue idea that they have worse lives than a medieval peasant.
11:33 PM r™ Apr 17,2022

6,425Likes583Retweets
Subscribe now

