Home base for this: <https://equitablegrowth.org/insights-expertise/value-added/>

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) Across a remarkably large chunk of America, employers seem to think that keeping their contract 
with their workers is an optional thing. It is very disturbing and distressing to
me that the norm that contracts are to be observed appears to of fallen to the wayside to such a 
substantial degree:

Equitable Growth: AGENDA: FACT SHEET: LABOR: Executive Action to Combat Wage Theft Against U.S. 
Wbrfcershttps://equitablegrowth.org/wp-
content/uploads/2021/02/022421-wage-theft-fs.pdf: a€~Wage theft against U.S. workers exacerbates 
the long-run problem of low and stagnant wages. When companies commit
wage                  theft, they impoverish families and deprive workers of the just compensation 
for their hard work, robbing workers of the value they contribute to economic growth and
exacerbating economic inequality. The odds that a low-wage worker will be illegally paid less than 
the minimum wage ranges from 10 percent to 22 percent, depending on overall
economic conditions, and each violation costs that worker an average of 20 percent of the pay they 
deserve. Women, people of color, and noncitizens are especially vulnerable to
wage  theft and especially likely to feel they are not in a position to report the crime and get 
justice. Cracking down on lawbreaking companies that dona€™ t pay workers what they
are owed is a straightforward way for the Biden administration to raise the incomes and living 
standards of U.S. workers and their familiesa€!

2) Restoring the minimum wage to some thing that actually has bite in the US economy is the policy 
with the highest benefit cost ratio that I know of:

Kate Bahn & Will McGrew: FACTSHEET: Minimum Wage Increases Are Good For U.S. Workers & the U.S. 
Economy <https://equitablegrowth.org/factsheet-minimum-wage-
increases-are-good-for-u-s-workers-and-the-u-s-economy/>: a€~Minimum wage increases significantly 
lower the poverty rate, increase earnings for low-wage workers, and
decrease                     public expenditures on welfare programs. The earnings boost for 
low-wage workers from higher minimum wages extends beyond the immediate effect of the legal change
and instead grows in magnitude for several years thereafter. A 10 percent increase in the minimum 
wage increases wages by 1.3 percent to 2.5 percent for workers in the food and
beverage industry, according to a study of six cities with especially high minimum wages. Minimum 
wage increases can have some of the largest benefits for disadvantaged ethnic
groupsa€!

3) Big business appears to have gotten itself into the minds of the Obama administration in a way 
that I do not remember it getting into the minds of the Clinton administration. Yes,
the Department of Justicea€™ s antitrust unit did very well in the Obama administration. But much 
of the rest of the executive branch over 2009-2016a€’’not so much. Now I fear
that this pattern of forgetting that big businesses are not worthy people is taking hold in the 
Biden administration as well. That would not be a good thing:

Hiba Hafiz & Nathan Miller: Competitive Edge: Big Aga€™ s Monopsony Problem: How Market Dominance 
Harms U.S. Workers &
C6>n5MAngr5https://equitablegrowth.org/competitive-edge-big-ags-monopsonv-problem-how-market-dominan
ce-harms-u-s-workers-and-consumers/: a€~Agricultural markets are
among the most highly concentrated in the United States. The markets for beef, pork, and poultry, 
grain, seeds, and pesticides are dominated by four firms. Three firms dominate the
biotechnology industry. One or at best two firms control large farm equipment manufacturing. And a 
small number of firms are increasingly dominating agricultural data and
information markets. Yet former Iowa Gov. Tom Vilsack (D)a€’’President Joe Bidena€™ s nominee for 
secretary of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, the same position Gov.

Vilsack held during the Obama administration^’’has come out against breaking up Big Ag firms. 
a€oeThere are a substantial number of people hired and employed by those
businesses,a€D he said last year. a€oeYoua€™re essentially saying to those folks, a€~You might be 
out of a job.a€™ That to me is not a winning message.a€D Gov. Vilsack
couldna€™t be more wrong on the economicsa€!

4) Greg Leiserson is 100% right here: that tying the expiration of emergency relief to economic 
recovery is an indication of the scale of our problem and how much we need to do,
not a reason not to do what we need to do:

Greg Leiserson: A Great Covida€ “19 
JteZze/7ifeahttps://www.vox.com/policv-and-politics/22277339/covid-19-relief-bill-automatic-stabiliz
ers: a€~Ita€™ s ultimately a program
we need, and to use that as a reason that we cana€™ t have it is to confuse the indication of what 
we need to do with a reason not to do it. The price tag isna€™ t telling you
whether we need it, ita€™ s just telling you the price tag of the thing we needa€!

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) This was a truly excellent panel for all who are interested in why and how American economics as 
a discipline has made the African-American path so difficult. And everyone
should be interested in this:

Damon Jones, Lisa D. Cook, Sandile Hlatshwayo, & Trevon Logan: The Black Experience in the Field of 
Economics https ://harris .uchicago .edu/news-events/events/black-
experience-field-economics: a€~Economics is one of the most important fields in academia, 
government, and financea€”yet it is also one of the least representative. Join a
community                                                                                   of 
Black economistsa€’’emerging scholars and those more advanced in their careersa€”for a discussion 
on the Black experience in economics: entering and progressing
within the discipline, the academya€™ s racial and cultural blind spots, and what the future brings 
for Black economists, both with respect to the profession and the ultimate goal of
driving policy change and impacta€!

2) Xi Jinping wants most of all for, after he is gone, the CCP to be an effective governing party 
carrying the banner of utopia forward into the future. Everything he does is, I think,
focused on the accomplishment of that goal. However, it is not at all clear to me what he thinks 
that entails. And it is not at all clear how he has reached his conclusions about what
that entails. He should be building flexibility and incentives for truth-seeking into the 
structure. Yet, as best I can tell, he is not:

Dan Wang: This Year I Read Every Issue of a€ceQiushia€n(Translation: Seeking Truth) 
https://danwang.co/2020-letter/: a€~The partya€™ s flagship theory journal, whose core
task is to spell out the evolving idea of socialism with Chinese characteristics^! reads like a 
cross between the New Yorker and the Federal Register^}. Each issue starts in the
same way: a reprint of a speech or essay by Xi Jinpinga€”in a font distinct from the rest of the 
magazinea€™ sa€”and then commentary and reports from the rest of the party-
stateli. Steady engagement with the journal throughout the year has forced me to think more deeply 
about the Chinese Communist Party. There are many things that Xi wants to
do,   I believe that his most fundamental goal is to make this Marxist-Leninist party an effective 
governing force for the present centurya€! reshape the bureaucracya€! aided bya€!
propaganda to create centralized campaigns of inspiration^!. The country a€™ s governance 
capabilities have markedly improved, a trend that is apparent in daily life. At the same
time,  the state has grown much more repressivea€!. Propaganda might not matter to you, but it 
matters to the partya€!. The partya€™ s role can be boiled down to two items:
inspiration, by setting the ideological direction, and control, through its power to select 
personnel. Qiushi offers an authoritative articulation of the central governments™ s
priorities    at any moment. Its job, like the rest of the state media, consists of repetition and 
explication of a few phrasesa€!. Ita€™ s up to the party center to adjust and refine slogans
to signal the priorities of the momenta€!. Consider Deng Xiaopinga€! a€ redevelopment is the only 
hard truth,a€D a€recross the river by feeling the stones,a€D and Soepractice
is the sole criterion for the determination of trutha€Da€!

3) This is simply completely bizarre. At one level, Harvard's Mark Ramseyer appears to have done 
the historical equivalent of suppressing experimental evidence. There comes a
point where the slant is so slanted that it crosses the academic dishonesty line, and it really 
looks to me as thought Ramseyer has done so. Plus he appears to be getting a remarkable
amount of support for his claims that Korean "comfort womena€D during World War II were in any 
meaningful sense " volunteers a€D rather than kidnapped into forced
prostitution:

Tessa Morris-Suzuki: The a€~Comfort Womena€™ Issue, Freedom of Speech, and Academic Integrity: A 
Study Aid https://apiif.org/2021/5/MorrisSuzuki.html: a€~In December
2020, an article by J. Mark Ramseyer of Harvard University about the so-called a€~comfort womena€™ 
issue was published in the International Review of Law and Economics^.\
widespread controversya€! serious criticisms of its content. On the other hand, some commentators 
argued that RamseyeraC™ s critics were seeking to suppress his right to express
controversial opinionsa€!. This study aid aims to encourage debate about ways to maintain research 
integrity while protecting free speech, and uses the example of the Ramseyer
article    to provide illustrative material. This is the first in a series of responses on the 
a€oecomfort womena€D issue prompted by the Ramseyer articlea€!

4) The Texas blackout is worth studying closely. Apparentlya€’’obviouslya€’’there were insufficient 
market incentives in current and projected prices to incentivize and fund
investments to secure reliable supply in the case of a weather event that was bound to come along 
sooner or later with probability one. Yet there was sufficient uncertainty and risk
imposed upon consumers by the price process to make it a utility disaster for those who were not 
extremely nimble on their feet. It looks to me like a WOBWa€”a Worst of Both
Worldsa€’’situation. Was it? Where, exactly, did the market fail and why? I need to study this much 
much more:

John Quiggin: What Texasa€™ s Blackouts Tell Us 
https://insidestory.org.au/what-texass-blackouts-tell-us-about-australias-energy-market/: a€~Texas 
lost power when
neighbouring states, also experiencing the freeze, did not. The answer involves regulatory 
failuresa€!. Most of Texas is not connected to the rest of the US power grid. This is


aenoeraie: me lexas interconnection nas oeen Kept separate to ensure mat it remains unaer rexas 
ratner man teaerai controia^i. lexas Kept itseii separate so it couia replace ns

traditional integrated electricity supply with a structure that combined a pool market for the 
generation stage of electricity supply with a competitive market in retailing, and lightly
regulated transmission and distribution. The system is run by ERCOT, the ironically titled Electric 
Reliability Council of Texasa€!. The electricity market run by ERCOTa€! is an
electricity pool market in which generators bid to supply power to the grid each daya€!. When lots 
of power plants went offline, the market price of power soared to
US$9000/MWh, producing ruinous bills for customers who had chosen supply deals based on the 
wholesale price rather than a fixed rate. Second, the system made it unprofitable
for  generators to invest in a€cewinterisinga€Da€!. The maximum price is high enough to create both 
risk and opportunities for market manipulation, but not high enough to
provide incentives to invest in reliable supply. In response to this mess, some electricity 
regulators have reintroduced an element of central planning by making a€oecapacity
paymentsa€D to generators willing to guarantee supplya€!

5) It's not just ethnic minorities that economics has a very hard time attracting. It's the 
majority as wella€”the female majority. The pipeline leaks, massively, e very wherea€’’and
economics has been stalled for a generation in a way that no other academic discipline has:

Shelly Lundberg & Jenna Stearns: Women in Economics: Stalled Progress 
https://www.aeaweb.org/articles?id= 10.1257/jep .3 3.1.3: a€~By the mida€ “2000s, just under 35
percent of PhD students and 30 percent of assistant professors were female, and these numbers have 
remained roughly constant ever since. Over the past two decades, womena€™ s
progress in academic economics has slowed, with virtually no improvement in the female share of 
junior faculty or graduate students in decadesa€!. While differences in
preferences   and constraints may directly affect the relative productivity of men and women, 
productivity gaps do not fully explain the gender disparity in promotion rates in
economics. Furthermore, the progress of women has stalled relative to that in other disciplines in 
the past two decades. We propose that differential assessment of men and women
is    one important factor in explaining this stalled progress, reflected in gendered institutional 
policies and apparent implicit bias in promotion and tenure processesa€!

6) This is very, very good news indeed about the forthcoming robotization of the service sector. 
Human core capabilities appear to be straightforward to supplement, but nearly
impossible to replace, in at least one slice of services:

Karen Eggleston, Yong Suk Lee, & Toshiaki Iizuka: Robots & Labour in the Service Sector 
https://voxeu.org/article/robots-and-labour-service-sector: a€~Firm-level studies are
important for understanding how robots augment some types of labour while substituting for others, 
yet evidence outside manufacturing is scarce. This column reports on one of the
first studies of service sector robots, which suggests that robot adoption has increased some 
employment opportunities, provided greater flexibility, and helped to mitigate turnover
problems among long-term care workers. The wave of technologies that inspires fear in many 
countries may be a remedy for the social and economic challenges posed

by population ageing in othersa€!

7) Donella Meadows and company are trying to generalize what Adam Smith taught us about how to 
analyze the price mechanism, and that we thus have in our bones. I am not sure
she gets it right. But I do think we could benefit from cross-fertilization, because the price 
mechanism we understand so very well is not the only complex system in what we think
of as the economy:

Donella H. Meadows: Thinking in Systems: A Primer 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/book-meadows-systems.pdf>: a€~A 
system is a set of
thingsa€’’people, cells, molecules, or whatevera€’’interconnected in such a way that they produce 
their own pattern of behavior over time. The system may be buffeted, constricted,
triggered,                                                                                or driven 
by outside forces. But the systema€™ s response to these forces is characteristic of itself, and 
that response is seldom simplea€!. Something about statements
like these is deeply unsettling. Something else is purest common sense. I submit that those two 
somethingsa€”a resistance to and a recognition of systems principlesa€”come from
two kinds of human experience, both of which are familiar to everyone. On the one hand, we have 
been taught to analyze, to use our rational ability, to trace direct paths from cause
to effect, to look at things in small and understandable pieces, to solve problems by acting on or 
controlling^!. On the other hand, long before we were educated in rational

analysis, we all dealt with complex systemsa€!. Modern systems theory a€! traffics in truths known 
at some level by everyonea€!. a€oeBecause of feedback delays within complex
systems, by the time a problem becomes apparent it may be unnecessarily difficult to solvea€Ela€‘”A 
stitch in time saves ninea€\. a€oelf a reinforcing feedback loop rewards the
winner                                                                               of a 
competition with the means to win further competitions, the result will be the elimination of all 
but a few competitors.a€Cla€ "for he that hath, to him shall be given;
and he that hath not, from him shall be taken even that which he hatha€\. d€ceA diverse system with 
multiple pathways and redundancies is more stable and less vulnerablea€!d€”’
dona€™ t put all your eggs in one basketa€\

8) 600,000 dead in the end at best, when even semi-competent governance would have made it only 
200,000; and competent governance would have made it 50,000. All who
supported and enabled Donald Trump have a lot of deadly cytokine storms on their hands:

Heather Cox Richardson: a€™ At 4:42 p.m., exactly a year ago, then-President Trump tweeted 
https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.eom/p/february-24-2021.- a€oeThe
Coronavirus is very much under control in the USA. We are in contact with everyone and all relevant 
countries. CDC & World Health have been working hard and very smart.
Stock  Market starting to look very good to me!a€D On February 7, Trump had told journalist Bob 
Woodward something very different. a€oeThis is deadly stuff,a€D he said. The
coronavirus is a€oemore deadly than your, you know, your, even your strenuous flus.a€Da€! More than 
503,000 official deathsa€! 4% of the worlda€™ s population and have
suffered                                                                               20% of 
deathsa€!. Anthony Faucia€! blamed political divisions for the horrific death tolla€!. The pandemic 
has crippled the nationa€™ s economy, and a new The
Economist/YouGov poll reveals that 66% of Americans said they support Bidena€™ s $1.9 billion 
American Rescue Plan; 25% of Americans said they oppose it. This means it is
the most popular piece of legislation since the 2007 minimum wage hike. Also popular is the 
proposed $15 minimum wage hike, which is supported by 56% of Americans and
opposed by 38%, making it more popular than anything former president Trump did while in office. 
More than 150 of the nationa€™ s business leaders are now backing the rescue
plan, saying it is necessary for a€oea strong, durable recovery.a€D And yet, Republicans are, so 
far, united against the proposala€!

