Subscribe now

CONDITION: OA34ers Report Their Muskker Feeds Have Become Hellscapes:

Mine, on Day 5 of Muskker, remains a garden of unicorns, rainbows, and puppiesa€!
Share

FIRST: Market, Barter, Blat, & Plan

The wise Adam Gurri is posting screenshots from Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> as he 
reads it on his phone:

Adam Gurri: From @delong, Slouching Towards Utopia: a€~On the New Economic Policy, wartime 
mobilization, and corporate command and controla€!

KX? T

Adam Gurri @adamgurri

From @delong, Slouching Towards Utopia. On the New Economic Policy, wartime mobilization, and 
corporate command and control.

Initially, the attempt required stepping back

from war communism and into the “New Eco­
nomic Policy,” which required letting prices rise
and  fall,  letting  people  buy  and  sell  and  get
richer, letting managers of government factories
make profits (or be sacked), and letting a class of
merchants and middlemen grow, as what Keynes
called "tolerated outlaws.” It was an expediency.
Capitalism, but subject to state control; socialized
state enterprises, but run on a profit basis. And
while the leash was rarely tugged, it remained.

Part of the expedience was due to the fact that
the centralized  Soviet government had limited
grasp.  Even  by  the  mid-1930s,  the  planners
could only track material balances for about one

hundred commodities. The movements of these
Timm inrlnnrl    1 Ixz


VV^At   AllVA^^Vl   VtAALJLCmy   pAdl   11Lt   VI.   1N   Cl   LAU11   V   V   1U.^;    j^/AV/^

ducers of these commodities who did not fulfill
their  goals  according  to  the  plan  were  sanc­
tioned. Otherwise, commodities were exchanged
between businesses and shipped out to users ei­
ther  through  standard  market  cash-on-the-bar-
relhead  transactions  or  via  blat:  connections.
Who you knew mattered.

When blat, market exchange, or central plan­
ning failed to obtain the raw materials an en­
terprise needed, there was another option: the

tolkachi, or barter agents. Tolkachi would find out
who had the goods you needed, what they were
valued, and what goods you might be able to ac­
quire given what you had to barter with.il

If this sounds degrees familiar, it should.

One  hidden  secret  of  capitalist  business  is
that most companies’ internal organizations are
a lot like the crude material balance calculations
of the Soviet planners. Inside the firm, commod­
ities and time are not allocated through any kind
of market access process. Individuals want to ac­

complish the mission of the organization, please
4-1^ z^-i •** z^ z> z^ z^          Z^T r -w-v^z’v-v-v* z-\4- z^ z^ z^-** z> 4- 1z^nH4■ z> z^


L1LC11    UUddCS    OU    Llicy    gCL    piUlllULCU,    UI    ClL    ICClOL    dU

they don’t get fired, and assist others. They swap
favors, formally or informally. They note that
particular goals and benchmarks are high prior­
ities,  and that the top bosses will be displeased
if they are not accomplished. They use social en­
gineering and arm-twisting skills. They ask for
permission to outsource, or dig into their own
pockets for incidentals. Market, barter, blat, and
plan—this last understood as the organization’s
primary purposes and people’s allegiance to it—
always rule, albeit in different proportions.

The key difference, perhaps, is that a standard
business firm is embedded in a much larger mar­
ket economy, and so is always facing the make-
or-buy decision: Can this resource be acquired
most efficiently from elsewhere within the firm,
via social engineering or arm-twisting or blat, or

is it better to seek budgetary authority to pur­
chase it from outside? That make-or-buy decision
is   a powerful factor keeping businesses in capit­
alist market economies on their toes, and more
efficient.  And  in  capitalist  market  economies,

factory-owning firms are surrounded by clouds


of middlemen. In the Soviet Union, the broad
market interfaces of individual factories and the
clouds of middlemen were absent. As a conse­
quence, its economy was grossly wasteful.

Though wasteful, material balance control is
an expedient that pretty much all societies adopt
during wartime. Then hitting a small number of
specific targets for production becomes the high­
est priority. In times of total mobilization, com-
mand-and-control seems the best we can do. But
do we wish a society in which all times are times
of total mobilization?

2:31 PM r™ Oct 31,2022

5Likesl Re tweet

Here is the latest, which, I must say, is really damned good!

This is from Chapter 8: Really-Existing Socialism. It has two and a half pages on how World War I, 
the 1920s, and the Great Depression shattered confidence in the pseudo-classical semi-liberal order 
inherited from the Belle A%opoque, the Economic Eldorado of 1870-1913; two pages on Lenina€™ s 
version of socialism as one of the competing frameworks bidding for the power to lead humanity into 
the future and how it did not work
a€oel give little away when I tell you really-existing socialism wasa€! the most murderous of the 
totalitarian ideologies of the twentieth centurya€!a€U; two and a half pages on Marx; two and a 
half pages on what Marx got wrong and yet how he was taken not for an analyst but a prophet; and 
seven pages on Russia, the Bolsheviks, the October Revolution, and War Communism to bring us to 
this excerpt:

Initially, the attempt [to a€cebuild socialisma€D in one very poor country] required stepping back 
from war communism and into the a€oeNew Economic Policy,a€n which required letting prices rise and 
fall, letting people buy and sell and get richer, letting managers of government factories make 
profits (or be sacked), and letting a class of merchants and middlemen grow, as what Keynes called 
a€oetolerated
outlaws.a€n It was an expediency. Capitalism, but subject to state control; socialized state 
enterprises, but run on a profit basis. And while the leash was rarely tugged, it remained.

Part of the expedience was due to the fact that the centralized Soviet government had limited 
grasp. Even by the mid-1930s, the planners could only track material balances for about one hundred 
commodities. The movements of these were indeed centrally planned. Nationwide, producers of these 
commodities who did not fulfill their goals according to the plan were sanctioned. Otherwise, 
commodities were
exchanged between businesses and shipped out to users either through standard market 
cash-on-the-barrelhead transactions or via blat: connections. Who you knew mattered.

When blat, market exchange, or central planning failed to obtain the raw materials an enterprise 
needed, there was another option: the tolkachi, or barter agents. Tolkachi would find out who had 
the goods you needed, what they were valued, and what goods you might be able to acquire given what 
you had to barter with.
If this sounds degrees familiar, it should.

One hidden secret of capitalist business is that most companiesa€™ internal organizations are a lot 
like the crude material balance calculations of the Soviet planners. Inside the firm, commodities 
and time are not allocated through any kind of market access process. Individuals want to 
accomplish the mission of the organization, please their bosses so they get promoted, or at least 
so they dona€™t get fired, and
assist others. They swap favors, formally or informally. They note that particular goals and 
benchmarks are high priorities, and that the top bosses will be displeased if they are not 
accomplished. They use social engineering and arm-twisting skills. They ask for permission to 
outsource, or dig into their own pockets for incidentals. Market, barter, blat, and plan, this last 
understood as the organization^ ™s
primary purposes and peoplea€™s allegiance to it, always rule, albeit in different proportions.

The key difference, perhaps, is that a standard business firm is embedded in a much larger market 
economy, and so is always facing the make-or-buy decision: Can this resource be acquired most 
efficiently from elsewhere within the firm, via social engineering or arm-twisting or blat, or is 
it better to seek budgetary authority to purchase it from outside? That make-or-buy decision is a 
powerful factor keeping
businesses in capitalist market economies on their toes, and more efficient. And in capitalist 
market economies, factory-owning firms are surrounded by clouds of middlemen. In the Soviet Union, 
the broad market interfaces of individual factories and the clouds of middlemen were absent. As a 
consequence, its economy was grossly wasteful.

Though wasteful, material balance control is an expedient that pretty much all societies adopt 
during wartime. Then hitting a small number of specific targets for production becomes thexf 
highest priority. In times of total mobilization, command-and-control seems the best we can do. But 
do we wish a society in which all times are times of total mobilization?

And over on Twitter, Elf Sternberg reminds me that my thoughts on these issues are derivative from:

• Francis Spufford: Red Plenty <https: //archive .org/details/redplentyOOOOspuf>

• Cosma Shalizi: In Soviet Union, Optimization Problem Solves You! 
<https://crookedtimber.org/2012/05/30/in-soviet-union-optimization-problem-solves-you/>

PT»f Stpmhpro (a)p1fstp.rnbp.ro


Leave a comment

One Image: Going Viking!:


Western Settlement

Greenland

Middle
Settlement


Vinland

(North America)

Eastern
Settlement

Iceland

NORWEGIAN
SEA

Saami (Lapps)


ATLANTIC
OCEAN

Faroes >

Shetland

Hebrides      Orkneys

Norway

Sweden

Finns

Chuds

JRus[
States

Volga
Bulgars


Ireland

Wales

NORTH HL

S EA Den°iarki

England

Frisia

Skane,

Wends

f Letts

0 Lithuanians

Prus

East Slavs

Khazar/
naganate

CASPIAN


Scandinavian
Settlement

| eighth century

| ninth century
tenth century
eleventh century

denotes areas subjected to
frequent Viking raids but
with little or no Scandinavian
settlement

Iberian
Kingdoms

al Andalus

Normandy

Francia

Africa

West Slavs

South Slavs

Bulgars

Shirvia

Daylam

Abbasid
Caliphate


McUI I tHHANLAN SLA

Scandinavian settlements and raids, which took place mostly between the 700s
and the 1000s. Source: Max Naylor.


The Siege of Paris of 845.. Note that this is from the 19th century, a point al
which history and archaeology were still in their infancy. These walls didn't

exist at that time. They were likely wooden.

Give a gift subscription

Must-Read: Rogoff on China:

Kenneth Rogoff: ChinaaC™ s Diminishing Returns: a€~The breakneck pace of state-guided investment in 
real estate and infrastructure^! has generated diminishing returnsa€!. China and the global economy 
appear to be at a turning point. Heightened political tensions, together with deglobalization, look 
set to slow productivitya€!. Europe is headed for a deep recession, anda€! the United States seems 
to be headed for a slump as well,
[so] China cannot count on exporting its way out of its real-estate-driven slowdowna€!. With the 
Chinese government even less inclined to adopt market-oriented reforms, a smooth landing seems less 
likely than evera€!

Get 50% off a group subscription

O A34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• Gideon Rachman: Xi Jinpinga€™ s China and the rise of the a€~global westa€™ a€!

•  Joe Gagnon: To keep unemployment low, central banks should plan to raise inflation target: 
a€~After high inflation is defeated in the next year or two, the world risks returning to the 
excessive unemployment of the decades before 2020. Central banks will therefore need to put less 
faith in estimates of sustainable employment based on simple linear models and adopt a more 
aggressive policy approacha€!

• Berkeley Registrar: Econ 135: The History of Economic Growth: a€~Etcheverry 3106 :: Instruction 
Mode:In-Person Instruction :: 42 Seats Reserved for Economics Majors :: This course examines the 
idea and reality of economic growth in historical perspective, beginning with the divergence 
between human ancestors and other primates and continuing through with forecasts for the 21st 
century and beyond. Topics covered
include human speciation, language, and sociability; the discovery of agriculture and the 
domestication of animalsa€!

•  Mauro Boianovsky: Lucasa€™ expectational equilibrium, price rigidity, and descriptive realism: 
a€~Lucas rejected disequilibrium price dynamics, as expressed by the Walrasian tA^tonnement and 
auctioneer mechanisms. Lucasa€™ new treatment of equilibrium as an expectational concepta€!. 
Lucasa€™ effort [s]a€!led him to stress the notion of descriptive realism of the modelsa€™ main 
assumptions, which played an
important role in his original discussion of model robustnessaCI

• Kev Quirk: How Does Mastodon Work?a€!

•  John Styles: a€~These are loyalty tests, not engineering challenges. The goal is not to retain 
the strongest talent. They're looking for the yes men who will fall in line and do what they're 
told. You might be able to think of other leaders in recent history who operated this waya€!

•  Rana Faroohar: We must prepare for the reality of the Chip Wars: a€~The question of how far 
decoupling will go depends on Chinaa€™ s next move as well as the extent of new US rules: There has 
been widespread portrayal of President Joe Bidena€™ s recent semiconductor export bans on China as 
Americaa€™ s declaration of economic war with the country. But, in fact, Washington is merely 
reacting to Beijing, and it
is a late reaction at thata€!

Donate Subscriptions


AJs:

Economist Free Exchange: How to escape scientific stagnation: a€~A number of billion-dollar 
experiments suggest a path: In 2008 Ben Jones of Northwestern University formalised a simple yet 
powerful observation. The more knowledge humans have, the longer it takes a budding researcher to 
get to the frontier, and thus to push things forward. In a paper provocatively titled, a€oeThe 
burden of knowledge and the death of the
Renaissance mana€D, Mr Jones argued humanitya€™ s growing knowledge would slow scientific progress 
and thus economic growth. More recent research has solidified this viewa€!. The slowdown has 
spurred academics and policymakers looking to bolster scientific enterprisea€!. Breaking bad 
funding habits should make a difference. The DARPA model, which has more in common with venture 
capital than traditional funding
structures, is an attempt to do just thata€!

Harriet Agnew: Could a€~something breaka€™ in 2023?: a€~a€oeThings fall apart; the centre cannot 
hold; Mere anarchy is loosed upon the worlda€Da€l. Leverage in the overall financial system, says 
Mortier, a€oeis in multiple places that are difficult to trackaCd. Increased capital requirements 
imposed on banks to make them safer following the financial crisis. That made sense. The problem 
is, a lot of risk appears to have shifted
to less regulated parts of the financial system, namely asset managers, insurance companies and 
pension funds. Investors have fuelled the shift by pouring money into alternative strategies such 
as private credit as they searched for yield in a low interest rate environmenta€!

John Ganz: March on Rome, One Century Later: a€~Clara Mattei, The Capital Order: How Economists 
Invented Austerity and Paved the Way to Fascism, is mostly a look at the role liberalism played in 
early fascism. Italian liberals were both political collaborators and also the architects of a 
state policy that favored austerity and a€cestability.a€D But abroad, liberal and conservative 
elites also had high hopes for fascism as a
constructive force in world affairs. This was a€cetechnocratic-fascisma€da€! understood, 
especially, in the 1920s as a force of order, offering a new set of solutions to the problem of 
capitalist governance and one which forward-thinking liberals and conservatives associated 
themselvesa€!. Those who saw from the very beginning in fascism the utter disaster and crime that 
it actually represented were often either faithful devotees of
older traditions or people of unusually perspicacious judgment. Today, we dona€™ t have the same 
excusesa€!

Rana Foroohar: Maximum Xi: a€~If we had any doubt about US-China tech decoupling, the past few days 
have cleared it upa€!. Richer Chinese are scared about the more authoritarian, top-down nature of 
President Xi Jinpinga€™ s regimea€!. A credit bubble of unprecedented proportions built on the real 
estate sector is unravelling, and challenging the finances of provincial governments.a€! Edward 
Luce: Rana, I dona€™ t have a
strong instinct on whether Chinaa€™ s growth is derailing or going through a period of managed 
slowdown. Whichever turns out to be the case, this is Indiaa€™ s chance to take the lead as the 
worlda€™ s fastest growing economya€!. India has already taken a piece of the rejigged tech supply 
chains that are moving out of Chinaa€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

