Give a gift subscription

ONE IMAGE: Binance Tokens:

BNB to USD Chart

Price Market Cap      Candle Chart                                               1D 7D 1M 3M 1Y YTD 
ALL 0 LOG

100B


80B

60B

40B

20B

0


USD

I                I

2018         Jul         2019         Jul         2020         Jul         2021         Jul         
2022         Jul

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€l

Very Briefly Noted:

• John Quiggin: Reaching for Utopiaa€l

•  Mohamed A. El-Erian: Another Annus Horribilis for the Fed: a€~Over the past two years, the US 
Federal Reserve has repeatedly erred in its analysis, policymaking, communications, and governance. 
To restore its effectiveness and reduce its vulnerability to undue outside interference, Fed 
officials must start making up for past mistakes in the new yeara€! I do not see this at all: from 
my perspective, federal reserve policy over the past three
years looks very, very, very good indeeda€\

•  Helen Thomas: Private equitya€™ s debt tower is teetering: a€~What was once a simple story of 
buy, fix, sell is more complicated, after years of cheap money and keen investmenta€l

•  Tim Duy: Fed Watch, 12/19/22: a€~The Fed believes wage growth exceeds the pace consistent with 
2% inflation, and that the recent improved inflation numbers will not be durable unless wage growth 
deceleratesa€! believes that restoring price stability requires it to raise unemployment 0.9 
percentage points over the next yeara€!

•  Azeem Axhar, Chantal Smith, & Nathan Warren: EVa€™ s Charts of the Week #104: a€~Last week, we 
asked how much it cost the creators of Stable Diffusion to train their AI models using 4,000 GPUs 
over the course of a month. 31% of readers selected the correct answer: $50 milliona€l

•  Thomas Wilson, Angus Berwick, & Elizabeth Howcroft: Binance's books are a black box, filings 
show: a€~The exchange said it dealt with net outflows of around $6 billion over 72 hours last week 
"without breaking stride" because its finances are solid and "we take our responsibility as a 
custodian seriously.a€na€l Changpeng Zhao promised his company would "lead by example" in embracing 
transparencya€!

• Nikodemus Sil vol a: Nikodemus' Guide to Mastodona€!

• Constanze StelzenmAllier: The westa€™ s axis of prudence risks a Kremlin victory by default in 
Ukraine: a€~Putina€™ s relentless missile strikes on infrastructure indicate that mere containment 
of Russia will not achieve a secure peacea€l
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Very, very nicely done here. However, it is not clear to me what "international factors" mean here. 
Think of it in this way: there are four things going on in Britain between 1688 and 1815 
economicallya€”(a) the creation of the British empire and its engrossment of global long-distance 
trade, (b) the general growthof the Atlantic, long-distance trade economy, (c) the general growth 
of the Dover Circleeconomy of north west, Europe, and(d) things going on
within the island of Britain itself. Customs revenues tell us about the first three while excise 
revenues tell us about the fourth. But what I am really interested in here is the division between 
the former two and the latter two:

Ernesto Dal BA3, Karolina HutkovA;, Lukas Leucht & Noam Yuchtman: Dissecting the Sinews of Power: 
International Trade and the Rise of Britaina€™ s Fiscal-Military State, 1689-1823: a€~Brewera€™ s 
(1989) "Sinews of Power," attributed increased fiscal capacity to the taxation of domestic, rather 
than traded, goods: exciserevenues, coarsely associated with domesticgoods, grewfaster than customs 
revenues. We construct
new historical revenue seriesa€l find substantial growth in taxes on traded goods, accounting for 
over half of indirect taxation around 1800. This challenges the conventional wisdom attributing the 
develooment of the British state to domestic factors: international factors mattered. tooa€!


OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

• John Quiggin: Reaching for Utopiaa€!

•  Mohamed A. El-Erian: Another Annus Horribilis for the Fed: a€~Over the past two years, the US 
Federal Reserve has repeatedly erred in its analysis, policymaking, communications, and governance. 
To restore its effectiveness and reduce its vulnerability to undue outside interference, Fed 
officials must start making up for past mistakes in the new yeara€! I do not see this at all: from 
my perspective, federal reserve policy over the past three
years looks very, very, very good indeeda€\

•  Helen Thomas: Private equity a€™ s debt tower is teetering: a€~What was once a simple story of 
buy, fix, sell is more complicated, after years of cheap money and keen investment^!

•  Tim Duy: Fed Watch, 12/19/22: a€~The Fed believes wage growth exceeds the pace consistent with 
2% inflation, and that the recent improved inflation numbers will not be durable unless wage growth 
deceleratesa€! believes that restoring price stability requires it to raise unemployment 0.9 
percentage points over the next yeara€!

•  Azeem Axhar, Chantal Smith, & Nathan Warren: EVa€™ s Charts of the Week #104: a€~Last week, we 
asked how much it cost the creators of Stable Diffusion to train their AI models using 4,000 GPUs 
over the course of a month. 31% of readers selected the correct answer: $50 milliona€!

•  Thomas Wilson, Angus Berwick, & Elizabeth Howcroft: Binance's books are a black box, filings 
show: a€~The exchange said it dealt with net outflows of around $6 billion over 72 hours last week 
"without breaking stride" because its finances are solid and "we take our responsibility as a 
custodian seriously.a€da€ I Changpeng Zhao promised his company would "lead by example" in 
embracing transparencya€!

• Nikodemus Silvola: Nikodemus' Guide to Mastodona€!

• Constanze Stelzenm Allier: The westa€™ s axis of prudence risks a Kremlin victory by default in 
Ukraine: a€~Putina€™ s relentless missile strikes on infrastructure indicate that mere containment 
of Russia will not achieve a secure peacea€!
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Very, very nicely done here. However, it is not clear to me what "international factors" mean here. 
Think of it in this way: there are four things going on in Britain between 1688 and 1815 
economicallya€”(a) the creation of the British empire and its engrossment of global long-distance 
trade, (b) the general growth of the Atlantic, long-distance trade economy, (c) the general growth 
of the Dover Circleeconomy of north west, Europe, and     (d) things going o
within the island of Britain itself. Customs revenues tell us about the first three while excise 
revenues tell us about the fourth. But what I am really interested in here is the division between 
the former two and the latter two:

Ernesto Dal BA3, Karolina HutkovAj, Lukas Leucht & Noam Yuchtman: Dissecting the Sinews of Power: 
International Trade and the Rise of Britaina€™ s Fiscal-Military State, 1689-1823: a€~Brewera€™ s 
(1989) "Sinews of Power," attributed increased fiscal capacity to the taxation of domestic, rather 
than traded, goods: excise revenues, coarsely associated with domestic goods, grew faster than 
customs revenues. We construct
new historical revenue seriesa€! find substantial growth in taxes on traded goods, accounting for 
over half of indirect taxation around 1800. This challenges the conventional wisdom attributing the 
development of the British state to domestic factors: international factors mattered, tooa€!

If you realized what was going on in the zero interest rate world before 2022, you recognized that 
if you could talk fast enough, the willingness of lenders to open their purse would give you 
near-infinite shots-onpgoal. And if you were smart enough to hire good-enough engineers, eventually 
some of those shots would go in. That is my theory of how Tesla survived and grew inthe 2010s. But 
willthe same talk-faster strategy work for the 2020s?:

Ed Harrison: Tesla Heading Into Make-or-Break 2023 With Pandemic Shine Waning: a€~In the run up to 
the early 2021 post-vaccine peak of high beta shares, [Tesla] got all of the parabolic gains other 
pandemic-related stocks did. But it is also now included in the S&P 500a€!. It has traded more like 
Nvidia or Facebook since early 2021.  Tesla is the only large cap tech stock that went up over 
sixfold from its pre-pandemic high and

10 times from its March 2020 low. It has further to fall as a result... Margin and growth pressure 
from the... Hyundai loniq 5... Kia EV6... Audi E-tron SUVs. Mercedes is coming....Unnder-$50k 
electric vehicles are gaining momentum.... Think of Tesla as the AOL of the EV marketa€!. Zoom... 
is trading 30% below its February 2020 levels despite doing well financially. Thata€™ s the power 
of bubbles popping...

Meme-stock celebrity finance does not seem to be working well at Twitter:

Liz Hoffman: The bird is not all right: a€~In April... Musk was worth $250 billion on paper but was 
cash-poor.... Because Twitter was inconsistently profitable, it was a poor candidate for 
traditional buyout debt, which is secured by the cash flows of the company being acquired.... 
Within three weeks, Musk had assembled a $46.5 billion financing package... put up about half 
themoney.a€! I thinka restructuring is most likely, and
probably soon. Selling new shares at the deal price is like buying a new car, crashing it, and then 
trying to sell it back to the dealer at sticker pricea€!. [But] I might be underestimating the 
willingness of Muska€™ s fans to part with their money for the chance to hang out with him at 
Twitter HQ...

An unpreposessing beginning to one of the greatest works of early 20th-century literature:

John Watson: A Study In Scarlet: a€~In the year 1878 I took my degree of Doctor of Medicine of the 
University of London, and proceeded to Netley to go through the course prescribed for surgeons in 
the army. Having completed my studies there, I was duly attached to the Fifth Northumberland 
Fusiliers as Assistant Surgeon. The regiment was stationed in India at the time, and before I could 
join it, thesecondAfghan war had broken
out. On landing at Bombay, I learned that my corps had advanced through the passes, and was already 
deep in the enemy's country. I followed, however, with many other officers who were in the same 
situation as myself, and succeeded in reaching Candahar in safety, where I found my regiment, and 
at once entered upon my new dutiesa€!

Capitalist enterprises can be surplus creation, machines, surplus, re-division, machines, or 
dissipative psychological grift machines. I am coming around more and more two of you that social 
media are the third. Cory Doctorow agrees:

Cory Doctorow: Better failure for social media: a€~Commercial social media sites don't want to be 
good, they want to be profitable. The unique dynamics of social media allow the companies to 
uncouple quality from profit, and more's the pitya€!. Social media sites who want to keep their 
users' business walk a fine line: they can simply treat those users well, showing them the things 
they ask to see, not spying on them, paying to police
their service to reduce harassment, etc. But these are costly choices: if you show users the things 
they ask to see, you can't charge businesses to show them things they don't want to see. If you 
don't spy on users, you can't sell targeting services to people who want to force them to look at 
things they're uninterested in. Every moderator you pay to reduce harassment draws a salary at the 
expense of your shareholders, and every catastrophe
that moderator prevents is a catastrophe you can't turn into monetizable attention as gawking users 
flock to it. So social media sites are always trying to optimize their mistreatment of users, 
mistreating them (and thus profiting from them) right up to the point where they are ready to 
switch, but without actually pushing them over the edgea€!. There's no money in showing people the 
things they tell you they want to see. If Amazon
showed shoppers the products they searched for, they couldn't earn $31b/year on an "ad business" 
that fills the first six screens of results with rival products who've paid to be displayed over 
the product you're seekinga€!

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

