Subscribe now

Brad DeLong's 20th Century

Scott Sumner

Yesterday, I flew back home from Europe. On the flight, I read Brad DeLonga€™ s Slouching Toward 
Utopia, a narrative of the political economy of the period from 1870 to 2010. DeLong views this 
period as a sort of
extended 20th century, during which accelerated economic growth had all sorts of unforeseen 
effects.

SLOUCHING
TOWARDS

JJTOMA

IN ECONOMIC HISTORY

or THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

' J. BRADFORD DELONG

Flying to the west, I had an extended October 12th, with 9 extra hours. I am a slow reader and I 
was dead tired on the final leg of the trip. Yet I somehow managed to finish the entire 540-page 
book just as I landed in Orange
County, which wouldna€™ t have been possible if DeLong hadna€™ t written an unusually absorbing 
account of this period. Everyone else seemed to be watching inflight movies.

From reviews, I had assumed the book would be an account of how three major factors supercharged 
growth after 1870: globalization, the industrial research lab, and the rise of the modern 
corporation. Those ideas are certainly
discussed, but DeLonga€™ s real interest is in the way that ideology helped to shape the events of 
the past 150 years. Ia€™ 11 focus on areas where I disagree with DeLong, but I agree with most of 
his analysis. Dona€™ t let my
quibbles dissuade you from reading this engrossing narrative.

DeLong sees many of the problems of the 20th century as being caused by people having blind faith 
in ideologies. While individuals have committed crimes in all times and places, only ideology can 
motivate the sort of mass
crimes committed by communist and fascist regimes during the 20th century. DeLong actually sees 
three ideologies that people adhere to despite the evidence being overwhelming against them; 
communism, fascism, and
extreme laissez-faire. I think hea€™ s right about the first two, but mostly (not entirely) wrong 
about the third. Most of my reservations boil down to one issue. I am a libertarian economic 
historian and DeLong is a center-left
economic historian with a deep skepticism of libertarian ideology.

Throughout the book, DeLong frequently refers to a€oereally-existing socialisma€n in order to 
distinguish regimes such as the Soviet Union and Maoa€™ s China from idealized versions of 
socialism dreamed up by
intellectuals. Of course ita€™ s easy to find examples of really-existing socialism and 
really-existing fascism. Ita€™ s also easy to show how these ideologies led to fanatical political 
movements that caused great destruction.
Indeed,   the examples are so obvious I dona€™ t even need to recount them here. But what about the 
third ideology a€’’libertarianism? Presumably, DeLong also believes there are lots of examples of 
libertarianism run amok, but
Ia€™ m not so sure thata€™ s right. Who are the Stalins and Hitlers of libertarianism? Which 
countries are the spectacular failures of libertarianism?

To be clear, I accept that the real world is messy and that a€oetrue libertarianisma€n has never 
been tried. I am perfectly willing to consider partly libertarian cases. For example, leta€™ s 
think about the most libertarian
economic models in the world today, keeping in mind that all countries have large and intrusive 
governments, at least to some extent. How do those relatively extreme cases compare to their 
neighbors? Do they go too far?

In Europe, most economic freedom rankings view Switzerland as the most free market economy. In the 
Western Hemisphere, the US, Chile, and Canada generally top the rankings. In the Asia-Pacific 
region ita€™ s usually
Hong                                                                                                
Kong, Singapore, New Zealand, Australia, and Taiwan.

Ia€™ m certainly not suggesting that these countries dona€™ t have problems, or even that they 
dona€™ t have problems that are in some sense due to right wing economic ideologies. At the same 
time, these are clearly some of
the most successful countries in their region, by almost any measure.

If you wanted to draw a picture of the evils of communism, it would be easy. Show the concentration 
camps. Show the victims of famine. The same is true of fascism, but replace famine with bombed out 
cities. Libertarianism
run amok? What does that even look like? A Swiss village?

This doesna€™t mean that DeLong is wrong about libertarianism, just that a critique requires a more 
nuanced argument than in the case of communism and fascism. There are no obvious cases of failed 
libertarian countries to
point to.

Many center left people would disagree, arguing that there are two obvious examples of libertarian 
failure. One is historical. Prior to WWII, free market ideologies led many nations to reject 
government programs like
unemployment compensation, disability insurance, universal health care and old age pensions. In 
addition, regulatory agencies such as the EPA, FDA and OSHA did not exist. The second seemingly 
obvious example of
libertarian   failure is financial crises that are widely attributed to deregulation and/or, and 
unwillingness of governments to adopt appropriate fiscal stimulus after the damage is done. These 
are the examples that DeLong focuses
on.

Once again, this anti-libertarian argument is not as strong as it looks. Yes, governments were much 
smaller in the 19th century. And yes, living conditions were much worse. But to draw any causal 
connection between those two
facts youa€™ d need to do some cross sectional comparisons. DeLong does a good job of showing that 
the entire world was much poorer in the 19th century. If excess libertarianism was the problem, 
then you might have
expected a mass migration of people from free market dystopias to the less laissez-faire parts of 
world. Just the opposite occurred. The migration was primarily to the relatively capitalist 
countries such as the US, despite our
lack                                                                                                
        of welfare programs.

[As an analogy, ita€™ s awkward for intellectuals on the center left to watch large numbers of 
working class Americans moving each year from blue states to places like Texas and Florida. Indeed, 
this fact explains their sudden
interest in zoning reform, which is (ironically) a longstanding cause for libertarians like me.]

Thata€™ s not to say that the US might not have been better off with more welfare spending in the 
19th century, just that ita€™ s not an obvious example of the failure of extreme libertarianism. 
Indeed, Ia€™ d go even further.
At the (cross sectional) level, I dona€™ t believe world history offers any obvious examples of the 
failure of libertarian ideology. Not one. If I am wrong, which country is the failed libertarian 
model?


On the other hand, from a time series perspective there are some seemingly obvious examples of 
libertarian excess, including the Great Depression of the 1930s and the more recent Great Recession 
that followed the 2008
banking crisis. While those events certainly look like failures of libertarian ideology, on closer 
inspection they are both examples of the failure of government monetary policy. Nonetheless, here I 
believe DeLong is partly
correct,   as while I see these events as representing government policy failure, I accept 
DeLonga€™ s view that they largely reflect government policy failures caused by ideas popular among 
many libertarians,.such as opposition
to stimulus when NGDP has fallen. So I certainly dona€™t wish to suggest that our hands are clean. 
Libertarians are like anyone else; they often hold incorrect and even morally objectionable views.

[BTW, throughout the book DeLong sprinkles in a few embarrassing quotes from libertarians like 
George Stigler and Friedrich Hayek. In contrast, one finds almost no examples of embarrassing 
quotes from intellectuals on the
center-left, even though if you go back in history you can find plenty of such examples on issues 
ranging from race to gay rights. Whole books have been written documenting the lefta€™ s 
embarrassing excuse making
regarding communist regimes.]

DeLong views Herbert Hoover as an example of how laissez-faire ideology can lead to disaster. The 
truth is more complicated. At the time, Hoover was regarded as being much more interventionist than 
Coolidge. DeLong
correctly lists some of Hoovera€™ s mistakes, but only those that would be viewed as mistakes by a 
center-left economist. Thus Hoover favored high tariffs and opposed devaluing the dollar. But 
DeLong doesna€™t discuss
the many (ineffective) actions that Hoover took to ameliorate the Depression. Nor does he discuss 
Hoovera€™ s decision to dramatically raise income taxes on the rich (from 25% to 63%), or his 
success in jawboning
corporations to avoid the sort of deep nominal wage cuts that allowed for a fast recovery from the 
1921 deflation. Thata€™ s not laissez-faire. Ia€™ m not one of those libertarians that believe 
these policy errors caused the
Great Depression^’’tight money was the main problema€”but these mistakes made it somewhat worse. 
(As did FDRa€™ s NIRA wage shock.) I suspect that most center-left economists support higher taxes 
on the rich and
oppose nominal wage cuts in a depression, so perhaps this explains DeLonga€™ s oversight.

Like most Keynesian economists, DeLong sees the collapse of aggregate demand as an example of the 
inherent instability of unregulated capitalism, although in my view the decline in AD was caused by 
a tight money policy
adopted by the Fed in 1929 (and also the Bank of France.) Again, at the time many right wing 
intellectuals supported this policy, so Ia€™ m not trying to let them off the hook. But given what 
we know now, the cause of the
Great Depression was clearly government failure.

Many libertarians oppose central banking. I find many of their arguments to be quite weak, as Ia€™ 
ve explained in previous posts. But even if it were true that abolishing the Fed would be a policy 
disaster, I dona€™ t see how
any center-left economist can claim that mistakes made by actual real world government central 
banks constitute a failure of laissez-faire. Maybe we need a central bank. Maybe laissez-faire in 
money wona€™ t work. But if
we have a central bank and it screws up, thata€™ s not a failure of laissez-faire. Show me the 
Great Depression of the pre-Fed era.

The counterargument from mainstream Keynesians is that the Fed didna€™ t cause the Depression; it 
merely failed to prevent it. That issue gets bogged down in two areasa€ “semantics and 
counterfactuals. Ita€™ s not even
clear what the term a€cecausea€D means in macroeconomics. If a central bank could have prevented 
disaster X with policy Y, does not doing policy Y mean it caused disaster X? Ia€™ d say yes, but 
others might say no.

In practice, not much is at stake on the semantics question. I imagine that DeLong and I mostly 
agree on how Fed policy during the 1930s and 2010s could have been much better, even if we disagree 
as to how much good that
would have done.

Similarly, we both agree that the housing bust did not cause the Great Recession. DeLong makes the 
same sort of argument that I made in my book on the Great Recession. Herea€™ s DeLong:

By November 2008, there was no sense in which construction employment a€ceneededa€D to fall. It had 
managed to make its adjustment from its boom-bubble 2005 high back to normal and even
subnormal levels in 2006 and 2007 without a recession. By November 2008, employment in construction 
nationwidea€”and in Nevadaa€” was well below its normal and average share of the US
workforce.

Take out the term a€oebubblea€D and thata€™ s exactly my view.

But whereas I then pivot to the view that it was tight money (not housing) that caused NGDP growth 
to collapse, DeLong thinks it was a Minsky issue; too much demand for safe assets. And swapping 
bank reserves for T-bills
would not solve that problem. I address the myth of central banks running out of ammunition in the 
book I have coming out later this year, but leta€™ s step back and consider whata€™ s at stake in 
this debate. Basically, I
believe  the Great Recession was much worse than otherwise because the Fed did the wrong monetary 
policy, whereas DeLong thinks it reflected the fact that an unregulated economy is unstable and the 
government did the wrong
fiscal policy.

By the intellectual rules of the game, monetary policy rules such as the gold standard, money 
supply targeting, price level targeting, NGDP targeting, etc., are viewed as being consistent with 
libertarianism, whereas activist fiscal
policy is not. And yet from 64,000 feet up, if thata€™ s the only distinction between 
libertarianism and pragmatic center-left ideology, ita€™ s a fairly minor one. Especially given 
that one can have an activist fiscal policy
without making government any bigger at all; you merely need to make the budget more 
countercyclical (without altering the average ratio of G/GDP.)

The world is very complex, so people can interpret facts in different ways. DeLong focuses on how 
industrial policies helped East Asian countries grow fast, whereas I see East Asia as a free market 
success story, with
institutions such as Japana€™s MITI being a net drag on growth. This is partly because the more 
free trading examples of East Asia (Singapore, Hong Kong) actually did a bit better than the East 
Asia countries with more
subsidies   and tariffs. And ita€™ s partly because export subsidies and import tariffs tend to 
partly neutralize each other, leaving overall East Asian trade regimes more open than they might 
appear when looking at one sector at a
time. And ita€™ s partly because East Asia did better than Latin American countries that relied 
more heavily on import substitution. But I can see how others might view the picture 
differentlya€”the world is messy.

I am not interested in defending libertarianism in all its forms. For instance, I am disgusted with 
the new leadership of the Libertarian Party. I strongly disagree with many libertarians on monetary 
policy issues. I favor carbon
taxes and progressive consumption taxes. But I cannot accept DeLong lumping libertarianism in with 
communism and fascism as being one of three fanatic ideologies that ignore the evidence provided by 
the real world.

Hea€™ s right about communism and fascism, but wrong about libertarianism. Yes, we make mistakes, 
but no more than the typical center-left or center-right economist.
The best parts of the book are the sections looking at ideologies such as nationalism, communism 
and fascism. On those issues, I am in complete agreement with DeLong.

His chapter on a€ceinclusiona€D discusses issues such as race and gender, mostly from an American 
(moderate woke) perspective. My views are somewhere between DeLonga€™ s and those of American 
conservatives. On
the one hand, I think many conservatives underestimate how much things like tighter voting rules 
are aimed at suppressing African-American turnout. On the other hand, while the left is correct 
about the pernicious effects of
racism (residential zoning is another example), they underestimate the extent to which differences 
in pay between ethnic groups and genders (both in the US and in other countries) is caused by 
factors other than current
discrimination^“particularly cultural differences. So I found the chapter on race and gender to be 
less persuasive than other parts of the political analysisa€“too much of the overly simplistic 
progressive a€oevictims and
villainsa€D     perspective. DeLong also takes a few jabs at critics of the welfare state, but I 
think he underestimates the disincentive effects of social welfare programs. The programs may be 
worth doing, but ita€™ s
disingenuous   to dismiss libertarian concerns about work incentives. Marty Feldstein was at least 
partly correct. (Indeed, DeLong himself used to be a bit of a supply-sider.)

The book has a rather sad ending. DeLong sees the neoliberal era as ending around 2010 and mentions 
the recent rise of illiberal ideologies such as populist nationalism. My sense is that his views 
have shifted somewhat to left
since 2007, for two reasons:

1. The Great Recession looks like it was caused by laissez-faire, and many laissez-faire proponents 
advocated bad policy responses.

2. In recent years, wea€™ ve seen an increasing number of dangerous right wing demagogues in 
various countries.
My views are:

1. The Great Recession was caused by bad monetary policy, and many laissez-faire proponents 
advocated bad policy responses.

2. In recent years, wea€™ ve seen an increasing number of dangerous right wing demagogues in 
various countries.

Unlike DeLong, my economic policy views have not shifted to the left. But regarding the political 
changes now happening all over the world, I increasingly align with the left.

In my view, DeLong recent pessimism about neoliberalism puts too much weight on time series 
evidence. Yes, growth often failed to improve during the neoliberal era, and even slowed in some 
cases. (Ia€™ d argue thata€™ s
for reasons explained by Robert Gordona€“fewer promising new technologies.) But from a cross 
sectional perspective, neoliberalism looks much better. The countries that did more neoliberal 
reforms tended to do better than
the more statist models. Few people in the UK, Sweden, Estonia, Chile, Australia or New Zealand 
wish to go back to their 1970s economic model.

Slouching Toward Utopia is a hard book to describe. The subtitle is An Economic History of the 20th 
Century. But ita€™ s much more than that. Some of the best parts cover areas such as political 
ideology, diplomacy and
military history. By conventional standards, DeLong probably tries to do too many things. But he 
has an extraordinarily wide range of knowledge, a sharp analytical mind, and an engaging style. So 
whatever the book is,
Ia€™ m very glad I went along for the ride.


SLOUCHING

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

-                  ■'■                ■"             £ ~■ ■ — 
.......................................................................... —

J. BRADFORD DELONG


Leave a comment
Subscribe now

