Subscribe now

First:

This is perhaps the most bonkers thing I have read this month:

Anne-Christine Taylor & al.: Letter to the Editors of The Chronicle of Higher Education by the 
Directors of the Society for Ethnographic Theory. a€~We were dismayed that the Chronicle decided to 
publish Jesse Singala€™ s article on our publication HAU (How One Prominent Journal Went Very 
Wrong, Oct. 5,2020) in such an inchoate statea€!. The article merely
reprised the developments of a turbulent period simply in terms of a conflict between two 
individuals. It gives the false impression, casually smuggled in towards the end, that HAU remains 
substantially unchanged. Nothing could be further from the truth. HAU came into being as a radical 
departure from established waysa€!. Its independence was its strengtha€!.

Unfortunately, that very independence also proved a temporary weakness, that sustained an 
informality beyond when it was healthy for the journala€!. This informality had to be the first 
thing that had to be addressed to re-establish trust in the journal and its workings, following the 
media campaign launched against HAU and its founder Giovanni da Col. The world of
HAU described in Singala€™ s piece bears absolutely no resemblance to the new organisation of the 
journal or the ethos of its current structure of editorial collectivesa€!. Rather than situate the 
events of the past within the broader concerns of contemporary publishing and its fraught 
relationship with academia, the article dwelled on gossip, email exchanges, and
innuendo, shallow in its ethical judgement, and betrayed its informants. Its analytical value as a 
sociological analysis of academic practices is underwhelming and not up to the standards of CHE. On 
all counts, this was a missed opportunitya€!

LINK: chttps://www.haujournal .org/index.php/hau/announcement/view/32>

What, exactly, is a€oean informality beyond when it was healthy for the journala€D? And what could 
a€oethe media campaign launched against HAU and its founder Giovanni da Cola€D be, other than the 
a€oeconflict between two individualsa€D that Jesse Singal describes? And what was a€ceinchoatea€D 
about Jesse Singala€™ s story, other than that Anne-Christine Taylor and company
would rather that nobody ever speak about what happened before they took over the journal?

Share

One Video:

Phil Libin: The Out-of-Ojfice (OOO) World <https://watch.mmhmm.app/z_I82SbS72S6Q2FLjEmFQz>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Wayne Ma: Apple and Its Favorite Chipmaker Get Closer 
<https://www.theinformation.com/articles/apple-and-its-favorite-chipmaker-get-closer>

•  Nina Burleigh: Inside the Plot to Kidnap Michigan Governor Gretchen Whitmer: a€~Sons of Anarchy: 
How an F.B.I. informant stopped the gun-crazed, conspiracy-theorizing group behind the plot to 
kidnap Michigan governor Gretchen Whitmer a€ I <https 
://airmail.news/issues/2021-11-13/sons-of-anarchy>

• Alice Evans <https: //www.draliceevans ,com/>

•  Foster Grant: Word Counts of the Most Popular Books in the World: a€~Les Miserables, Victor Hugo 
a€“ 530,982 words. War and Peace, Leo Tolstoy a€“ 561,304 wordsa€!. For Whom the Bell Tolls, Ernest 
Hemingway a€“ 174,106 wordsa€!. Lonesome Dove, Larry McMurtry a€“ 365,712 words. Atlas Shrugged, 
Ayn Rand a€“ 561,996 words. Crime and Punishment, Fyodor
Dostoyevsky a€“ 211,591 wordsa€! 
<https://blog.fostergrant.co,uk/2017/08/03/word-counts-popular-books-world/>

• August Meier & Elliott Rud wick: The Rise of Segregation in the Federal Bureaucracy, 1900a€“1930 
<https ://www.j stor.org/stable/273560>

•  MetaChat: Meiji Four-Character Slogans: a€~Insights into the development of Meiji Japan can be 
gained by an examination of five of the four-character slogans: fukoku kyohei, shokusan kogyo, 
bunmei kaika, chukun aikoku, and kanson minpia€! a€oerich country, strong armya€na€! a€oeestablish 
productivity, encourage industrya€da€; a€oecivilization,
enlightenmenta€na€!a€oeloyalty, patriotisma€Da€! a€oereverence for officials, contempt for the 
peoplea€Da€! <http://metachat.Org/index.php/2005/ll/02/meiji_four character slogans>

•  Henry Blodget: a€™ Yesa€\ Zoom is a classic a€cedisruptive technologyaCLJ&'i not BETTER than the 
incumbent tech (face-to-face). Ita€™ s worse. Buta€! ita€™ s 10X as simple, cheap, and convenient. 
And ita€™ s a€oegood enougha€D for many interactionsa€!

Henry Blodget @hblodget

Yes... Zoom is a classic "disruptive technology." It's not BETTER than the incumbent tech 
(face-to-face). It's worse. But... it's IPX as simple, cheap, and convenient. And it's "good 
enough" for many interactions.

Brian Feroldi @BrianFeroldi

@AdamMGrant @hblodget Zoom is wonderful but in-person meetings are still 5x better
1:38 PM r™ Nov 10,2021

49Likes 11 Retweets

Paragraphs:

Foster Grant: Word Counts of the Most Popular Books in the World: a€~Les Miserables, Victor Hugo 
a€“ 530,982 words. War and Peace, Leo Tolstoy a€“ 561,304 wordsa€!. For Whom the Bell Tolls, Ernest 
Hemingway a€“ 174,106 wordsa€!. Lonesome Dove, Larry McMurtry a€“ 365,712 words. Atlas Shrugged, 
Ayn Rand a€“ 561,996 words. Crime and Punishment, Fyodor Dostoyevsky
a€ “ 211,591 wordsa€!

LINK: <https://blog.fostergrant.co.uk/2017/08/03/word-counts-popular-books-world/>

Wayne Ma: Applea€™ s Road Map for Mac Chips Shows Likely Advantage Over Intel: a€~Applea€™ s third 
generation of Mac processorsa€! look to be an especially big step up from the processors Intel is 
expected to begin shipping around that timea€L All of the A- and M-processors are manufactured for 
Apple by Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co., which has arguably become
Applea€™ s most important technology partnera€!. Ita€™ s unclear when Apple products containing the 
companya€™ s third-generation processors will be released, analysts and people familiar with 
TSMCa€™ s plans expect the company to be able to reliably manufacture 3-nanometer chips by 2023a€!. 
A less powerful version of Applea€™ s third-generation processor is expected to debut in
a  future iPada€!. That chip, code-named Ibiza, also will likely be used in a future MacBook 
Aira€!. More powerful third-generation processors, code-named Lobos and Palma, will likely show up 
in future MacBook Pros and other Mac desktopsa€!. The next Mac Proa€! will include a processor with 
at least two dies based on the Ml Maxa€! part of a family of first-generation processors code-
named Jade. The next MacBook Air and a future iPad will likely contain Applea€™ s less powerful 
version of the companya€™ s second-generation processora€’’code-named Statena€!. And upcoming 
MacBook Pros and desktop computers will likely use more powerful versions of Applea€™ s 
second-generation chips, which are part of a family of processors code-named Rhodesa€!. Apple
[has] finished their physical design and handed them off to TSMC for trial production^!

LINK: 
<https://www.theinformation.com/articles/apples-road-map-for-mac-chips-shows-likely-advantage-over-i
ntel?rc=b4kz7m>

Nathan Lane: Manufacturing Revolutions: Industrial Policy and Industrialization in South Korea: 
a€™I study the impact of industrial policy on industrial development by considering a canonical 
intervention. Following a political crisis, South Korea dramatically altered its development 
strategy with a sector-specific industrial policy: the Heavy Chemical and Industry (HCI) drive,
1973a€“1979. With newly assembled historical data, I use the sharp introduction and withdrawal of 
industrial policies to study the impacts of industrial policya€’’during and after the intervention 
period. I show (1) HCI promoted the expansion and dynamic comparative advantage of directly 
targeted industries. (2) Using variation in exposure to policies through the input-output network, 
I show
HCI indirectly benefited downstream users of targeted intermediates. (3) I find direct and indirect 
benefits of HCI persisted even after the end of HCI, following the 1979 assassination of the 
president. These effects include the eventual development of directly targeted exporters and their 
downstream counterparts. Together, my findings suggest that the temporary drive shifted Korea
manufacturing into more advanced markets and created durable industrial change. These findings 
clarify lessons drawn from South Korea and the East Asian growth miraclea€!


LINK: <http://nathanlane.info/>

Martin Wolf: Best Books of2021: Economics: a€~_Cogs and Monsters: What Economics Is, and What It 
Should Be_, by Diane Coyle, Princeton University Press A£20/$24: Coyle, now at Cambridge 
university, is an exceptionally thoughtful commentator on economics. In this book, she rejects what 
she calls the a€oestraw mena€D arguments of the many critics of economics, though admitting
how difficult it is for economists to be objective. Instead, she focuses on two other weaknesses: 
first, the assumption of the rational economic a€cecoga€D has become even more unrealistic in the 
age of a€oesnowballinga€n digital a€oemonstersa€n; and, second, practitioners of economics are 
wildly unrepresentative of the society they studya€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/25ca2b59-8047-4f9b-bf99-e7f7cl5d8d51>

Doug (Mule): The Rising Tide of Semiconductor Cost: a€~Shortages and the geopolitical concentration 
of TSMC and ASML have awakened the popular imagination and have highlighted the 
science-fiction-like process of chipmaking. The road ahead has obstacles that arena€™ t widely 
appreciated. Making a semiconductor is going to get even harder, more expensive, and more 
technical. In
other words, the challenges are going to accelerate. To operate in the future, chipmakers will need 
more scale, more talent, and more moneya€!. I want to first refresh you on the death of Moorea€™ s 
Law. Wea€™ ve topped out the growth in transistor-energy scaling, frequency scaling, and wea€™ re 
starting to hit the end of multi-core scaling in transistor-density increases. But more important
than the end of those trends, cost scaling has ended. While we continue to improve transistor 
density through new techniques, each one layers additional costs. ASML, in its investor day, made a 
bold statement that Moorea€™ s Law will continue with system-level scaling. Another name for this 
is advanced packaging. But these costs are additive to the already escalating costs of making a
smaller transistora€!

LINK:


abricated Knowledge

The Rising Tide of Semiconductor Cost
Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- Doug (mule)

Noah Smith: What If Xi Jinping Just Isna€™ t That Competent?'. a€~From his utter destruction of 
potential rivals Bo Xilai and Zhou Yongkang to a sweeping a€oeanti-corruptiona€n campaign that 
purged or cowed every faction but his own, Xi showed very quickly that he was not going to tolerate 
the factional pluralism that the Chinese Communist Party had enjoyed under his predecessors.
His abolition of term limits essentially means that hea€™ s now president for life, effectively 
ending the system that had seen three peaceful transfers of executive power. And he has been more 
effective than any leader since Mao at creating a cult of personality around himselfa€!. But other 
than turning a bureaucratic oligarchy into a personalistic dictatorship, what are Xia€™ s
accomplishments, exactly?a€! There are multiple signs that Xi has actually weakened the 
capabilities of the Chinese juggernautaC!. Xi Jinping took power at the end of 2012. By then, China 
was already undergoing a growth slowdowna€!. Why is China slowing down? Part of it is inherent to 
ChinaaC™ s growth model, which Xi inherited from his predecessors Jiang and Hua€!. But if Xi
didna€™      t create ChinaaC™ s economic dilemma, he didna€™ t do much to fix it eithera€!. Xi has 
also reversed Deng and Jianga€™ s pattern of reforming state-owned enterprises and encouraging 
private-sector growtha€!. Xia€™ s reliance on SOEsa€! sets off alarm bells in other countries, who 
view state-backed competition as an unfair advantagea€!. Overall, Xia€™ s approach to the
economy looks an awful lot like a kid playing with toy sa€’’smashing the ones he doesna€™ t like, 
telling his favored champions to go forth and conquera€!. Why alienate India? Why push against 
Southeast Asian countries? Perhaps it was necessary for China to oppose Japan and the U.S. in order 
to complete its ascent to superpower status and avenge historical humiliations, but why did Xi
choose  to slap otherwise neutral or even friendly nations in the face?a€! Finally, we come to 
Covida€! a number ofa€! misstepsa€!. First, therea€™ s ChinaaC™ s a€oezero Covida€D policya€!. The 
government apparently bragged about its success so much that when the much more infectious Delta 
variant began to spread, Xi and his people felt that they would lose face if they changed to a
a€oelive with CovidaCD strategya€!. So China continues its ever more manic efforts to eliminate a 
virus that is now probably too infectious to be eliminateda€l

LINK:

Noahpinion

What if Xi Jinping just isn't that competent?

Xi Jinping is widely hailed as Chinaa€™ s most powerful leader since Mao. He certainly has been 
highly effective at consolidating power under his own person. From his utter destruction of 
potential rivals Bo Xilai and Zhou Yongkang to a sweeping a€ceanti-corruptiona€D campaign that 
purged or cowed every faction but his own, Xi showed very quickly that he was noa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 110 likes A- 57 comments A- Noah Smith

Brad DeLong: Why Gillian TettaC™ s Anthropological Take on the World Is Very Useful'. a€~let us pay 
attention this afternoon to Gillian Tett, of the tribes of the Financial Times and of the 
anthropology community, author of the very recently published Anthro-Vision: How Anthropology Can 
Explain Business and Life https://www.amazon.com/Anthro-Vision-Anthropology-Explain-Business-
Life/dp/1847942881/. Listen to her: for I believe it is her training in anthropology that has made 
her uniquely insightful journalist an analyst throughout her careera€l

LINK:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Why Gillian Tett's Anthropological Take on the World Is Very Useful

N2PE: Gillian Tett (@gilliantett) Discusses Her New Book a€oeAnthro-Vision: A New Way to See in 
Business & Lifea€D. Amid severe digital disruption, economic upheaval, and political flux, how can 
we make sense of the world? Leaders today typically look for answers in economic models, Big Data, 
or artificial intelligence platforms. Gillian Tett will discuss hea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- Brad DeLong

Kate Berner: a€™ CBO estimates that Build Back Better will add $367.IB to the deficit. That 
doesna€™ t include revenue collected from tax enforcement. Treasury estimates $479.6 revenue from 
tax enforcement. Soa€! $112.5B in deficit reductiona€! Naomi Jagoda: Larry Summers: IRS Proposal 
Will Generate More Revenue Than Cbo Estimate'. a€~Larry Summers, who served in top
economic policy roles during the Clinton and Obama administrations, said Thursday that the IRS 
funding proposal in Democratsa€™ social spending bill is likely to raise more revenue than the 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is expected to estimate. a€oel have one central message, and that 
is that it is reasonable to rely on substantially more revenue than is included in the CBO 
projection
from efforts to strengthen the IRS,a€D Summers said on a call with reporters hosted by the Center 
for American Progressa€! 
<https://thehill.com/policy/finance/582138-lany-summers-irs-proposal-will-generate-more-revenue-than
-cbo-estimate>

LINK:

Kate Berner @KateBerner46

How did we reach this? CBO estimates that BBB will add $367.IB to the deficit. That doesna€™t 
include revenue collected from tax enforcement. Treasury estimates $479.6 revenue from tax 
enforcement. Soa€! $112.5B in deficit reduction
11:37 PM r™ Nov 18,2021

1,812Likes466Retweets
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Why Gillian Tett's Anthropological Take on the World Is Very Useful

N2PE: Gillian Tett (@gilliantett) Discusses Her New Book a€oeAnthro-Vision: A New Way to See in 
Business & Lifea€D. Amid severe digital disruption, economic upheaval, and political flux, how can 
we make sense of the world? Leaders today typically look for answers in economic models, Big Data, 
or artificial intelligence platforms. Gillian Tett will discuss hea€l
Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- Brad DeLong

Kate Berner: a€™ CBO estimates that Build Back Better will add $367.IB to the deficit. That 
doesna€™ t include revenue collected from tax enforcement. Treasury estimates $479.6 revenue from 
tax enforcement. Soa€! $112.5B in deficit reductiona€! Naomi Jagoda: Larry Summers: IRS Proposal 
Will Generate More Revenue Than Cbo Estimate'. a€~Larry Summers, who served in top
economic policy roles during the Clinton and Obama administrations, said Thursday that the IRS 
funding proposal in Democratsa€™ social spending bill is likely to raise more revenue than the 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is expected to estimate. a€oel have one central message, and that 
is that it is reasonable to rely on substantially more revenue than is included in the CBO 
projection
from efforts to strengthen the IRS,a€D Summers said on a call with reporters hosted by the Center 
for American Progressa€! 
<https://thehill.com/policy/finance/582138-larry-summers-irs-proposal-will-generate-more-revenue-tha
n-cbo-estimate>

LINK:

Kate Berner @KateBerner46

How did we reach this? CBO estimates that BBB will add $367.IB to the deficit. That doesna€™t 
include revenue collected from tax enforcement. Treasury estimates $479.6 revenue from tax 
enforcement. Soa€! $112.5B in deficit reduction
11:37 PM r™ Nov 18,2021

1,812Likes466Retweets
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

