A marvelous device, that if we could only understood why and how and why not a flood of such 
instruments following, we would understand a great deal of the world?

Six Paragraphs:

This, I think, gets it very right: even two weeks after your second vaccination dose, do not get 
together with all of your friends in a damp, hot basement and have a singing partya€”wait until the 
virus is genuinely scotched for
that:

Emily Oster: Vaccines & Transmission Redux Redux'. a€~What you shouldna€™ t doa€”and I think this 
is really the key to the continued caution in messaginga€”is get together with all your
vaccinated friends in a damp, hot basement and have a singing party. If you have close contact with 
1000 people even if they are all vaccinated there is a reasonable chance someonea€™ s carrying
some  virus around, and they could then carry it out to the rest of us who are waiting on vaccines. 
In another few months, when cases are lower, this will not be true anymore and wea€™ 11 be able to
do our hot basement singinga€!

LINK: <https://emilyoster.substack.eom/p/vaccines-and-transmission-redux-redux>

Gertjan Vlieghe: An Update on the Economic Outlook'. a€~The effect of the pandemic on the economy 
has been unusually uneven. We are really not all in this togethera€!. Should we considera€!
unspent income as a€oeadditional incomea€D or a€oeadditional wealtha€D, or something else 
altogether? A comparison between UK and US income dynamics is instructivea€!. In the US, on the
other hand, the pandemic stimulus cheques and the increase in unemployment benefits have led to a 
significant rise in household income relative to its pre-pandemic trajectory. That can more
reasonably be interpreted as a€oeadditional incomea€D for many. Moreover, it has, by design, been 
spread more evenly across the income distribution^!.

The degree to which health risks dissipate later this year will be a key factor in determining to 
what extent savings are retained or spent. The more there are lingering health risks and associated
economic uncertainty, the more it is likely that a larger share of the accumulated savings stock 
will be retained, and that the desired on-going flow of savings will remain somewhat elevated 
relative to


LINK: <https://emilyoster.substack.eom/p/vaccines-and-transmission-redux-redux>

Gertjan Vlieghe: An Update on the Economic Outlook'. a€~The effect of the pandemic on the economy 
has been unusually uneven. We are really not all in this togethera€!. Should we considera€!
unspent income as a€oeadditional incomea€D or a€oeadditional wealtha€D, or something else 
altogether? A comparison between UK and US income dynamics is instructivea€!. In the US, on the
other hand, the pandemic stimulus cheques and the increase in unemployment benefits have led to a 
significant rise in household income relative to its pre-pandemic trajectory. That can more
reasonably be interpreted as a€oeadditional incomea€D for many. Moreover, it has, by design, been 
spread more evenly across the income distribution^!.

The degree to which health risks dissipate later this year will be a key factor in determining to 
what extent savings are retained or spent. The more there are lingering health risks and associated
economic uncertainty, the more it is likely that a larger share of the accumulated savings stock 
will be retained, and that the desired on-going flow of savings will remain somewhat elevated 
relative to
pre-pandemic flows. Given that we have never experienced an economic situation quite like the one 
we are now in, a wide range of outcomes are possible. I am genuinely uncertain about this, and it is
something that reasonable people can disagree ona€!

LINK: 
https://www.bankofengland.co.Uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2021/february/an-update-on-the-economic-out
look-speech-by-gertjan-vlieghe.pdf?
la=en&hash=4D50354F53FDA4D035082B9B 1A844A6B134212D1

Charles Dickens: Little Dorrif. a€~The conference was held at four or five oa€™ clock in the 
afternoon, when all the region of Harley Street, Cavendish Square, was resonant of carriage-wheels 
and
double-knocks. It had reached this point when Mr Merdle came home from his daily occupation of 
causing the British name to be more and more respected in all parts of the civilised globe capable 
of
the appreciation of world-wide commercial enterprise and gigantic combinations of skill and 
capital. For, though nobody knew with the least precision what Mr Merdlea€™ s business was, except 
that
it was to coin money, these were the terms in which everybody defined it on all ceremonious 
occasions, and which it was the last new polite reading of the parable of the camel and the 
needlea€™ s
eye to accept without inquiry a€ I

LINK: <https://www.gutenberg.org/files/963/963-h/963-h.htm>

Kirsten Devine: Romance Before Bros'. a€~A few months further back I wrote a 5 part Valentinea€™ s 
Day series on romance novels, a feat of insanity that I am going to repeat this year, only I
learned my lesson and am starting it at the beginning of January instead a...” of the way through. 
So hopefully unlike last year Ia€™ 11 make it through mentally unscathed. This time Ia€™ m actually
reading GOOD romances instead of trashy ones. Ita€™ s a lot of work, and do you know why Ia€™m 
doing this? Ita€™ s because romance MATTERSa€!

LINK: <https://ordinary-times.com/2020/01/05/romance-before-bros/>

Ben Thompson: Creation, Consumption, & Clubhouse'. a€~That a€cesomethinga€D was a combination of 
factors: First, ita€™ s much easier to get a group of people together for an informal
conversation that requires nothing more than the tap of a button than a formal podcast recording. 
Convenience matters! It matters more than anything. Second, the rhythm and a€cefeela€D of a
conversation   is just fundamentally different than a produced podcast. Zeynep Tufecki wrote about 
this difference on her Substack, and it was tangible in this conversation. Third, this room wasna€™ 
t
simply about those who were invited, but multiple others that raised their hands and joined in, 
sometimes to riff on stories that came beforea€!

LINK: 
<https://stratechery.com/2021/more-from-daniel-ek-creation-consumption-and-clubhouse-facebook-and-au
stralia-continued/>

Daniel Ek: On Clubhouse'. a€~My fundamental view is that Clubhouse is really two things. Ita€™ s a 
creative format and ita€™ s super-engaging for creators. Ita€™ s very interesting with the
interactivity, so we obviously pay a lot of attention to all social and interactive features. The 
second part is the listening part as well. Long term I believe the major trend on the Internet 
isna€™ t linear
and   live programming, but ita€™ s still time-shifted and on-demand, and to that extent I feel 
very good about where wea€™re placed, but obviously, to the extent that creators find interesting 
ways to
interact with their audience thata€™ s definitely something that wea€™ re paying a lot of attention 
to and looking at and experimenting with as wella€!

LINK: 
<https://stratechery.com/2021/more-from-daniel-ek-creation-consumption-and-clubhouse-facebook-and-au
stralia-continued/>

Hoisted from the Archives

2010: Is This an April Foola€™ s Joke?: Charles Lane of the Washington Post:

Some in the antislavery movement were as extreme, in their way, as the Southern 
a€oefire-eaters.a€na€! In 1851, a Boston crowd broke into a federal courthouse to free 
a€ceShadrach,a€D a black
man being held there by U.S. marshals enforcing the Fugitive Slave Lawa€!. I am not suggesting a 
moral equivalency between the anti-slavery and pro-slavery forces. But I am suggesting an
attitudinal equivalencya€!

First of all, Shadrach Minkins has a namea€“which does not deserve to be put into scare quotes. He 
was a human being. Charlesa€’’excuse me, a€™Charlesa€™a€”sees an a€~attitudinal equi valency a€™ 
between
abolitionists who a€~arrested Minkins from his court officers, carried him off and temporarily hid 
him in a Beacon Hill attica€! Boston black leaders Lewis Hayden, John J. Smith and others helped 
Minkins escape from
Massachusetts, and he eventually found his way to Canada on the Underground Railroada€!a€™ and 
Jefferson Davis and his ilk who raised armies that killed 400,000 Americans.

I am sorry: those who kill tens of thousands have a different a€~attitudea€™ than those who set 
people free without killing anybody. Worst Washington Post writer alive.
LINK: 
https://delong.typepad.com/sdj/2010/03/is-this-an-april-fools-ioke—the-tea-party-and-a-history-of-go
ing-to-extremes.html

Leave a comment

