CONDITION: War in Ukraine:

I want to believe that this is not stage-managed to make Putin look dominant, but in fact reflects 
the shakiness of Putina€™ s internal position. I want to believea€!

Anton Troianovski: a€™ Another extraordinary televised Kremlin meeting, this one with oligarchs. 
The head of the industrialists^™ lobby group tells Putin to avoid wrecking the Russian economy 
further in responding to Western sanctions; Putin responds describing todaya€™ s invasion as a 
a€oenecessary measurea€D <https://t.co/4jwQGlfmJM> <

Anton Troianovski @antontroian

Another extraordinary televised Kremlin meeting, this one with oligarchs. The head of the 
industrialists' lobby group tells Putin to avoid wrecking the Russian economy further in responding 
to Western sanctions; Putin responds describing today's invasion as a "necessary measure."

4:58 PM r™ Feb 24,2022

4,462Likes 1,919Re tweets

Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...
Share

First: Sleepwalking into Historya€!

Noah Smith has a very nice piece da€™ occasion:

Noah Smith: A Moment of Clarity. a€~For the last two decades wea€™ ve been sleepwalking through 
various dreams of our own creation, willfully blind to the dangersa€!. It is time for those dreams 
to end now. The alarm clock is ringinga€!. [The] a€oeLong Peacea€Da€! created the space for global 
trade, investment, and migration to flourish, creating an economic
boom that benefitted first the developed nations, anda€’’after 1990 or soa€”the developing nations 
as well. That Long Peace was dealt a critical blow in 2003, when the U.S. invaded Iraq on flimsy 
pretensesa€!. But the U.S. didna€™t conquer Iraq. Iraq an independent country, more closely allied 
with the U.S.a€™ main regional rival, Iran.

Putina€™ s seizure and annexation of Crimeaa€! [was] a great power using its military might to add 
to its territorya€!. The Russian invasion of Ukraine is different both quantitatively and 
qualitatively. It represents a great power simply declaring that a weaker country has no 
sovereigntya€!. The norm that kept the peace since World War 2a€! is no longera€!. The law of
the jungle has returneda€! dramatically increasing] the incentives for nuclear proliferation^! 
pushing] countries toward great-power alliance blocsa€!.

In recent years, some libertarians have been talking about the idea of walking away from what they 
see as overbearing governments and stifling societya€!. Russia is making it even clearer that this 
strategy is doomed, because eventually there is nowhere to runa€I. Thus it is very very important 
to every libertarian that the U.S. not collapse. This means supporting public
goodsa€”a strong industrial commons, strong infrastructure, robust investment in science and 
technology, a functional legal system, and all the rest. I wrote about this back in 2011, and 
called it the Tamerlane Principle: a€oeTamerlane is always over the horizon, waiting to strike. 
There will always be conquerors waiting for the chance to conquer and pillage the soft
civilized nations of the worlda€!.a€D

Many leftists got the Russia-Ukraine conflict very, very wronga€!. This about-face has not been 
universal. Jacobin, for example, continues to blame the U.S. for Putina€™ s aggressiona€!. But 
mostly, the roar of Putina€™ s bombs seems to have jolted the Left from their sleep.

Villains on the Trumpist Right: Unfortunately, the same cannot be said of the Righta€!. The world 
for 70 years enjoyed the greatest flourishing of prosperity, culture, and human achievement in all 
its history. Now those norms are gone, torn up by jealous, petty men who never lived to see what a 
world ruled by the law of the jungle is likea€!.
We must go into this crisis with open eyes, discarding the illusions we spun for our own 
consumption when we took peace for granted. We can no longer afford to treat our wealthy liberal 
society as a fatted calf to be slaughtered and parceled out by factiona€!

LINK:


A moment of clarity

a€oeall sleeping the deep, deep sleep of England, from which I sometimes fear that we shall never 
wake till we are jerked out of it by the roar of bombsa€D a€” George Orwell, a€oeHomage to 
Cataloniaa€D Few events create as much moral clarity as the unprovoked, brutal invasion of a 
peaceful nation by a ma€!

Read more

a year ago A- 20 likes A- 2 comments A- Noah Smith

The last paragraph of my Slouching Towards Utopia (forthcoming September 6 
chttps://bit.ly/3pP3Krk>) is about the world after 2010: a€oeA new story, which needs a new grand 
narrative that we do not yet know, has begun.a€D The story of the Long 20th Century of 1870-2010 
ended in 2010,1 argue, with a substantial number of seismic shifts occurring more-or-less at the 
same time: the
collapse of Americaa€™ s hegemonic role in economic and in geopolitical leadership, failure to keep 
income and wealth inequality within bounds, the emptiness of claims by neoliberal technocrats that 
they got economic management, political institutions that repeatedly failed to even begin to 
grapple with global warming, a sputtering (but not stalling) of the underlying global-north engine 
of
productivity growth. Plus in 2010 the great and good of the global north were about to fail to 
prioritize a rapid restoration of full employment, and then fail to understand and manage the 
discontents that would bring, which discontents would in turn bring neofascist and fascist-adjacent 
politicians to prominence worldwide.

I confess I had not expected that the grand narrative of the 21st century would have to find a 
place within itself for the return of major-power (i.e., not civil) war.

From 1870 on there had been a social darwinist current in the forces pushing for wara€”nations 
deprived of their rightful access to resources, proletarian nations rather than proletarian 
classes, for whom both a test of their fitness and thus evolutionary prowess and also their rights 
to fair distribution required that they start the laughter of the guns. Yet it was so, until 1945. 
As Max Weber, a pro­
democracy German liberal of his day, put it back before World War I, the struggle between nations 
was primary chttps 
://www.bradford-delong.com/2017/09/after-world-war-i-weber-hoisted-from-ten-years-ago.html>:

We all consider the German character of the East as something that should be protecteda€!. The 
economic struggle between the nationalities follows its course even under the semblance of 'peace'. 
The German peasants and day-labourers of the East are not being pushed off the land in an open 
conflict by politically-superior opponents. Instead, they are getting the worst of
it in the silent and dreary struggle of everyday economic existencea€! abandoning their homeland to 
a race which stands on a lower levela€!. There can be no truce even in the economic struggle for 
existencea€!. The vulgar conception of political economy is that it consists in working out recipes 
for making the world happya€!. [Reality] prevents us from imagining that
peace and happiness lie hidden in the lap of the futurea€!. Elbow-room in this earthly existence 
can [only] be wona€! through the hard struggle of human beings with each other.... The economic 
policy of a German state, and that standard of value adopted by a German economic theorist, can., 
be nothing other than a German policy and a German standard.  Our

successors willa€! us responsible before history fora€! the amount of elbow-room we conquera€!. The 
ultimate and decisive interests at whose service economic policy must place itself are the 
interests of national power... and the vehicle of that power, the German national state...

As it was then, so it is now, especially for Weimar Muscovy, National Hinduist India, and Willemine 
China.

It is not clear whether their leaders actually believe that the people of their nations have 
concrete important interests at stake in domination, or whether it is primarily an 
internal-political move to attempt to busy giddy minds with foreign quarrels. How far Muscovy will 
go or attempt to go with Ukraine, the Baltics, and the rest of the "near abroada€D; China with the 
Chinese-Indian borderlands,
Russiaa€™ s maritime province, and Taiwan and the Ryuchus; India with Pakistana€”that is all in the 
lap of the future, with the chances that they will go and try to go further greatly increased by 
the perception that their targets are soft ones. (The Iran-Israel-Arabia dynamic is an example of 
similar forces under conditions in which nobody perceives the targets as soft.)

Major-power war is now back on the agenda. But I confess that I cannot clearly see what shape it 
will take. Our conventional weapons are now so destructive that war-as-a-social-practice will not 
be carried out via total industrial mobilization and then by the weight of metal and morale, but it 
will rather be in some other mode that will then, at some point, turn back into politics.
This struck me as smart:

Paul Poast: a€™How will Russiaa€™s invasion of Ukraine play out? What is PutinaC™ s end game? I see 
four scenariosa€!. Scenario 1 a€!. Putin seeks to establish a pro-Russian regime in Kieva€! 
a€cesupporteda€D, indefinitely, by Russian forces. Scenario 2a€!. Putin seeks to annex all of 
Ukraine into Russia. Scenario 3: Imperial Overreach: Putina€™ s ethno­
nationalism, combined with security paranoia, leads him to seek recreation of the entire Russia 
Empire/USSR. All of the a€oenear abroada€D is the next target. Scenario 4: Major Power War Putin 
specifically shifts his focus to the Baltic States. Despite being NATO members, Putin, in his mind, 
senses an opportunity to strike and correct the mistake of letting them
a€oejoin the Westa€D. Which scenario is most likely? It depends on two factors. First, are Putina€™ 
s aims Maximalist or Limited? Second, the operational ease of invading Ukrainea€!

LINK:

How will Russia's invasion of Ukraine play out? What is Putin's end game? I see four scenarios, 
none of which are good. [THREAD]

r         *             s



One Picture:

*’ Ed Caesar @edcaesar • 7h


It's not always a mystery. Take a known example. Witanhurst, in
Highgate, is London's largest private house (apart from Buckingham
Palace.) The gardens are inspired by Versailles. It is owned by Andrey
Guryev, a Russian whose family control Phosagro, a fertiliser company.
1/3 twitter.com/ianbremmer/sta...

Show this thread


'Ll             V 1

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Jag Bhalla: Ita€™ s Time We Stop Listening to Economists on Climate Change: a€~Economic models 
of climate change are so riddled with flaws and fudge factors that wea€™ d be better off without 
thema€! <https://undark.org/2021/ll/ll/its-time-we-stop-listening-to-economists-on-climate-change/>

•  Eric Basmajian: _a€™ Therea€™ s been a lot of movement in the belly. Wea€™re pulling hikes 
forward and expecting them to end soonera€! faster and shallowera€!

Eric Basmajian @EPBResearch

While most people debate 25bps or 50bps in March, there's been a lot of movement in the belly. 
We're pulling hikes forward and expecting them to end sooner. Would we be surprised if the hiking 
cycle is faster and shallower than originally expected?


2YR- 1YR

040

SYR - 2YR

SYR - 1YR


E .       : AH _

MS 1


6:15 PM r™ Feb 22,2022

50Likes4Retweets

•  Willem H. Buiter: The Case Against Fed Gradualism'. a€~After two decades of never raising policy 
rates by more than 25 basis points at a timea€!. If the Fed proceeds too slowly, it will jeopardize 
its own credibilitya€l 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/fed-rate-hikes-slow-is-dangerous-by-willem-h-buiter-20
22-02>

•  David Adam: The Pandemic a€™s True Death Toll: Millions More than Official Counts: a€~Countries 
have reported some five million COVIDa€“19 deaths in two years, but global excess deaths are 
estimated at double or even quadruple that figurea€! 
<https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-00104-8>

• David French: Wea€™ re All Ukrainians Now: a€~How healthy patriotism helps us extend our 
compassion and concerna€!

Wea€™ re All Ukrainians Now

Earlier today, at the end of a conference hosted by Redeemer Presbyterian Church in San Antonio, I 
was asked an interesting questiona€”one Ia€™ ve never been asked at a Christian conference before. 
a€oeWhat are you specifically praying for, today?a€D My answer was immediate: a€oela€™ m praying 
that God turns Vladimir Putina€™ s heart a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 240 likes A- 301 comments A- David French

• Josh Barro: Rick Scott Just Gave a Huge Gift to Democrats <


Rick Scott Just Gave a Huge Gift to Democrats

When we talk about popularism, we usually talk about Democrats and whether theya€™re working hard 
enough at being popular. But this weeka€™ s big popularism story is a Republican one, with Florida 
Senator Rick Scott taking a hammer to his partya€™ s pretty successful efforts to do popularism on 
economic issues in recent yearsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 18 likes A- 13 comments A- Josh Barro

• Matthew Klein: How Should the Federal Reserve Tighten?'. a€~Among the possibilities for 
Americaa€™ s monetary policymakers: -Squeeze bank lending without raising interest rates (at least 
not very much). -Raise short-term market interest rates while maintaining positive net interest 
income (potentially with the help of the Treasury). -Increase bond risk premiums faster than
they shrink the balance sheeta€!

THE


The Overshoot

How Should the Federal Reserve Tighten?

The policy stance that made sense in 2020 and 2021 is no longer appropriate. Most indicators now 
suggest that the U.S, economy has either fully recovered from the economic shock of the pandemic, 
is on track to fully recover in the next few months, or is already ahead of where it would have 
been in the absence of the pandemica€!

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- 1 comment A- Matthew C. Klein

• Jonathan Lambert & Dave Levitan: Cancer Isna€™ t One Disease, Ita€™ s 200: a€~Bidena€™ s revised 
Cancer Moonshot reflects thata€! 
<https://www.grid.news/story/science/2022/02/07/cancer-isnt-one-disease-its-200-bidens-revised-cance
r-moonshot-reflects-that/>


• Tom Maher: a€™ A concise piece of storytelling (the tapestry is full of them) is amid the chaotic 
depiction of the Battle of Hastingsa€’’William raises his visor to show he has not been killed, as 
some had worried, and a lieutenant then affirms the identification and relays it to those nearbya€!

Tom Maher @TomasOMeachair


10:36 AM a~™ Feb 12,2022

2Likesl Re tweet

• Timothy Snyder: Putin Has an Exit from the Conflict: a€~Ita€™ s just that he might prefer the 
road to wara€!

Putin has an exit from the conflict

I keep hearing pundits say that Vladimir Putin is "up a tree" or "in a corner." The idea is that, 
having surrounded Ukraine with troops and armor, he must invade lest he lose face with his own 
people. I do not believe that this is the case. Russians are not evaluating the situation in the 
same way that Americans do. Thea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 71 likes A- 12 comments A- Timothy Snyder

• Clare People: Maire Rua <https://www.clarelibrarv.ie/eolas/coclare/people/ruadh.htm>

Paragraphs:

Robert Shapiro: Note to Reporters: Americans Are Better Off Even After Inflation: a€™ Conventional 
wisdom [is] inflation has left most Americans poorer. Ita€™ sa€! odda€! the number of people with 
jobs jumped by 4.7 percent in 2021, and the economy grew by 5.7 percenta€!. If people are poorer, 
why did household spending jump by 8.8 percent in 2021, after inflation, including increases
of                                                                                                  
                                                                                25.8 percent for 
clothing and shoes and 11.6 percent for home furnishings? The reason the conventional wisdom 
doesna€™ t seem right is because ita€™ s wronga€!

LINK: 
<https://washingtonmonthlv.com/2022/02/23/note-to-reporters-americans-are-better-off-even-after-infl
ation/>

Wallace Witkowski: InteldC™s a€~Absurdly Bullisha€™ Long-Term Forecast Sends Stock to Lowest Point 
since 2020: a€~Another delay in a chip rollout Intela€™ s 7-nanometer data-center chip codenamed 
a€oeGranite Rapidsa€Da€! pushed into 2024a€!. [Can] Intela€! command enough market share in data 
center and graphics to pull off 10% to 12% growth by 2025a€!. a€oeConsidering

1) Intela€™ s recent history of poor execution, and 2) its own projection for zero FCF for the next 
three years, we think investors will need to see hard, concrete evidence that the huge investments 
Intel is making will pay off,a€D [Mark] Lipacis said. a€oeWe dona€™ t expect that for at least 
another yeara€Da€l
LINK: 
<https://www.msn.com/en-us/monev/topstocks/intels-absurdly-bullish-long-term-forecast-sends-stock-to
-lowest-point-since-2020/ar-AAU30H1 ?ocid=winp-st>

Glenn Loury: Identity Politics vs. Excellence: a€~Changing the standards that determine who gets 
admitted to our top schools and who gets hired in our top academic departmentsa€l not justa€! 
giving a boost to individuals who happen to be members of historically underrepresented minority 
groupsa€! intervening in a meritocratic vetting process that identifies and cultivates individual 
talent,
creativity, and innovation and transforms it into far-reaching social and scientific changea€!. 
[These are] the real stakes of affirmative action. I do not endorse dismantling affirmative action 
altogethera€!. If we prioritize diversity and proportional representation over academic excellence, 
we may end up debilitating our academic and governmental institutions. Are we willing to take that 
risk?a€!

LINK:


I keep hearing pundits say that Vladimir Putin is "up a tree" or "in a corner." The idea is that, 
having surrounded Ukraine with troops and armor, he must invade lest he lose face with his own 
people. I do not believe that this is the case. Russians are not evaluating the situation in the 
same way that Americans do. Thea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 71 Ekes A- 12 comments A- Timothy Snyder

• Clare People: Maire Rua <https://www.clarelibrary.ie/eolas/coclare/people/ruadh.htm>

Paragraphs:

Robert Shapiro: Note to Reporters: Americans Are Better Off Even After Inflation'. a€™ Conventional 
wisdom [is] inflation has left most Americans poorer. Ita€™ sa€! odda€! the number of people with 
jobs jumped by 4.7 percent in 2021, and the economy grew by 5.7 percenta€!. If people are poorer, 
why did household spending jump by 8.8 percent in 2021, after inflation, including increases
of                                                                                                  
                                                                                25.8 percent for 
clothing and shoes and 11.6 percent for home furnishings? The reason the conventional wisdom 
doesna€™ t seem right is because ita€™ s wronga€!

LINK: 
<https://washingtonmonthly.com/2022/02/23/note-to-reporters-americans-are-better-off-even-after-infl
ation/>

Wallace Witkowski: InteldC™s a€~Absurdly Bullisha€™ Long-Term Forecast Sends Stock to Lowest Point 
since 2020: a€~Another delay in a chip rollout Intela€™ s 7-nanometer data-center chip codenamed 
a€oeGranite Rapidsa€Da€! pushed into 2024a€!. [Can] Intela€! command enough market share in data 
center and graphics to pull off 10% to 12% growth by 2025a€!. a€oeConsidering

1) Intela€™ s recent history of poor execution, and 2) its own projection for zero FCF for the next 
three years, we think investors will need to see hard, concrete evidence that the huge investments 
Intel is making will pay off,a€D [Mark] Lipacis said. a€oeWe dona€™ t expect that for at least 
another yeara€Da€l
LINK: 
<https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/topstocks/intels-absurdly-bullish-long-term-forecast-sends-stock-to
-lowest-point-since-2020/ar-AAU30H1 ?ocid=winp-st>

Glenn Loury: Identity Politics vs. Excellence: a€~Changing the standards that determine who gets 
admitted to our top schools and who gets hired in our top academic departmentsa€! not justa€! 
giving a boost to individuals who happen to be members of historically underrepresented minority 
groupsa€! intervening in a meritocratic vetting process that identifies and cultivates individual 
talent,
creativity, and innovation and transforms it into far-reaching social and scientific changea€!. 
[These are] the real stakes of affirmative action. I do not endorse dismantling affirmative action 
altogethera€l. If we prioritize diversity and proportional representation over academic excellence, 
we may end up debilitating our academic and governmental institutions. Are we willing to take that 
risk?a€!

LINK:

Glenn Loury

Identity Politics vs. Excellence

Often, debates about affirmative action and racial preferences in college admissions get so intense 
and so overdetermined, we forget whata€™ s actually at stake. Ia€™ m not talking about how many 
members of A or B group will get into X or Y university. Ia€™ m talking about the role of the 
university in creating value in our society. Yes, college can do all sortsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 25 likes A- 8 comments A- Glenn Loury

Erik Brynjolfsson: Is the Great Stagnation Finally Coming to an End?: a€~A wave of powerful 
technologies, particularlya€! AI and machine learninga€!. mRNA vaccinesa€! solar powera€!. The 
economics of powerful technologies typically follows a a€oeJ-curvea€na€!. The pandemic accelerated 
20 yearsa€™ worth of digitization into 20 weeksa€!. Individuals, companies and industries
are rapidly learning how to work digitallya€!. Creating intelligent machines is arguably a more 
important invention than just about any other invention wea€™ ve ever made. Leading firms have been 
investing in business process redesign and business model reinventiona€!. This digital capital is 
the harbinger of productivity growtha€!

LINK: <https://www.pairagraph.com/dialogue/9301beaf3a5b4al4868c682a36402474>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA....
Share

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Subject: Things I <strike>Someday Hope to</strike> Almost Surely Will Never Understand: QM Edition

So what do I read in order to have a chance of understanding this paragraph below?

Sydney Coleman: Quantum Mechanics in Your Face: a€~Some, maybe all, self-adjoint operators are 
a€ceobservablesa€D. If the state is an eigenstate of an observable A, with eigenvalue a, then we 
say the value of A is a, is certain to be observed to be a.  Therea€™ s an implicit promise in here 
that, when you put the whole theory together and start calculating things,

that the words a€ceobservesa€D and a€ceobservablea€D will correspond to entities that act in the 
same way as those entities do in the language of everyday speech under the circumstances in which 
the language of everyday speech is applicable. Now to show that is a long story. Ita€™ s not 
something Ia€™m going to focus on here, involving things like the WKB
approximation and von Neumanna€™ s analysis of an ideal measuring device, but I just wanted to 
point out that thata€™ s therea€!

LINK: <https://arxiv.org/pdf/2011.12671 ,pdf>

I mean, I get that in matrix mechanics you have a quantum-state variable, and its evolution over 
time is given by a self-adjoint operatora€”a unitary matrix that describes the forces at work, and 
that you multiply the state variable in the past by in order to get the state in the present.

But, then, why, when you do not ignore but instead focus on how that matrix multiplication process 
entangles the state variable with the environment in such a way that you can and do make a 
a€oemeasurementa€n, does the resulting a€oereduction of the wave packeta€D generate measured values 
that are eigenvalues and only the eigenvalues a of A?
It makes me very sad that I will almost surely die before I have ever understood thisa€!


PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Subject: Things I <strike>Someday Hope to</strike> Almost Surely Will Never Understand: QM Edition

So what do I read in order to have a chance of understanding this paragraph below?

Sydney Coleman: Quantum Mechanics in Your Face’. a€~Some, maybe all, self-adjoint operators are 
a€ceobservablesa€d. If the state is an eigenstate of an observable A, with eigenvalue a, then we 
say the value of A is a, is certain to be observed to be a.  Therea€™ s an implicit promise in here 
that, when you put the whole theory together and start calculating things,

that the words a€oeobservesa€n and a€ceobservablea€D will correspond to entities that act in the 
same way as those entities do in the language of everyday speech under the circumstances in which 
the language of everyday speech is applicable. Now to show that is a long story. Ita€™ s not 
something Ia€™m going to focus on here, involving things like the WKB
approximation and von Neumanna€™ s analysis of an ideal measuring device, but I just wanted to 
point out that thata€™ s therea€!

LINK: <https://arxiv.org/pdf/2011.12671 ,pdf>

I mean, I get that in matrix mechanics you have a quantum-state variable, and its evolution over 
time is given by a self-adjoint operatora€”a unitary matrix that describes the forces at work, and 
that you multiply the state variable in the past by in order to get the state in the present.

But, then, why, when you do not ignore but instead focus on how that matrix multiplication process 
entangles the state variable with the environment in such a way that you can and do make a 
a€oemeasurementa€n, does the resulting a€oereduction of the wave packeta€D generate measured values 
that are eigenvalues and only the eigenvalues a of A?
It makes me very sad that I will almost surely die before I have ever understood thisa€!

