Subscribe now

I never wrote up my a€oeModern Political Economya€D course as I taught it in 2007a€“8 into a 
potential book. That makes me very sad:
Share

Lecture Notes for September 13,2007: After World War I: Weber & Keynes:

Max Weber

Marxism, liberalism, and, to be polite, a€cenationalisma€Da€!

• Wea€™ ve talked about Marxisma€!

• Wea€™ ve talked about classical liberalising!

• We havena€™ t talked about a€cenationalisma€Da€!

We read Norman Angell. We did not read Max Weber: Nationalism as social-darwinist doctrine:

Max Weber, a€oeThe National State and Economic Policya€D: We all consider the German character of 
the East as something that should be protected, and that the economic policy of the state
should enter into the lists in its defense. Our state is a national state, anda€! we have a right 
to make this demanda€!.

The economic struggle between the nationalities follows its course even under the semblance of 
a€~peacea€™. The German peasants and day-labourers of the East are not being pushed off the
land in an open conflict by politically-superior opponents. Instead, they are getting the worst of 
it in the silent and dreary struggle of everyday economic existence, they are abandoning their
homeland to a race which stands on a lower level, and moving towards a dark future in which they 
will sink without trace. There can be no truce even in the economic struggle for existence; only
if   one takes the semblance of peace for its reality can one believe that peace and prosperity 
will emerge for our successors at some time in the distant future. Certainly the vulgar conception 
of
political economy is that it consists in working out recipes for making the world happy; the 
improvement of the a€~balance of pleasurea€™ in human existence is the sole purpose of our work
that   the vulgar conception can comprehend. Howevera€! [reality] prevents us from imagining that 
peace and happiness lie hidden in the lap of the future, it prevents us from believing that elbow­
room in this earthly existence can be won in any way than through the hard struggle of human beings 
with each othera€!.

The overwhelming majority of the of the fruits of the economic, social, and political endeavours of 
the present are garnered not by the generation now alive but by the generations of the
futurea€!. [T]here cana€! be no real work in political economy on the basis of optimistic dreams of 
happinessa€!. The questiona€! is not a€~how will human beings feel in the futurea€™ but
a€~how will they bea€™ a€!. We do not want to train up feelings of well-being in people, but rather 
those characteristics we think constitute the greatness and nobility of our human naturea€!.

The economic policy of a German state, and that standard of value adopted by a German economic 
theorist, can therefore be nothing other than a German policy and a German standarda€!. Our
successors will not hold us responsible before history for the kind of economic organization we 
hand over to them, but rather for the amount of elbow-room we conquer for them in the worlda€!.
Processes of economic development are in the final analysis also power struggles, and the ultimate 
and decisive interests at whose service economic policy must place itself are the interests of
national powera€!. The science of political economy is a political sciencea€! a servant of 
politicsa€! of the lasting political-power interests of the nationa€!. [F]or questions of German 
economic
policy a€! the ultimate and decisive voice should be that of the economic and political interests 
of our nationa€™ s power, and the vehicle of that power, the German national statea€!

LINK: <http://books .google .com/books?

id=WaV7Q35jy_AC&pg=PAl28&lpg=PA 
128&dq=max+weber+%22vulgar+conception+of+political+economy%22&source=web&ots=sCHQNhK5qG&sig=ScmEe6 
9HEO5XmtjjoaSiiYZUy4#PPAl29M 1>

This is a WWI-era German liberal. This is a German talking about Poles. But Post-WWII Bundeskanzler 
Konrad Adenauer spoke truth when he said: a€oeA Prussian [an eastern German] is a Pole who has 
forgotten who
his grandfather wasa€!a€D Weber was wrong. Yet even World War I did not change Webera€™ s mind 
much:

Yet more from Weber at Freiburg in 1895:

In the outstanding works of our historical colleagues we find that today instead of telling us 
about the warlike deeds of our ancestors they dilate at length about a€oematriarchy,a€n that
monstrous notion, and force into a subordinate clause the victory [over; the original has 
a€oeona€D, a mistranslation] the Huns on the Catalaunian Plaina€!

A second view of nationalism: Nationalism as way to distract people from domestic political 
concerns:

The Search for an Enemy: Matthew Yglesias: Ia€™ ve actually heard that Francis Fukuyama has said 
this before, but that information didna€™t come to me in reportable form. During a
BloggingHeads.tv appearance with Robert Wright, Fukuyama says of Bill Kristol and his circle at The 
Weekly Standard that during the 1990s a€oeThere was actually a deliberate search for an
enemy  because they felt that the Republican Party didna€™t do as wella€D when foreign policy 
wasna€™t on the issue agenda. The obvious candidates were either China or something relating
to Islamic fundamentalism and, as Fukuyama notes, what they came up with was China. Then 9/11 
changed things around, at least for a few years. I think this is very telling, and reveals a great
deal about the mentality thata€™ s been guiding Americaa€™ s foreign policy during the Bush 
yearsa€! <http://bloggingh.eads .tv/?id=81 &cid=271 &in=04:59>

William Shakespeare:

Henry IV to Prince Harry: [A]all my friends, which thou must make thy friendsa€! by whose fell 
working[s] I was first advanca€™ d, and by whose power I well might lodge a fear to be again
displaca€™ da€!. [R]est and lying still might make them look too near unto my state.

Therefore, my Harry, be it thy course to busy giddy minds with foreign quarrels, that action, hence 
borne out, may waste the memory of the former daysa€!

John Maynard Keynes

The point to grasp World War I makes it impossible to be a liberal believer in progress, peace, 
rationality, equilibrium, the benevolence of the market, the triumph of reasoned discussion, et 
ceteraa€”that the world is on
track, an economic El Dorado of growth and prosperity that is marching towards utopia.

So what do you do?

The answer is a€oemanagerialism.a€n Muddling through. Trying desperately to somehow cobble together 
something like what the optimists had confidently thought that the pre-WWI pseudo-classical 
semi-liberal order
wasa€“to make it true in practice even though it isna€™ t true in theory, and to do so by whatever 
means had a chance of working.

Hence Keynes. And here I have little to say that I havena€™ t stolen from Robert Skidelskya€™ s 
magnificent three-volume biography of Keynes:

Skidelskya€™ s first two volumes give us John Maynard Keynesa€™ s fife up to 1937 entire, and he 
does so with wit, charm, control, scope, and enthusiasm. You read these books and you know 
Keynesa€“who he was,
what he did, and why it was so important.

Who was this guy? Keynes was an academic, but also a popular author. His books were read much more 
widely outside of academia than within it. Keynes was a politician: trying to advance the chances 
of Britaina€™ s
Liberal Party between the warsa€”but also a bureaucrat: at times a key civil servant in the British 
Treasury. He was a speculator, trying to make his fortune on the stock market, but also at the core 
of the a€oeBloomsbury
Groupa€D of artists and intellectuals that did so much to shape interwar culture.

For the literati it is Keynes of Bloomsburya€”his loves, enthusiasms, acts of patronage, and 
wita€”who is the most interesting. That story contains things like Virginia Woolf on Keynes. She 
wrote of her:

vivid sight of Maynard by lamplighta€”like a gorged seal, double chin, ledge of red lip, little 
eyes, sensual, brutal, unimaginate. One of those visions that come from a chance attitude, lost as
soon as he turned his head. I suppose though it illustrates something I feel about him. Hea€™ s 
read neither of my booksa€!

There is a clear lesson: if your circle includes future Nobel Prize-winning novelists with wicked 
pens, read their books and praise them as often as possible.


For economists like myself, it is Keynes the academic who is the real Keynes: he was the founder of 
the half-science half-witchcraft discipline of macroeconomics. For those interested in the 
political and economic
history of the twentieth century, it is Keynes the author and politician who is primary. In either 
case, John Maynard Keynes is the man who has the best claim to be the architect of our modern 
worlda€ “whether it is how
our central banks think about economic policy, what our governments believe that they must try to 
do, the institutions through which they work, or the habit of thought that views the economy not as 
Adam Smitha€™ s
a€oesystem of natural libertya€D but as a complicated machine that needs adjustment and governance, 
all of these trace large parts of their roots to the words and deeds of John Maynard Keynes.

The first volume of Skidelsky a€™ s biography is the story of growth and development. Skidelsky 
writes the best narrative interpretation of growing up as a smart and privileged children of 
academics in late Victorian
Britain than I can ever conceive of being written. He writes of how Keynes was one of a relatively 
small number of brilliant students thrust as a leaven into the mass of Britaina€™ s upper class at 
Eton, and thus became
part                                                                                                
 of a€oean intellectual elite thrust into the heart of a social elitea€D (HB, page 77). An entire 
cohort of Britaina€™ s upper class thus learned before they were twenty that Keynes could be very 
smart, very witty,
very entertaininga€“and very helpful if there was a hard problem to be thought through or something 
to be done.

Skidelsky then writes of Keynes at Cambridge, his joining the secret society of the Apostles, and 
his eager grasping with both hands of the philosophy of the aesthete common among the students of 
the philosopher G.E.
Moore. As Keynes put it in 1938, he believed that one should arrange onea€™ s life to achieve the 
most good, where a€cegooda€D was nothing more or less than a€oestates of minda€! states of minda€! 
not associated
with action or achievement or with consequences [but]a€! timeless, passionate states of 
contemplation and communiona€!. a beloved person, beauty, and truth.a€D Thus Keynes left Cambridge 
convinced that
a€oeonea€™ s prime objects in life were love, the creation and enjoyment of aesthetic experience, 
and the pursuit of knowledge. Of these love came a long way firsta€!a€D (HB, page 141).

This embrace of aestheticism was and remained the key to the a€oeBloomsburya€n avatar of John 
Maynard Keynes, for whom the lodestars were to a€oebe in love with onea€™ s friends, with beauty, 
with
knowledgea€D and who was and remained an enthusiastic member of the Bloomsbury group, sharing 
a€oeits intellectual values and its artistic enthusiasms,a€D and participating a€oein its wild 
fancy dress partiesa€D
(HB,   page 234). Keynes was a man who could celebrate this appointment to the British Treasury 
wit:

a party for seventeena€! at the CafA© Royalea€!. Afterwards they went back to 46 Gordon Square for 
Clive [Bell]a€™ s and Vanessa [Bell, the sister of Virgina Woolf]a€™ s party. There they
listened to a Mozart trioa€! and went upstairs for the last scene of a Racine play performed by 
three puppets made by Duncan [Grant], with words spoken by the weird-voiced Stracheys. a€~The
evening ended with Gerald Shove enthroned in the center of the room, crowned with rosesa€!a€™ a€D 
(HB, page 300).

But at the same time Keynesa€™ s pursuit of knowledge was shading over into politics and policy as 
well. For Keynes it was never enough to pursue knowledge in order to achieve a good state of mind, 
one had also to
be sure to cause the knowledge to be applied to make the world a better place. And how one could 
act in politics and policy was greatly constrained by the limits of our knowledge. One argument 
from Edmund Burke,
especially resonated with Keynes. As he wrote:

[Edmund] Burke ever held, and held rightly, that it can seldom be righta€! to sacrifice a present 
benefit for a doubtful advantage in the futurea€!. It is not wise to look too far ahead; our powers 
of
prediction are slight, our command over results infinitesimal. It is therefore the happiness of our 
own contemporaries that is our main concern; we should be very chary of sacrificing large
numbers of people for the sake of a contingent end, however advantageous that may appeara€! We can 
never know enough to make the chance worth takinga€!" (ES, page 62).

Keynesa€™ s industry and intelligence thus made him a trusted and effective member of Britaina€™ s 
intellectual and administrative elite well before the eve of World War I. Sir Edwin Montagu, 
especially, pushed him
forward both before and during the war. Before the war Keynes decided that he wanted the life of an 
academic rather than of an administrator: Cambridge rather than the India Office or the Treasury. 
Yet he kept a strong
presence in both worlds, writing his practical and policy-oriented book Indian Currency and Finance 
in spare moments as he worked on the deeper and philosophical project that was his Treatise on 
Probability.

Thus it was no surprise that Keynes found an important and powerful job at the Treasury during the 
national emergency that was World War I. How do you mobilize the financial resources of Britain to 
support the war
effort? How large a war effort could the British economy stand? How could an international trade 
system geared to consumer satisfaction be harnessed as an instrument of national power? These are 
all deep and
complicated questions. These are what Keynes worked on. But as the death toll from World War I 
mounted up toward ten million, Keynes became angrier and angrier at this monstrous botch of human 
lives and social
energy  that was World War Ia€“and angrier and angrier at the politicians who could see no way 
forward other than mixing more blood with mud at Paaschendale.

Keynesa€™ s friend David Garnett wrote him a letter condemning his work for the government, calling 
Keynes:

an intelligence they need in their extremitya€!. A genie taken incautiously outa€! by savages to 
serve them faithfully for their savage ends, and thena€“back you go into the bottlea€!. Oha€! our
savages are better than other savagesa€!. But dona€™ t believe in the profane abomination.

The interesting thing was that Keynes a€oeagreed that there was a great deal of truth in what I had 
saida€la€D (HB, page 321). And then the whole project of post-World War I reconstruction went wrong 
at Versaillesa€
“when the new German government was treated as a foe rather than a democratic ally, when the object 
seemed to be to extract as much in plunder and reparations from Germany as possible (a€oeuntil the 
pips
squeaka€D).

Skidelsky quotes South African politician Jan Christian Smuts on the atmosphere at Versailles:

Poor Keynes often sits with me at night after a good dinner and we rail against the world and the 
coming flood. And I tell him that this is the time for Griguaa€™ s prayer (the Lord to come
himself and not to send his Son, as this is not a time for children). And then we laugh, and behind 
the laughter is [Herbert] Hoovera€™ s horrible picture of thirty million people who must die
unless there is some great intervention. But then again we think that things are never really as 
bad as that; and something will turn up, and the worst will never be. And somehow all these phases
of feeling are true and right in some sensea€! (HB, page 373).

Keynes exploded with the book you have read: The Economic Consequences of the Peace. It condemned 
the political maneuvering of Versailles and the treaty that resulted in the strongest possible 
terms. He excoriated
short-sighted politicians who were interested in victory rather than peace. He outlined his 
alternative proposals for peace: a€oeGerman damages limited to A£2000m; cancellation of inter-Ally 
debts; creation of a
European   free trade areaa€! an international loan to stabilize the exchangesa€!.a€D

And Keynes prophesied dooma€“if the treaty were carried out and Germany kept poor for a generation:

If we aim deliberately at the impoverishment of Central Europe, vengeance, I dare predict, will not 
limp. Nothing can then delay for long that final civil war between the forces of reaction and the
despairing convulsions of revolution, before which the horrors of the late German war will fade 
into nothing, and which will destroya€! the civilization and progress of our generational (HB,
page 391).

The Economic Consequences of the Peace made Keynes famous. His horror at the terms of the peace 
treaty won him friends like Felix Frankfurter, a powerful molder of opinion in the United States. 
In his book,
propelled by a€oepassion and despair,a€D Keynes a€cespoke like an angel with the knowledge of an 
experta€D and showed an extraordinary mastery not just of economics but also of the words that were 
needed to
make economics persuasive. Before The Economic Consequences of the Peace Keynes was primarily an 
academic (with some government experience) with a lot of influential literary friends. Afterwards 
he was a
celebrity. He was not only the private Keynes:

the Cambridge [professor] selling economics by the hour, the lover of clever, attractive, unworldly 
young men, the intimate of [the literate geniuses of] Bloomsbury.

He was alsoa€’’because of what he had done with his pen after Versailles:

the monetary reformer, the adviser of governments, the City magnate, the feared journalist whose 
pronouncements caused bankers and currencies to tremblea€! conferences jostled with holidays,
intimacy merged into patronage. In 1925 the world-famous economist would marry a world-famous 
ballerina in a blaze of publicitya€! (HB, page 400).

Keynes to Lopokova:

In my bath today I considered your virtuesa€”how great they are. As usual I wondered how you could 
be so wise. You must have spent much time eating apples and talking to the serpent! But I
also thought that you combined all agesa€”a very old woman, matron, a debutante, a girl, a child, 
an infant; so that you are universal. What defence can you make against such praises? (page
181)

So after World War I Keynes used what power he had toa€”dona€™t laugha€”try to restore 
civilization. In Skidelskya€™ sa€”powerful and I believe correcta€’’interpretation, Keynes before 
1914:

believed (against much evidence, to be sure) that a new age of reason had dawned. The brutality of 
the closure applied in 1914 helps explain Keynesa€™ s reading of the interwar years, and the
nature of his mature effortsa€! to restore the expectation of stability and progress in a world cut 
adrift from its nineteenth-century mooringsa€! (ES, page xv).

After World War I, Keynes in the 1920s fought a brave but losing struggle against the approaching 
Great Depression, against political insanity, and against the Nazi Partya€™ s attempted revenge for 
the German defeat
in World War I. Keynes struggled for stable money and full employment, and against deflation, 
overvalued exchange rates, and the sacrifice of the happiness of todaya€™ s populations in the 
hopes of regaining the
imagined benefits of the classical gold standard at some time in the distant future. Keynes spent 
more than a decade arguing against central bankers who a€oethink it more important to raise the 
dollar exchange a few
points  than to encourage flagging trade.a€D He tried to prevent Britaina€™ s return to the gold 
standard in 1925 at an overvalued exchange rate, for by overvaluing the exchange rate Britaina€™ s 
Treasury Minister,

Winston Churchill, was willing

the deliberate intensification of unemnlovment. The object of credit restriction, in such a case, 
is to withdraw from emplovers the financial means to emolov labor at the existing level of prices


uiiaguicu uciicuis ui me uiaa>a>iuai guiu siaiiuaiu ai s>umc tune in uic uisuun IUIUIC. xxcyiica. 
spent inuic man a ucuauc aiguing against vciinai uains.cis wnu aetcuuim n inuic nnpuiiain to laisc 
me uunai CAunange a icw

points than to encourage flagging trade.a€D He tried to prevent Britaina€™ s return to the gold 
standard in 1925 at an overvalued exchange rate, for by overvaluing the exchange rate Britaina€™ s 
Treasury Minister,

Winston Churchill, was willing

the deliberate intensification of unemployment. The object of credit restriction, in such a case, 
is to withdraw from employers the financial means to employ labor at the existing level of prices
and wages. This policy can only attain its end by intensifying unemployment without limit, until 
the workers are ready to accept the necessary reduction in money wages under the pressure of
hard factsa€!. Deflation does not reduce wages a€~automatically.a€™ It reduces them by causing 
unemployment. The proper object of dear money is to check an incipient boom. Woe to those
whose faith leads them to use it to aggravate a Depression! (page 203).

But in the end Keynes failed. He was unable to persuade British governments that economic policy 
should be decided upon by rational thought rather than by obedience to old poorly-understood 
verities. He failed to
achieve any material easing of the terms of the Versailles treaty. He failed to prevent deflation 
and high unemployment in Britain. He failed to convince people that the Great Depression was a 
man-made catastrophe that
could be cured relatively easily. His pena€“though stronga€“was not strong enough. His allies were 
too few. And among central bankers and cabinet ministers understanding of the situation in which 
they were
embedded  was rare.

So the 1930s saw a change of emphasis. Fewer short polemical articles were written. Instead, Keynes 
concentrated his attention on writing a book, a book which he thought

will largely revolutionizea€“not, I suppose, at once but in the course of the next ten yearsa€“the 
way the world thinks about economic problems. When my new theory has been duly assimilated
and mixed with politics and feelings and passions, I cana€™t predict what the upshot will be in its 
effects on actions and affairs. But there will be a great changea€! (pages 520a€“521).

And he succeeded.

His General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money did change the world. It ends with a bold 
claim for the importance of ideas rather than interests that, in context, has to be read not as a 
considered judgment but as
his desperate hope:

Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are 
usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air, are
distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the power 
of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment of ideasa€!.
But,                                                                                    soon or 
late, it is ideas, not vested interests, which are dangerous for good or evila€! (page 570).

The extraordinary thing is that Keynes was right.
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER Only Content Below: I did get some very good comments:

Sokrates: A wonderful lecture on people you care about: No point quibbling.
However, I will quibblea€!

First, a word: a€oemanagerialisma€EI. This was, I think, introduced by James Burnham, and it did 
not mean a€oemuddling througha€D. I met it in 1984 as the work of Emanuel Goldstein who repeats 
Burnham. Orwell
had only criticism for Burnham, but he nicked his ideasa€!

Glaukon: The question is: a€oewho is to be master here?a€D I need a worda€”a€ceneoliberalisma€D 
wona€™t do. Burnham is dead. He doesna€™t get to hog the word forever. I want a word that means
a€oemuddling through and trying to realize the dreams of classical liberalism through clever 
government action and regulation^Ua€’’trying to make Saya€™ s Law, et cetera, true in practice even 
though it is not true in
theory.

Sokrates: With respect to the early Keynesa€!. I have read volume 1 of Skidelskya€™ s biography of 
Keynes, and he presents a very different picture. Not just an Aesthete but an advocate of Eqoism. 
According to
Skidelsky, Keynes noted that the logical implication of rational intuitionism is rational egoism, 
and the arguments Moore made to avoid this conclusion are nonsense. (Basically, Moore said if we 
cana€™t prove
something beyond all doubt we can ignore the argumenta€’’perhaps the most feeble reasoning humanly 
possible). Skidelskya€! claimed that the treatise on probability wasa€! written in defense of 
selfishness.

Skidelsky may have emphasized Keynesa€™ s declared indifference to the fate of the lower orders in 
order to make the transition to the public-spirited humanitarian Keynes of his volume II more 
dramatic, or perhaps to
stress the irony of the great contribution to the sum of global human utils made by an 
anti-utilititarian. That is, he may have tricked me, since I have no other source on Keynes.

You, however, are doing a bait and switch. You are claiming that you follow Skidelsky. You are then 
suppressing the (very large) party of Skidelskya€™ s argument which is inconvenient to a modern 
Keynesian such as
yourselfa€!

Glaukon: I was just trying to acknowledge Skidelsky. But youa€™re right: I should say a€oel draw on 
Skidelskya€D, rather than a€oel follow Skidelsk.ya€EL

Sokrates: Finally, on to your final quote from Keynes:

I find it is impossible to read without hearing a whispering voice saying a€oeMarx Marx Marx 
Marxa€D. Marx is clearly the defunct scribbler. Marx is simultaneously the strongest proof and the 
most rigid denier of the
power of ideas.

To find another mixture of praise and snark I turn, of course, to Orwell who wrote something like 
this anti-Marxist praise of Marx (I quote from memory): a€oeThe motivations of a thinker are 
irrelevant to the evaluation
of his ideas. While Marx was largely motivated by spite and bitterness, his conclusions are mostly 
accuratea€!a€D

Orwell is, admirably, offending everyone there. (Do note that I disagree with Orwell on both 
points.)

Glaukon: My view is that the example of Marx greatly encouraged Keynes in his projectMarxa€™ s 
writing is crabbed, and the translations out of German werea€”area€’’often deadly. Yet Marxa€™ s 
ideas changed
the world, and along the Leninist branch greatly for evil. So what, Keynes asked himself, could he, 
who both wrote well and had good ideas, manage to accomplish? The sky seemeda€”and to a great 
degree wasa€”the
limit.

Sokrates: And as for the Huns: The Huns were not a€oeGermanica€D. (The Visigoths were.) The Huns 
were notably yellow skinned. Due to their fearless quest for national power, greatness and 
a€oeelbow rooma€D
there arena€™ t any of them left as far as anyone can tell.

Glaukon: Dona€™t some Hungarians sometimes claim to be Huns? Hungarians name some of their children 
a€ceAttilaa€D. Bulgarians name some of their children a€ceTrajana€Da€!

Sokrates: Also no nationalist can really admit that Attila existed. The army which withdrew from 
the Field of Chalons (it certainly wasna€™ t routed) was a polyglot multiethnic mix which made the 
USA look
monochromatic. The a€oeHunsa€D vanished from history instantly when Attila died, because the Hun 
nation was never a protagonist.

Glaukon: But the Huns did chase the Goths and the rest from the Volga to Aquitaine, no? Was it 
always just a€oethe people to our west are much softer targets and much richer than the people to 
our easta€D? And that
went on for a century-and-a-half, until Attila died and there the Huns were, in Pannonia, 
surrounded by their subjects and allies who turned on a dime and became ex-subjects and ex-allies?

Sokrates: Now your main point, that a German liberal was more German than liberal, is most 
embarrassing to liberals. It almost makes me believe in such concepts as a€oenational charactera€D 
and the Zeitgeist. I think
I will decide that Max Weber is just one (possibly unrepresentative) data pointa€!

Sokrates: I do remember when you discovered how much Max Weber had turned to the Dark Side, you 
were sincerely shockeda€!

Glaukon: IIRC, I was sincerely shocked. But I as not so much shocked that a German liberal turned 
out to have a strong component that was a social darwinist who believed the aim of German policy 
should be the
demographic replacement of Poles and Russians by Germans so Germans could have 
Lebensraum^.’’elbow-room. I was, rather, shocked that I had not run across the Freiburg address, or 
even a hint of the ideas in it, in
the   Weber readings I had been assigned. I had been assigned to read Weber and nothing but Weber 
for five straight weeks. Five weeks! Much of what I had been assigned was absolutely deadly: badly 
translated works in
which Weber was grasping for complex ideas that he did not yet (and I think never) could fully 
understand. Freiburg, by contrast, is lively and readablea€”and is a very important part of both 
Weber and of the
intellectual currents of 20th-century history. It belonged in those five weeks. It wasna€™ t there. 
Why not? Because my teachers and their teachers and the translators had decided to make Weber more 
sympathetic by
whitewashing him.


urwen is, aumiraoiy, onenaing everyone mere, (uo note mar i disagree wim urwen on oom points.;

Glaukon: My view is that the example of Marx greatly encouraged Keynes in his projectMarxa€™ s 
writing is crabbed, and the translations out of German werea€”area€’’often deadly. Yet Marxa€™ s 
ideas changed
the world, and along the Leninist branch greatly for evil. So what, Keynes asked himself, could he, 
who both wrote well and had good ideas, manage to accomplish? The sky seemeda€”and to a great 
degree wasa€”the
limit.

Sokrates: And as for the Huns: The Huns were not a€ceGermanica€D. (The Visigoths were.) The Huns 
were notably yellow skinned. Due to their fearless quest for national power, greatness and 
a€oeelbow rooma€D
there arena€™ t any of them left as far as anyone can tell.

Glaukon: Dona€™t some Hungarians sometimes claim to be Huns? Hungarians name some of their children 
a€ceAttilaa€D. Bulgarians name some of their children a€ceTrajana€Da€;

Sokrates: Also no nationalist can really admit that Attila existed. The army which withdrew from 
the Field of Chalons (it certainly wasna€™ t routed) was a polyglot multiethnic mix which made the 
USA look
monochromatic. The a€ceHunsa€D vanished from history instantly when Attila died, because the Hun 
nation was never a protagonist.

Glaukon: But the Huns did chase the Goths and the rest from the Volga to Aquitaine, no? Was it 
always just a€oethe people to our west are much softer targets and much richer than the people to 
our easta€D? And that
went on for a century-and-a-half, until Attila died and there the Huns were, in Pannonia, 
surrounded by their subjects and allies who turned on a dime and became ex-subjects and ex-allies?

Sokrates: Now your main point, that a German liberal was more German than liberal, is most 
embarrassing to liberals. It almost makes me believe in such concepts as a€oenational charactera€D 
and the Zeitgeist. I think
I will decide that Max Weber is just one (possibly unrepresentative) data pointa€!

Sokrates: I do remember when you discovered how much Max Weber had turned to the Dark Side, you 
were sincerely shockeda€!

Glaukon: IIRC, I was sincerely shocked. But I as not so much shocked that a German liberal turned 
out to have a strong component that was a social darwinist who believed the aim of German policy 
should be the
demographic replacement of Poles and Russians by Germans so Germans could have 
Lebensraum^.’’elbow-room. I was, rather, shocked that I had not run across the Freiburg address, or 
even a hint of the ideas in it, in
the   Weber readings I had been assigned. I had been assigned to read Weber and nothing but Weber 
for five straight weeks. Five weeks! Much of what I had been assigned was absolutely deadly: badly 
translated works in
which Weber was grasping for complex ideas that he did not yet (and I think never) could fully 
understand. Freiburg, by contrast, is lively and readablea€”and is a very important part of both 
Weber and of the
intellectual currents of 20th-century history. It belonged in those five weeks. It wasna€™ t there. 
Why not? Because my teachers and their teachers and the translators had decided to make Weber more 
sympathetic by
whitewashing him.

