Subscribe now

Larry Summers attributes the Federal Reservea€™ s decision to tighten policy, in what appears to 
him and to me to be a weakly-growing and high-slack economy, to four mistakes, which are themselves 
driven by a fifth, overarching
mistake. The four mistakes are:

1. The Fed has much too much confidence in its models that tell it that the unemployment rate takes 
the temperature of the labor market and the Phillips Curve now still has the slope it had in the 
1970s.

2. The Fed operates as though FOMC members are tased whenever inflation rises above 2%/year, with 
no countervailing painful consequences of low inflation, low employment, or low output.

3. The Fed believesa€’’without empirical support anywhere that I can seea€”that quick sharp moves 
up or down in interest rates have larger effects in total than the same interest-rate change made 
gradually and over a longer
term.

4. The Fed thinksa€’’without theoretical support that I can seea€“that zero interest rates are not 
a reflection of an economy in a pathological state, but rather a cause of economic pathology that 
is dangerous now that the
economy is once again a€cenormala€D.

And Summers sees the fifth, overarching mistake the Fed is making right now as: (5) The Fed is 
excessively committed to a€oeexisting models and modes of thoughta€! in the thrall of orthodoxya€U:

Why is the Fed making these mistakes if indeed they are mistakes? It is not because its leaders are 
not thoughtful or open minded or concerned with growth and employment. Rather I suspect it is 
because of an
excessive commitment to existing models and modes of thoughta€!

I do thinka€’’confidentlya€’’that Summers is absolutely 100% correct in his identification of the 
four component intellectual errors that the Federal Reserve is currently making. And it is 
certainly true that these are the result of an
excessive commitment to some current modes of thoughta€’’there are, after all, a lot of people who 
join the Fed in apparently thinking that:

• zero interest rates are at least as much a cause of rather than the proper treatment of pathology 
right now,

• the Fed needs to raise rates now to give it the space to lower them if need be later,

• that it is dangerous for inflation to rise above 2%/year ever,

• that the Phillips Curve somehow has a steeper slope than the recent evidence of the past 
generation can justify belief in, and

• that the unemployment rate rather than the detrended employment-to-population ratio gives the 
temperature of the labor market.

But do these beliefs on the part of the Fed really reflect an excessive commitment to existing 
models! There I have my doubts. Or, rather, it depends on what you think the proper function of 
economic modeling is.
Share

Are models properly idea-generating machines, in which you start from what you think is the case 
and use the model-building process to generate new insights?


• that the Phillips Curve somehow has a steeper slope than the recent evidence of the past 
generation can justify belief in, and

• that the unemployment rate rather than the detrended employment-to-population ratio gives the 
temperature of the labor market.

But do these beliefs on the part of the Fed really reflect an excessive commitment to existing 
models! There I have my doubts. Or, rather, it depends on what you think the proper function of 
economic modeling is.
Share

Are models properly idea-generating machines, in which you start from what you think is the case 
and use the model-building process to generate new insights?

Or are models merely filing systemsa€“ways of organizing your beliefs, and whenever you find that 
your model is leading you to a surprising conclusion that you find distasteful the proper response 
is to ignore the model, or to tweak it
to make the distasteful conclusion go away?

Both can be effectively critiqued. The critique of models-as-discovery-mechanisms is that they 
suffer from the Polya-Robertson problem: It involves replacing what he calls a€oeplausible 
reasoninga€D, where models are there to assist
thinking, with what he calls a€oedemonstrative reasoninga€O. in which the model itself becomes the 
object of analysis. The box that is the model is well described but, as Dennis Robertson warned, 
there is no reason to think that the box
contains anything real. The critique of models-as-filing-systems is that they are often used like a 
drunk uses a lamp post: more for support than illumination.

In the real world, it is, of course, the case that models are both: both filing systems and 
discovery mechanisms. Coherent and productive thought is, as the late John Rawls used to say, 
always a process of reflective equilibriuma€”in
which the trinity of assumptions, modes of reasoning, and conclusions are all three revised and 
adjusted under the requirement of coherence until a maximum level of comfort with all three is 
reached. The question is always one of
balance.

But it is clear to me that if you give even minor weight to the firsta€”see well-founded models as 
a way of generating new insights rather than just organizing old beliefsa€”that the line of work 
into the economics of the liquidity trap
that I see as well-represented by Krugmana€™ s (1999) a€oeThinking About the Liquidity Trapa€D 
tells us, very strongly, that the Federal Reserve is on the wrong track intellectually right now. 
It tells us that what is out of whack has
not been and is not the real money stock, but is instead the expected inflation rate. Or, rather, 
that because the expected inflation rate is too low, there is no value of the real money stock 
consistent with full employment equilibrium. If
expected inflation were higher, the existing money stock would be ample, or even require shrinking.

This is the conclusion of Krugman (1999): that the economy needs higher expected and actual 
inflation, and that the free-market economy with full price flexibility would deliver that 
inflation. But the Fed does not appear to acknowledge
either that the economy needs higher inflation, that the flexible-price benchmark would deliver 
this inflation, or that the job of the Fed is to mimic that full employment-generating price 
structure as closely as possible.

Moreover, the Fed does not engage in reflective equilibrium. It rejects the conclusions of what I 
regard as the standard Patinkin-style existing model of Krugman (1999). But it does not propose an 
alternative model. There seems to me to
be no theoretical ground, no model even considered as a filing system, underpinning the a€ce 
orthodox a€D modes of thought that the Fed believes. And it does not seem to feel this absence is a 
problem.

I find that lack of faith in the usefulness of our toolsa€! disturbinga€!
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2015/12/musings-on-the-current-episteme-of-the-federal-reserve.html
>
Leave a comment

