CONDITION: We Truly Did Not Have History Rhyming to the Spanish Civil War on Our 2022 Bingo Card!:


rad DeLong's Grasping Reality

PODCAST: "Hexapodia" is AMe Key Insight XXXV!: Putin's Surprise Attack on Ukraine, with Special 
Guest Kamil Galeev

Listen now (69 min) I We Truly Did Not Have History Rhyming to the Spanish Civil War on Our 2022 
Bingo Card!a€!Subscribe to get this in your email inbox. Become a paid subscriber ifa€! I will not 
say that this a€~Stack will cease to exist without paying subscribers. I will say that the 
frequency of this a€~Stack depends on enough people being paying subscribers for me to feel under a 
sense of obligation to prioritize this, rather than something else. And I
will say that the survival of our civilization may well depend on our reattaining a functional, 
rational public spherea€”and that subscribing to a€~Stacks that you find useful may well be the 
most productive thing you can do to help make that happena€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong


Kamil Galeev @kamilkazani

Why Russia will lose this war? Much of the "realist" discourse is about accepting Putin's victory, 
cuz it's * guaranteed*. But how do we know it is? I'll argue that analysts 1) overrate Russian army 
2) underrate Ukrainian one 3) misunderstand Russian strategy & political goalsdY§^


5:53 PM a~™ Feb 27,2022

93,985Likes26,280Retweets

Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...
Share

First: a€~Stack App for iOS:

You can now read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the new a€~Stack app for iPhonea€”but not (YET) 
Android:



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

The a€~Stack Communications Apparat says:

With the app, youa€™ 11 have a dedicated Inbox for my a€~Stack and any others you subscribe to. New 
posts will never get lost in your email filters, or stuck in spam. Longer posts will never cut-off 
by your email app. Comments and rich media will all work seamlessly. Overall, ita€™ s a big upgrade 
to the reading experience. If you do not have an a€ce Apple devicea€D, you can join the Android 
waitlist here.a€D
I have been a beta tester for the iPhone a€~Stack app.

The use case I have found for it may be unique, but it is something that it seems to be very very 
good at.

The use I have found for it is as a podcast play era€’’and using Apple's text-to-speech feature for 
a€~Stacks that do not have attached audio podcasts. It has, so far, been a very very good 
experience.

I also have found it useful for keeping track of bite-sized things to read during short periods of 
what would otherwise be waiting time. It is very good at pulling up something interesting, so that 
I do not have to draw upon the resources of my rich inner life.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Audio:

Michael Kofman & Ryan Evans: 11 Days in: Russiaa€™ s Invasion Stumbles Forward'. a€~Russia bungled 
its invasion plan but is nonetheless making progress in the face of fierce Ukrainian resistance. 
But can the Russian military stay combat effective? What lessons can we learn from the war so far? 
What role is urban warfare playing in this fight? What do the troubles faced by the Russian 
military and security services in Ukraine portend for the regime of
Vladimir Putin? And what exactly is going on with that long column of Russian forces north of 
Kyiv?a€!

<https://warontherocks .com/2Q22/Q3/l 1 -days-in-russias-invasion-stumbles-forward/>

One Picture: Apple Computer: Jade, Jade-C-Chop, Jade-2C-Die: Ml, Ml Pro, Ml Max, Ml Ultra



’        * f |

1 f

3 t A pl

0

        lli


And when you add it to the Ml
family,

Full screen (f)

«M1 Pro                                ax

<https ://www,anandtech .com/show/17306/apple-announces-m 1 -ultra-combining-two-m 1 
-maxes-for-even-more-performance>

Very Briefly Noted

Janan Ganesh: Why the Ukraine Crisislis so Bad for Western Populists: a€~It is not the moral stain, 
but the blow to the idea that autocrats are competenta€l 
<https://www.ft.com/content/62b6bc6d-5c5d-400f-9305-999fa6bf4487>

Jerome Armstrong: Berkshire Has a Moment: a€~Shares in Berkshire Hathaway are having a really, 
really good 2022a€l <https://www.ft.com/content/c4b5f29e-545d-4f24-8025-0350de06c37c>

Andrey Kozyrev: Military Failing Because Budget Spent on Yachts: a€~The Kremlin spent the last 20 
years trying to modernize its military. Much of that budget was stolen and spent on mega-yachts in 
Cyprus. But as a military advisor you cannot report that to the President. So they reported lies to 
him insteada€l 
<https://www.businessinsider.com/russia-ex-fm-kozvrev-miitarv-failing-budget-spent-yachts-2022-3>

Rob Lee: a€™ "In less than a week, the United States and NATO have pushed more than 17,000 antitank 
weapons, including Javelin missiles, over the borders of Poland and Romania"a€l

"In less than a week, the United States and NATO have pushed more than 17,000 antitank weapons, 
including Javelin missiles, over the borders of Poland and Romania,1'nytimes.com/2022/03/06/us/a€ I


In less than a week, the United States and NATO have pushed

more than 17,000 antitank weapons, including Javelin missiles,
over the borders of Poland and Romania, unloading them from
giant military cargo planes so they can make the trip by land to
Kyiv, the Ukrainian capital, and other major cities. So far, Russian
forces have been so preoccupied in other parts of the country that
they have not targeted the arms supply lines, but few think that
can last.

But those are only the most visible contributions. Hidden away on
bases around Eastern Europe, forces from United States Cyber
Command known as “cybermission teams” are in place to interfere
with Russia’s digital attacks and communications — but measuring
their success rate is difficult, officials say.

In Washington and Germany, intelligence officials race to merge
satellite photographs with electronic intercepts of Russian military
units, strip them of hints of how they were gathered, and beam
them  to Ukrainian military units within an hour or two. As he tries
to stay out of the hands of Russian forces in Kyiv, President
Volodymyr Zelensky of Ukraine travels with encrypted
communications equipment, provided by the Americans, that can

mit him into a CAnnm rail with Pracidont Riston Mr Yolonclzv iicod

3:44 AM r™ Mar 7,2022

5,446Likes 1,360Re tweets

• Kamil Galeev: Why Russia Will Lose

Kamil Galeev @kamilkazani

Why Russia will lose this war? Much of the "realist" discourse is about accepting Putin's victory, 
cuz it's *guaranteed*. But how do we know it is? I'll argue that analysts 1) overrate Russian army 
2) underrate Ukrainian one 3) misunderstand Russian strategy & political goalsdY§^


93,985Likes26,280Retweets

•  Karen Attiah: a€™ The Atlantica€™ s April cover story is a case study in everything that is 
wrong with access journalism and the immoral fixation on powerful, brutal men, @KarenAttiah writes. 
https://t.co/pBda5mlpe8" / Twitter_: a€~The Atlantica€™ s April cover story is a case study in 
everything that is wrong with access journalism and the immoral fixation on powerful, brutal mena€!

Washington Post Opinions @ PostOpinions

The Atlantica€™ s April cover story is a case study in everything that is wrong with access 
journalism and the immoral fixation on powerful, brutal men, @KarenAttiah writes.

wapo .stOpinion I The Atlantica€™ s elevation of MBS is an insult to journalismThe Atlantic gave 
Saudi Arabiaa€™ s crown prince a platform to continue his absurd denials of having anything to do 
with the murder of Jamal Khashoggi.
1:01 AMT™ Mar7,2022

744Likes25 IRetweets

•  The Byzantine Scotist: a€™Donald Trump is not a historical figure but is actually a compilation 
of 4 distinct sources. A threada€!. The oldest two sources are the paleocon (P) and libertarian (L) 
sources. A later neocon (N) source was then added to make the narrative more acceptable, and the 
final MAGA (M) redactor combined these distinct sources into a single narrativea€!

The Byzantine Scotist @ByzCat

Donald Trump is not a historical figure but is actually a compilation of 4 distinct sources. A 
thread dY§^

11:48 PM r™ Mar 5,2022

4,17 6Likes91 ORe tweets

• Eric Topol: a€™ The impact of Covid on the braina€!

Eric Topol @EricTopol


SARS-CoV-2 is associated with changes in
brain structure in UK Biobank


% Change in duration io complete Trail A

40   Ccohos
Caws

35

30

25

20

15

1D

5

0

% Change in duration to ccmpiete Tre* B

50   — Centres
Cases

40

30

20

10

o

5                    -10

0 56 £6 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76      0 56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 72 74 76

Aga                      Age

Fig, 31 Percentage longitudinal change for SARS-CoV-2 positive
participants and controls, in the duration to complete Trails A and Bof the
UK Biobank Trail Making Test, Absolute baseline (used reconvert

2 of the 4 main regions with change in structure               Cognitive decline metrics

4:01 PM a'™ Mar 7,2022

5,406Likes3,295Retweets

Paragraphs:

William H. Janeway: Capital Is Not a Strategy: a€~While entrepreneurs and venture-capital founders 
tell themselves that a€oecapital is a strategy,a€D bubble finance is no substitute for a business 
plan that can achieve positive cash flowa€l. In the low-friction world of internet-delivered or 
mediated services, start-ups are eager to spend ever-greater amounts of other peoplea€™ s money to 
acquire customers, the goal being to emerge victorious in a winner-
takes-all racea€!. Occasionally, these explosions of investor exuberance have funded the deployment 
of innovative technologies at sufficient scale to transform the market economy, as was the case 
with railroads, electrification, and the internet. Whether a bubble is productive depends on what 
it leaves behind. But all bubbles burst, so even investors in the vehicles of a productive episode 
inevitably will fall into one of two categories: the quick or the deada€!.
The managerial sagas of Uber, We Work, and Theranos represent the downstream consequences of the 
flood unleashed by central banks. Theranos founder Elizabeth Holmes may be the only one so far to 
have been caught crossing the line into criminal liability as she pumped and puffed up her company. 
But the absence of other prosecutions is no excuse for investors and board members to abandon their 
fiduciary responsibilities^!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/attracting-nontraditional-capital-is-not-a-business-pl
an-bv-william-h-ianeway-2022-01>

Alan Cole: This GOP Senator Cana€™ t Stop Talking About His Plan to Raise Taxes: a€~Sen. Rick 
Scotta€! 11-point a€oeRescue Americaa€D plana€!. a€oeAll Americans should pay some income tax to 
have skin in the game, even if a small amount. Currently over half of Americans pay no income 
tax.a€da€! Scott defended the idea in a Wall Street Journal op-ed last Thursdaya€!. I dona€™ t 
think Scotta€™ s view is about economicsa€!. Scotta€™ s
references to a€oeskin in the gamea€D suggest a kind of bank-shot strategy based on dubious 
right-wing pop-polisci. a€oeThe federal government has figured out how to disconnect many Americans 
from fiscal reality ,a€D Scott wrote in his WSJ op-ed. a€oePoliticians peddle a fiction that they 
can waste as much money as they want with no downside.a€D The cure? a€oeEven if it is just a few 
bucks, everyone needs to know what it is like to pay some
taxes.a€Da€; Scotta€™ s idea assumes that even small income tax sums will create a strong emotional 
investment in fiscal responsibilitya€! [and] thata€! payroll taxes, do not inculcate that same 
ethosa€!. More cynical political veterans may guffaw at my earnest attempt to analyze this idea 
seriously. They might note that the point is simply to be talked about, to build an email list, and 
to get the less sophisticated people excited. Then, when you get elected, you
ignore  the idea and do something else entirely. But I think this is a mistakea€!. If youa€™re a 
backbencher looking to raise your political profile, it makes sense to put out some wild vaporware 
proposals in order to draw attention to yourself. But if you are acting as a spokesperson for more 
of the party, or even just attempting to build a solid national profile, your ideas should not be 
liabilitiesa€!

LINK: 
<https://fullstackeconomics.com/this-gop-senator-cant-stop-talking-about-his-plan-to-raise-taxes/>

Adam Tooze: John Mearsheimer & the Dark Origins of Realism: a€~a€oeWhy is Ukraine the Westa€™ s 
fault?a€Da€l is the provocative title of a talk by Professor John Mearsheimera€! international 
relations (IR) realisma€!. In 2022 Mearsheimer is still delivering his message, most explosively on 
1 March in an ill-advised down-the-telephone interview to the New Yorkera€!. What is the realism 
that Mearsheimer claims to espouse?a€! The scandal entails
Mearsheimera€™ s refusal to see Putina€™ s aggression as anything other than the behaviour of a 
great power at baya€!. Great powers, the theory goes, guard their security through spheres of 
interesta€!. If necessary, those zones are defended with force, and anyone who fails to recognise 
and respect this fails to grasp the violent logic of international relationsa€!. But that is not 
the same as actually explaining war, any more than gesturing to imperialism is an
adequate explanation for why the Kaiser gave the Austrians a blank cheque in July 1914. The realist 
model is grossly underspecified and fails to grasp the qualitative shift implied by the opening of 
hostilitiesa€!. To resort to war, by any side, should be acknowledged for what it is. It should not 
be normalised as the logical and obvious reaction to given circumstances, but recognised as a 
radical and perilous act, fraught with moral consequences. Any thinker or
politician too callous or shallow to face that stark reality, should be judged accordinglya€!

LINK: <https://www.newstatesman.com/ideas/2022/03/john-mearsheimer-and-the-dark-origins-of-realism>

Ed Yong: How Did This Many Deaths Become Normal?: a€~The United States reported more deaths from 
COVIDa€“19 last Friday than deaths from Hurricane Katrina, more on any two recent weekdays than 
deaths during the 9/11 terrorist attacks, more last month than deaths from flu in a bad season, and 
more in two years than deaths from HIV during the four decades of the AIDS epidemic. At least 
953,000 Americans have died from COVID, and the true
toll is likely even higher because many deaths went uncounted. CO VID is now the third leading 
cause of death in the U.S., after only heart disease and cancer, which are both catchall terms for 
many distinct diseases. The sheer scale of the tragedy strains the moral imagination. On May 
24,2020, as the United States passed 100,000 recorded deaths, The New York Times filled its front 
page with the names of the dead, describing their loss as
a€oeincalculable.a€D Now the nation hurtles toward a milestone of 1 million. What is 10 times 
incalculable?a€!

LINK: <https://kottke .org/22/03/how-did-this-many-deaths-become-normal>

Napier Lopez: Everything Apple Announced at its March 8 Event: a€~Ml Ultra: Applea€™ s transition 
to its own desktop processors revolutionized performance on macOSa€”and made competitors step their 
game up. Today Apple announced the most powerful chip in the Ml family: the Ml Ultraa€! two Ml 
Maxes stuck together using a special interconnect technology dubbed a€ceUltraFusiona€Da€! 114 
billion transistors and 128GB of unified memory
while maintaining a€oeindustry-leadinga€n power efficiencya€!. The chip has a 20-core CPU (16 
high-performance and 4 high-efficiency), a 64-core GPU, and a 32-core neural engine, for 
performance 8x faster than Ml. Apple also says the GPU is more powerful than the most powerful 
discrete graphics on the market (presumably an Nvidia 3090, although Apple didna€™t specify) while 
using 200W less powera€!. The Mac Studioa€! looks a lot like a
chunkier Mac Minia€! shatters performance compared to even the most expensive Mac Pro. Apple says 
Ml Ultra Studio offers 60 percent faster CPU performance than the top-of-the-line 28-core Intel 
Xeon Mac Pro. It also offers 80% faster graphics than the Radeon 6900X chip in the same maxed-out 
configurationaC!. The device starts ata€! $3,999 with Ml Ultraa€! available March 18a€!. The Studio 
Displaya€! is a powerful 27-inch monitor, with 5K Retina
resolutiona€! a 12MPultrawide cameraa€! Spatial Audio and Dolby AtmosaC! an Al3 Bionic chip to 
handle image processing^! available on March 18 starting at $l,599a€!

LINK: <https://thenextweb.com/news/apple-event-march-8-2022>

Thomas S. Fallows: Kiev in the 1970s, & Kyiv Now: a€~Ukraine is, and is not, a part of Russia. The 
two overlap but are also differenta€!. The easy a€~offrampa€™ for Putin would be to find some 
pretext FINALLY to stop his aggression, Declaring Victory and returning back to Moscow in triumph. 
Solidifying Russian control of Crimea and Donbas are the easy conclusions to this tragedy. I 
believe that eventually, the wise people of the West will have to
convince Zelensky of Ukraine to surrender once and for all Crimea and Donbas. They are not a€~worth 
ita€™ to remain in Ukraine. Russia controls them, and Ukraine should formally acknowledge this to 
gain the Peacea€!

LINK:



Breaking the News

Guest Post: Kiev in the 1970s, and Kyiv Now

The post below is by my brother, Thomas S. Fallows. He has spent much of his life working in and 
thinking about Russia and its environs. He has lived in Russia€!

Read more

a year ago A- 31 likes A- 16 comments A- James Fallows
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA...

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe


The post below is by my brother, Thomas S. Fallows. He has spent much of his life working in and 
thinking about Russia and its environs. He has lived in Russia€!

Read more

a year ago A- 31 likes A- 16 comments A- James Fallows
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA...

[Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

