Subscribe now

CONDITION: Hopeful (for Financial Tinies Best Business Book of the Year, That Is)

Financial Times Live @ftlive

600 entries down to 15 longlist books. Tomorrow live on twitter at 2pm BST (bit.lv/3SqeOXv) we will 
announce the finalists for the Business Book of the Year Award 2022. Here is a recap of all the 
#BBYA22 books & authors...

2:01 PM r™ Sep 21,2022

1 Like 1 Retweet

Am I reading too much into the appearance of my book as the cover image of the FTa€™ s promotional 
video? Probablya€l But at least it tells me that the Basic Book design team did an excellent and 
eye-catching job!

<bit.ly/3pP3Krk>
Share

FIRST: The Natural Rate of Inflation

The policy discussion surrounding appropriate monetary policy has been greatly hobbled by a lack of 
attention on the natural rate of inflationa€”a€Dthe level that would be ground out by the Walrasian 
system of general equilib- rium equationsa€! [accounting for] structural characteristics^! 
including market imperfections, stochastic variabilitya€! cost of gathering informational [and] of 
mobility, and so ona€!a€D
chttps://www.aeaweb.org/aer/top20/58.1.1-17.pdf>. Chief, among these structural characteristics is 
downward nominal wage stickiness: the extreme inadvisability for worker-morale and hence 
effort-elicitation reasons of a business attempting to continue to employee a worker at a lower 
nominal wage.

The first-order implication of this is that the natural rate of inflation will almost always be 
positivea€”that, contrary to Milton, Friedman, the long-run Phillips curve is NOT vertical, but, 
rather that downward nominal wage stickiness requires that the economy have a positive average rate 
of inflation, in order to grease the wheels of commerce and achieve anything close to an efficient 
allocation chttps://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2000/01/2000a_bpea akerlof .pdf>.

The second-order implication of this is that the natural rate of inflation will be higher in times 
when there is a good deal of reallocation to be donea€”at times when the economy is not in a stable 
configuration with respect to sectors and industries, but is instead hunting for a new and 
different cross-sector and cross-industry relative allocation of effort.
At times like now.

So I ran through the qualitative considerations that impact what the natural rate of inflation is 
likely to be right now for Tristan Bove of Fortune. And he wrote it up as a very nice little 
article:

TRISTAN BOVE: Why you should be happy about inflation and worried about something else, top 
economist Brad DeLong says 
<https://fortune.com/2022/09/17/whv-inflation-good-economv-stagflation-recession-brad-delong-larrv-s
ummers/>: a€~a€oeThe reopening inflation wea€™ ve had has so far been a very good thing,a€D Brad 
DeLong, a professor at UC Berkeley, told Fortune&=\. Inflation in the U.S. is currently serving
two functions that could helpa€! helping expand new economic sectors poised for big growth, and 
uncovering and optimizing supply chain snagsa€!. a€oeWhen youa€™re coming out of a big recession, 
the natural rate of inflation has got to be above the normal 2%a€Da€l. As always, therea€™ s a 
catcha€!. Expectations that inflation will become entrenched in the economy and stick around might 
become a self-fulfilling prophecy,
which would lead to something even worse for the economy.a€!

In a blog post last year, when inflation was already becoming a source of concern, DeLong compared 
the recovering U.S. economy to a driver suddenly accelerating away. The skid marks left on the 
asphalt represented inflationa€”a blemish and a nuisance to be surea€”but worth it to get the 
economy back on tracka€!

This argument of mine is a very von Hayekian argument: Prices exist to serve as traffic signals so 
that we can crowdsource the solution to the problem of efficient production. In order to serve as 
proper traffic, signals, prices need to move to the values that are neededa€”and we all need to 
gold and swallow the distributional consequences, or we will empowerish ourselves, relatively, at 
least. Moreover, one market failurea€”downward-sticky nominal wages
for psychological reasonsa€”does not interfere with the marketa€™ s ability to do its job of 
guiding the crowdsourcing as long as we do not pile on top of that a second market failure: the 
worship of a stable price level.

One might, indeed, see this as a strongly right-wing market-fundamentalist argument: people 
complaining about the inflation that the market has given us need to learneth the lesson: a€oethe 
market giveth; the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the marketa€D, for the market has its 
logic that we need to respect.
And leet me stress this: given that we have downward-sticky nominal wages in the economy, requiring 
that the Federal Reserve hit its 2% inflation target year-by-year gravely damages the market 
economies ability to do its proper job in a time of substantial sectoral activity reallocation.

This is, as I say, obvious. Rapidly returning to a different full-employment configuration after 
the plague is like rejoining the highway at speed. Inflation is thus like leaving 
skidmarksa€’’rubber on the road. To complain about leaving skidmarks and also demand that we rejoin 
the highway at speed is simply silly.

And there is, of course, a big danger: that the interaction of the energy and grain price shocks 
stemming from Muscovy's invasion of Ukraine with the reopening-shock inflation will cause us to 
lose inflationa€™ s expectational anchor, and leave us with a big problem. When I point out to 
Larry Summers that the bond market still thinks that the Federal Reserve has got this, Larry 
replies: a€oeYeah. But that is because the bond market expects the Federal
Reserve to deliver a big recession to our door.a€D I think that it is 50%-50% whether that is 
righta€”the expectational interest rate path implicit in the term structure does not seem to me to 
be sending that message. But Larry is not dumb, and his a€oeworry about this issuea€D positions 
have greatly risen in their market value over the past twenty-one months.

As I said, my argument here is at its base a strongly right-wing market-fundamentalist argument: 
people complaining about the inflation that the market has given us need to learn that the market 
has its logic that we need to respect.
And so I am not surprised by amused that this triggered my first right-wing twitter mob, with 1030 
almost-invariably hostile replies:

FORTUNE @FortuneMagazine


Not only are you paying more tor stutt than a year ago, but inflation continues to devastate the 
stock market, too. But higher inflation can also be good. How? OYbit.lv/3Sim4Vb

Year-over-year percent change in U.S. inflation

Consumer Price Index percentage changes

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics • Get the data • Created with Datawrapper

3:46 PM r™ Sep 20,2022

477Likes208Retweets

This is, of course, a very low-wattage right-wing twitter mob in all respects: 1000 angry comments 
is small beer in these matters, so not much power; there is no there there, in that I have not yet 
run across a reply in this thread (no, I have not and will not read them all) that gives any 
evidence of having actually read the Fortune article, so not much attention; and a more-or-less 
complete forgetting that whining about market outcomes is not a right-wing
position in America today, so low IQ.

But it does reinforce my beliefs that Twitter needs to be changed fundamentally. If I were running 
it, I would give real people one free tweet and a€~bots zero free tweets a daya€”and make them pay 
to tweet more. Otherwise, we would be better off without it, and it does need to die.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Agricultural Soil Quality:

SQR values (soil quality)

20—40 (poor)

40—60 (moderate I



h/t @lijukic

Leave a comment

Must Read:

Alexandria Symondsi^/X: The Gamification of Humanity: a€~YOUa€™VE BEEN PLAYED: How Corporations, 
Governments, and Schools Use Games to Control Us All, by Adrian Hon: Adrian Hon traces how and why 
gamificationa€! has come to suffuse nearly every aspect of human existence in the digital eraa€L 
Hon slips easily between the perspectives of expert, enthusiast and critica€!. Some of the booka€™ 
s most insightful moments come
when Hon discusses how his team considers ethics and user experience when deciding how much to use 
gamification tricks in their own worka€!. The breadth of sources Hon marshals is evidence, too, of 
his grounding in the subject. Some are to be expected: books released by M.I.T. Press, work by 
well-known commentators like Neil Postman and Ian Bogost, news articles from mainstream and gaming 
publications, plus a handful of loftier references like
Aristotlea€™ s a€oeNicomachean Ethicsa€D and Foucaulta€™ s a€oeDiscipline and Punish.a€D But 
throughout, the book also quotes liberally from ordinary usersa€™ posts on social networks and 
internet forumsa€!. Tension between incisive, specific ideas about technology design and mushier 
ones about society persists into the conclusion, where Hon lays out some possible solutions to the 
problems gamification has wrought. Alongside excellent
advice                                                                                              
                                                                                                    
                      for designers hoping to use these techniques ethically are some pretty 
unsatisfying prescriptions for how the gamification of real life might be averteda€!. Still, the 
book is charming and accessible enough to overcome these moments of overreacha€!. Ita€™ s worth 
keeping up your reading streak to finisha€!

Give a gift subscription

Other Things I Am Reading:

Very Briefly Noted:

• Milton Friedman (1968): The Role of Monetary Policy <https ://www.aeaweb .org/aer/top20/58.1.1-17 
.pdf >

•  George Akerlof, William Dickens, & George Perry (2000)): Near-Rational Wage and Price Setting 
and the Long-Run Phillips Curve 
<https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2000/01/2000a_bpea_akerlof.pdf >

• Andreas Kluth: A Decision Tree for Biden If Putin Goes Nuclear

• Brendan Murray: Factoriesa€™ Supply Pressures Linger as US Economy Downshifts
Get 25% off a group subscription

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Branko Milanovic: A Century Ago: a€~Ideology however was a powerful force. It spread 
Bolsheviksa€™ influence far and widea€!. Carr was criticized for coming close to adulation of Lenin 
There is no doubt that he admired Lenina€™ s clear-eyed realism and Machiavellianisma€!


•  Matthew Yglesias: Russia's military and economic strategy is failing: a€~I dona€™ t know whata€™ 
s going to happen on the battlefield in Ukrainea€!. A broader pointa€! everything Russia has been 
doing has been incredibly counterproductive from the standpoint of Russian interestsa€!

• Damon Linker: Philosophy and the Far Right

•  Dan Pfeiffer: Why GOP Voters Choose A#@holes: a€~Cruelty is strength and compassion is 
weaknesses for many Republican voters. Ita€™ s very clear that being the biggest, meanest cruelest 
person on the block is the path to success in the Republican Partya€!

•  Aaron Rupar and Noah Berlatsky: MAGA Vice Signaling: a€~They're desperate to demonstrate that 
everyone is as immoral as they area€!

Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Jared Rubin: a€~It is the *interaction* between factors that matter for long run growth, and these 
interactions manifest themselves differently in different contexts. For Britain it seems likely the 
interaction b/t political institutions and culture mattered, although there were other features too 
(large internal market, access to coal, loads of skilled workers) Many places had some of these 
features. Only Britain had all at the same time. What matters for catch-up
growth is different. Some combinations of the elements we identify can work, although some work 
better in different contexts The point is: the is *no silver bullet*. If thata€™ s what youa€™re 
looking for, read another book (which IMO will be wrong). But just because there is no magical 
combination of things that will always lead to economic growth does not mean that there is nothing 
to learn from economic history !a€!

Jared Rubin @ jaredcrubin

I want to correct a misconception about the argument in How the World Became Rich (w @MarkKoyama) 
This is that we dona€™ t say why the modern economy came to be. We just list a bunch of 
contributing factors without claiming which were most important This is NOT what we do 1/
12:39 AM r™ Sep 19,2022

90Likes25Retweets

Joseph Kahn: Representative Government Faces Its Most Serious Threats in Decades 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nvtimes.com/template/oakv2?productCode=NN&te=l&nl=the-morning&
emc=edit nn 20220919&uri=nvt://newsletter/a0abe3e8-a4d9-55a3-b8e8-e2d9f41461f7>: a€~While we may 
continue to witness robust political competition in this midterm election cycle in ways that appear 
in keeping with American history, threats to that
electoral system have grown relentlessly at the same time. Our coverage must examine both. So while 
we have a large staff dedicated to reporting on politics, a special team of some of our best 
journalists, nationally and internationally, has produced dozens of explanatory and investigative 
stories on the causes of our democratic declinea€!. David Leonhardt covers the two biggest threats 
to American democracy: first, a movement within the Republican Party
that refuses to accept election defeat; and, second, a growing disconnect between public opinion 
and government power. Below, we summarize the main points: The Jan. 6 attack on Congressa€!. Many 
Republicans who do not repeat the election lies have chosen to support and campaign for those who 
doa€!. American democracy also faces a chronic threat: The power to set government policy is 
becoming increasingly disconnected from public opinion. Two
of the past four presidents have taken office despite losing the popular vote. Senators 
representing a majority of Americans are often unable to pass bills, partly because of the 
increasing use of the filibuster. And the Supreme Court is dominated by an ambitious 
Republican-appointed bloc even though Democrats have won the popular vote in seven of the past 
eight presidential electionsa€!. The growing disconnect from federal power and public opinion
generally springs from enduring features of American governments I

Robert P. Brenner: The Low Countries in the Transition to Capitalism: a€~In the most recent phase 
of the discussion on the historical conditions for economic development, or the transition from 
feudalism to capitalism, the town-dominated Low Countries have been neglected, because the focus 
has been to such a large extent on agrarian conditions and agrarian transforma- tions. This article 
seeks to make use of the cases of the medieval and early modern
Northern and Southern Netherlands, the most highly urbanized and commercialized regions in Europe, 
to show that the rise of towns and the expansion of exchange cannot in themselves bring about 
economic develop- ment, because they cannot bring about the requisite transformation of agrarian 
social-property relations. In the non-maritime Southern Netherlands, a peasant-based economy led to 
economic involution. In the maritime Northern Netherlands,
the transformation of peasants into market-dependent farmers created the basis for economic 
developments!

Robert Brenner: The Low Countries in the Transition to Capitalism 
chttps://web.archive.org/web/20160910131149/http://www.unsa.edu.ar/histocat/haeconomica07/lecturas/l
awcountries.pdf#>: S~What makes for modern economic growths 1 is the presence throughout the 
economy of a systematic, continuous and quasi-universal drive on the part of the individual direct 
producers to cut costs in aid of maximizing profitability via increasing efficiency and
the movement of means of production from line to line in response to price signals. This phenomenon 
comes into existences! only when the individual direct producers are not only free and have the 
opportunity, but also are compelled in their own interest, to maximize the gains from trade through 
specialization, accumulation and innovation, as well as the reallocationa€!. This positive 
correspondence between what is required fora€! modern growtha€!
and what economic actions individuals find it in their own self-interest to choose will prevail 
only with the emergence of capitalist social-property relationsa€!. Only under such a structure of 
social-property relations are the economic actors not only left free to act as they deem best, but 
alsoa€”and most fundamentals’’rendered dependent upon the market for their inputs, thus subject to 
competition in production to survive, and therefore compelled on pain
of extinction to seek systematically to maximize exchange value through specialization, 
accumulation and innovation, and moving from line to line to meet changing demand, meanwhile 
subordinating all other goals to exchange value maximization...


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

