Subscribe now

Jeet Heer has been writing about Wilmoore Kendall: 
<https://jeetheer.substack.eom/p/racism-and-the-paradox-of-anti-democratic>. That reminds me of 
this:

HOISTED FROM THE ARCHIVES FROM 2005: Harry Jaffa, Willmoore Kendall, the Crisis of the House 
Divided, & the Party of Abraham Lincoln'. a€~a€oeMost
conservative books are pseudo-books: ghostwritten pastiches whose primary purpose seems to be the 
photo of the a€Uauthora€oe on the cover. What a tumble! From The
Conservative  Mind to Savage Nation', from Clifton White to Dick Morris; from Willmoore Kendall and 
Harry Jaffa to Sean Hannity and Mark Fuhrmana€”all in little more than a
generation^™ s time. Whatever this is, it isna€™ t progressa€la€Da€”Andy Ferguson, Weekly Standard.

Let me enthusiastically agree with Andy Fergusona€™ s high praise of the very interesting Harry 
Jaffa.
But Willmoore Kendall?

Share

Those with access to National Reviewa€™ s electronic archives can read Willmoore Kendalla€™ s 
review of Harry Jaffaa€™ s Crisis of the House Divided, with Kendalla€™ s
attack on Jaffaa€™ s argument that the Declaration and the Constitution are together living 
documents dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal. As Kendall
(unfairly) summarizes Jaffaa€™ s argument:

As for the a€oeall men are created equala€D clause, Jaffaa€™ s Lincolna€! sees it as the 
indispensible presupposition of the entire American political
experienced!. Jaffaa€™ s Lincoln sees the great task of the nineteenth century as that of affirming 
the cherished accomplishment of the Fathers by
transcending   it. Concretely, this means to construe the equality clause as having an allegedly 
unavoidable meaning with which it was always pregnant, but
which  the Fathers apprehended only dimlya€!.

The Civil Wara€! had to be fought in the interest of freedom for all mankinda€! once the South had 
gone beyond slaveholdinga€! to assert the
a€oepositive goodnessa€D of slavery, and so to deny thea€! equality-clause standard as the basic 
axiom of our poltical system. [Jaffa] insists that [the
Civil  War] had to be fought lest the possibility of self-goernment perish from the earth

And what does Kendall think of Jaffaa€™ s argument? That it is OK as long as it is kept a hundred 
years past and dead. But Kendall believes that a€oeall men are created equala€D
is not fine, not fine at all if it is going to have implications here in the present. Let me quote 
the ultimate paragraph:

The idea of natural right is not so easily reducible to the equality clause, and there are better 
ways of demonstrating the possibility of self-government than
imposing onea€™ s views concerning natural right upon others. In this light it would seem that it 
was the Southerners who were the anti-Caesars of pre-
Civil War days, and that Lincoln was the Caesar Lincoln claimed to be trying to prevent; and that 
the Caesarism we all need to fear is the contemporary
Liberal movement, dedicated like Lincoln to egalitarian reforms sanctioned by mandates emanating 
from national majorities, a [Civil Rights] movement
which is Lincolna€™ s legitimate offspring. In a word, it would seem that we had best learn to live 
up to the Framers before we seek to transcend them.

Kendall writes in code. Where Kendall writes a€oeCaesara€n read a€oeillegitimate tyrant ,a€D Where 
he writes a€oeegalitarian reformsa€D think a€oeletting African-Americans
vote.a€D Where he writes a€oea movement which is Lincolna€™ s legitimate offspringa€D read 
a€oepost-WWII civil rights movement.a€D Where he writes a€oelive up to the
Framersa€D read a€oeabandon any attempt by federal courts or the national legislature to interfere 
with the peculiar institutions of the American South as they stood in 195O.a€D

Abraham Lincolna€”and Harry Jaffaa€”would agree that there are better ways of demonstrating the 
possibility of self-government than imposing onea€™ s views concerning
natural right upon others. Thata€™ s why they objected to Southernersa€™ holding African-Americans 
as slaves: what could possibly be a greater a€ceimpositiona€d? For a
Union army under the command of General Ulysses S. Grant to say to rich white Southerners that they 
cannot hold African-Americans as slaves would seem to everyone a lesser
a€ceimpositiona€D than for the Mississippi militia under the command of Jefferson Davis to say to 
poor African-Americans that they are slavesa€”or for Robert E. Lee to send

J.E.B. Stuarta€™ s cavalry to ride around the Army of the Potomac in Pennsylvania to, among other 
things, pick up free African-American citizens of the United States and drag
them to the Confederacy to be enslaved.

Well, it seems like a lesser imposition to almost everyone. It seems a greater imposition to 
Willmoore Kendall.

Oh. And the a€oetranscendinga€D that Kendall italicizes in the first of my quotations from him 
above? Thata€™ s also code. Thata€™ s code for a€oeunder Jaffaa€™ s
interpretation, Abraham Lincoln is, at best, a fellow traveler of the communists .a€D

Is this really any better than Sean Hannity? More sophisticated and more polite in form, yes. But 
better?
LINK: <https ://www.bradford-delong.com/2005/12/harry_jaffa_wil.html>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


