Well: I have paid subscribersa€!

I should give you people something. But do so without hiding my light under a bushel basketa€!

I know: I was just editing chapter 1 of my Slouching Towards Utopia?: An Economic History of the 
Long 20th Century, which I still hope may see publication in December 2021.
Please keep this private. And do tell me what you think. As a paying subscriber you do command my 
attention at: delong@econ.berkeley.edu

DRAFT: I. Introducing My Grand Narrative

You may complain that my Grand Narrative in this book is much too simplea€”that every Grand 
Narrative is much too simple to be worth bothering with.

You might point out that history is never one story. And historya€™ s stories do not have one 
single thread. You might also point out that there have been too many Grand
Narratives over the past four centuries. They all heavily, heavily imply that one big thing 
happened, that it is over (or about to be over), that everything else revolves around that one
big thing, and that we clearly know what the one big thing means.

But go down the road fifty, a hundred, whatever years after anyone has written a Big History with a 
Grand Narrative. You find that, no, they did not know what it meant. That
always happens. We find that it was not the end but only the middle of the story. Or we find that 
there were other, more important stories, burbling along that we should have paid
more attention toa€”and that we would have paid more attention to, had we not been busy cramming 
everything and everyone into the Procrustean Grand Narrative.

Pounding history into a Procrustean Bed of a narrative, you declare, is fuzzy thought. It leads to 
bad judgments.
But we have to tell Grand Narratives if we are to think at all.

We have to think in narratives. Our intelligence is not that well developed. We are bears of very 
little brain. And stories are how we make sense of things, and how we remember.

Grand Narratives are, in the words of that bellwether 20th century philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein, 
a€oenonsensea€D. But so is all human thought. But our fuzzy thoughts are the
only ways we can thinka€”the only ways we have to climb up. Then, as Wittgenstein says, if we are 
lucky one can, a€oerecognizea€! them as nonsensical. After we have a€ reused
thema€”as stepsa€”to climb beyond thema€! [and then] throw[n] away the ladder,a€D for, perhaps, we 
will have learned to transcend a€oethese propositions, and thena€! see the
world arighta€D.

And because we crave stories that make sense to us, we choose the central themes that we do because 
they are of interest, and sometimes of importance, to us.

I maintain that I have chosen this Grand Narrative as the best and most important one to tell about 
the world of our parents, grandparents, great-grandparents, and great-great-grand
parents. I also think it holds out the promise of improving the fives of subsequent generations.

* * * *

This is my Grand Narrative:

The Long 20th Century began around 1870, when the triple emergence of globalization, the industrial 
research lab, and the modern corporation in the context of the market
economy set the world on the path that pulled it out of the dire poverty that was humanitya€™ s lot 
in all centuries before; and when America took the steps that made it the place
where much of the action wasa€”a€oethe furnace where the future is forged,a€D to quote Russian 
Revolutionary Leon Trotsky.

The Long Twentieth Century ended in 2016, with the sharp shock of the near-return of Great 
Depression-era macroeconomic conditions; with the failure of the anemic economic
recovery from the Great Recession that started in 2008 to bring a restoration of the post-1870 pace 
of productivity growth; and with the election of Donald Trump, an American
president hostile to global leadership, to global cooperation, and to the very ideas that America 
was open to immigrants.

It was, I think, the most consequential single century humanity has had and, hopefully, will have. 
And it was the first century in which the most consequent historical thread was
what I would call economic.

That is a claim worth pausing over. These are decades that witnessed, among much else, two world 
wars, the Holocaust, the rise and fall of the Soviet Union, the zenith of American
influence, the rise and ascension of Communist China, and more. Vast political, cultural, and 
social forces were at work alongside and sometimes due to the decisions, celebrated
and damned, of numerous individuals, celebrated and damned, of unique influence. Yet I still 
unhesitatingly declare the most consequent thread through all this history was
economic.

Before 1870, over and over again technology lost its race with human fecundity. Greater numbers 
coupled with resource scarcity and a slow pace of technological innovation
produced a humanity where most people most of the time could not be confident that in a year they 
and their families would have their 2000 calories, plus essential nutrients, plus a
roof over their heads. Before 1870 those successfully on the make had to do so overwhelmingly 
focusing on how to take from others and then keep what they had while maintaining
order, rather on how to make more for everyone.

The ice was breaking before 1870. Between 1770 and 1870 technology and organization gained a step 
or two or three on fecundity. But only a step or two or three. Any post-1870
slackening of the pace of technological or organizational progress, or any major redivision of 
societya€™ s dividends devoting less to the sinews or peace and more to the sinews of
war,  and the a€oenasty, brutish, and shorta€D of previous ages would have reasserted itself. In 
the early 1870s that British establishment economist, moral philosopher, and
bureaucrat John Stuart Mill continued to claim that a€oeit is questionable if all the mechanical 
inventions yet made have lightened the daya€™ s toil of any human beinga€!a€D

The consequences of the 20th century have been enormous: Today less than 9% of humanity lives at or 
below the roughly $2-a-day living standard we think of as a€oeextreme
povertya€D, down from 70% or so 1870. And even those 9% have access to public-health and mobile 
phone-communications technologies of vast worth and power. Today the
economies                                                                                 of the 
world lucky enough to be rich stand at levels of per-capita prosperity at least twenty (and 
possibly much more) times those of 1870 and at least twenty-five (and
possibly much more) times those of 1770, with every expectation of further doublings in the 
centuries to come. Today the typical citizens of those economies can wield powersa€”
of mobility, of communication, of creation, and of destruction^’’that approach if they do not 
surpass those attributed to sorcerers and gods in ages past. Even the majority living in
economies unlucky and in the a€oeGlobal Southa€D confront not the $2-3 a day living standard of 
those economies in 1800 or 1870, but $15 a day (and more).

Tell any of those in previous centuries about the wealth, productivity, technology level, and 
sophisticated productive organizations of the world today, and they would say that with
such power and wealth in our collective hands we must have built a utopia.

Perhaps the third best-selling novel in the United States in the 19th Century was Looking Backward, 
2000-1887, by Edward Bellamy. Bellamy was a populist anda€’’although he
rejected the namea€”a socialist: he dreamed of a utopia created by government ownership of 
industry, the elimination of destructive competition, and the altruistic mobilization of
human energies in a way analogous to his vision of the Northa€™ s collective effort to end slavery 
in the Civil War. Technological and organizational abundance would then
generate  a society of abundance. He therefore wrote a a€reliterary fantasy, a fairy tale of social 
felicitya€D as a a€ rehanging in mid-air, far out of reach of the sordid and material
world                                                                               of the 
presenta€! cloud-palace for an ideal humanitya€D.

He throws his narrator-protagonist forward in time from 1887 to 2000 to marvel at a well-working 
rich society. At one point the narrator-protagonist is asked, a€oeWould you like
to hear some music?a€D He expects his hostess to play the piano. This alone would be testament to a 
vast leap forward. To listen to music on demand around 1900 you had to
havea€”in your house or nearbya€”an instrument, and someone trained to play it. It would have cost 
the average worker some 2400 hours, roughly a year at a 50-hour workweek,
to  earn the money to buy a high-quality piano. Then there would be the expense and the time 
committed to piano lessons.

But Bellamya€™ s narrator-protagonist is awed when his hostess does not sit down at the pianoforte 
to amuse him and exhibit her ladylike domestic accomplishments. Instead, she
a€oemerely touched one or two screws,a€D and immediately the room was a€ refilled with music; 
filled, not flooded, for, by some means, the volume of melody had been perfectly
graduated to the size of the apartment. a€~Grand!a€™ I cried. a€~Bach must be at the keys of that 
organ; but where is the organ?a€™ a€D

He learns that his host has dialed up, on her telephone landline, a live local orchestra playing in 
the city, and she has put it on the speakerphone. In Bellamy's utopia, you see, you
can dial up a local orchestra and listen to it play live. But, wait. It gets more impressive. He 
further learns he has a choice. His hostess could


dial up one of four orchestras currently playing.
Bellamya€™ s narratora€™ s reaction?

If we [in the nineteenth century] could have devised an arrangement for providing everybody with 
music in their homes, perfect in quality, unlimited in
quantity, suited to every mood, and beginning and ceasing at will, we should have considered the 
limit of human felicity already attained...

Think of that: thelimit of human felicity.

Utopias are, by definition, the end-all be-all. a€oeAn imaginary or hypothetical place or state of 
things considered to be perfect; a condition of ideal perfection,a€D so says the
Oxford English Dictionary. Much of human history has been spent in disastrous flirtations with 
ideals of perfection of many varieties. Utopian imaginings during the long twentieth­
century were responsible for its most shocking grotesqueries. It was also the century during which 
humanitya€™ s willingness to lose itself to such imaginings declined. Another
bell-weather 20th century philosopher, Immanuel Kant, wrote, a€oeOut of the crooked timber of 
humanity no straight thing was ever made,a€D inspiring philosopher-historian

Isiah Berlin to note, a€oeAnd for that reason no perfect solution is, not mere in practice, but in 
principle possible in human affairs .a€D

Berlin goes on to write, a€oeand any determined attempt to produce it is likely to lead to 
suffering, disillusionment, and failure.a€D This also points to why I see the long 20th
century as most fundamentally economic. For all its uneven benefits, for all its expanding human 
felicity without ever reaching its limit, for all its manifest imperfections,
economics during the 20th century has worked just shy of miracles.

Many technological inventions of the past century have transformed experiences that were rare and 
valued luxuriesa€’’available only to a rich few at great expense at relatively rare
performances of the symphony or the operaa€”into features of modern fife that we take so much for 
granted that they would not make the top twenty or even the top 100 in an
ordered list of what we think our wealth consists of us. If you asked Edward Bellamya€”or any other 
nineteenth-century or earlier sketcher of utopiasa€’’whether we here today
have the knowledge of technology and of productive organization needed to provide at least the 
material abundance needed to build a utopia, they would all say a€oeof course.a€D
Indeed, Bellamy, on confronting a Pandora playlist, would have to admit that we have exceeded the 
limit of human felicity.

And yet. We todaya€”even the richest of usa€”rarely see ourselves as so extraordinarily lucky and 
fortunate and happy even though for the first time in human history there is more
than enough.

There are more than enough calories produced in the world that it is not necessary that anybody 
need be hungry.
There is more than enough shelter on the globe that it is not necessary that anybody need be wet.

There is more than enough clothing in our wearhouses that it is not necessary that anybody need be 
cold.

And there is more than enough stuff lying around and daily being produced to aid daily life that 
nobody need feel under the pressure of lack of something necessary.
We are no longer in anything that we could call a€oethe realm of necessity.a€D So, one would think 
we humans ought to be in something recognizably utopian.

That we cannot is another consequence of living lives fully in the stream of economic history. 
While history fueled by utopian aspirations is an all or nothing proposition, economic
historya€™ s successes and failures are most often experienced in the margins.

Which is partially why no full-throated triumphalism over the long twentieth century can survive 
even a brief look at the political economy of the 2010s: the stepping-back of the
United States from its role of good-guy world leader and of Britain from its role as a key piece of 
Europe; the rise in politics in North America and Europe of movements that reject
democratic representative consensus politics in favor of allegiance to not so much a new growth as 
a revival of an old crop of leaders. Leaders whose principal qualifications are
their  desires to strike at external foes and at internal fifth columns. Leaders of movements 
Madeleine Albright calls a€cefascista€D (and who am I to tell her she is wrong?). Indeed,
the opposite of triumphal is the conspicuous failure over the previous decade by the stewards of 
the global economy to either maintain or to rapidly return to full employment, and
to nurture equitable growth rather than rising plutocracy.

Yes, over 1870-2016, technology and organization repeatedly lapped fecundity. Yes, then the 
psychology of a newly richer humanity in which girls learned to read and acquired
social power permanently scotched Malthusian forces from their role as the fetters of humanity. But 
material prosperity is grossly, criminally unevenly distributed around the globe.
And material wealth does not make people happy in a world where politicians and others prosper 
mightily from finding new ways to make and keep people unhappy. The history of
the Long 20th Century cannot be told as a gallop, run, a march, or even a walk of progress along 
the road that brings us closer to Utopia. It is, rather, a slouch. At best.

Having more than enough is, somehow, not enough.

* * * *

Slouching, however, is better than standing still, let alone going backwards. That no generation of 
humanity has ever disputed. Humans have always been inventive. Technological
advance has rarely stopped. The windmills, dikes, fields, crops, and animals of Holland in 1700 
made the economy of its countryside very different indeed from the thinly-farmed
marshes of 700. The ships that docked at the Chinese port of Canton had much greater range and the 
commodities loaded on and off them had much greater value in 1700 than in
800.                                                                              And both commerce 
and agriculture in 800 were far more technological advanced than that the first literate 
civilizations of -3000 or so.

But before our age, back in the pre-industrial Agrarian-Age, technological progress led to little 
visible change over one or even several lifetimes; and little growth in typical living
standards even over centuries or millennia.

I can and doa€’’heroically a€’’construct an index of the value of the stock of useful human ideas 
about manipulating nature and organizing human efforta€”an index of our
a€oetechnologya€n, as economists call it. I assume that each 1% increase in typical human standards 
of living worldwide tells us that the value of the stock of useful ideas has
risen                                                                                   by 1%. I 
assume that each 1% increase in the human population at a constant typical living standard tells us 
that the value of useful ideas has risen by 0.5%a€”for such an
increase is necessary to hold living standards constant in the face of the smaller average farm 
sizes and other Malthusian per capita resource scarcities that emerge from a higher
population. (Where does the a...“ come from? It is a heroic guess: a judgment that natural 
resources are, in the average and over time, roughly half as important as human brains,
eyes, hands, and muscles in boosting production.) This is simply a way of taking account of the 
fact that, since our natural resources are not unlimited, human ingenuity is as
required to support a larger population at the same standard of living as to support the same 
population at a higher standard of living.

Set this quantitative index of the global value of useful human knowledge equal to a value of 1 at 
the beginning of the Agrarian Age, at the discovery of farming about 8,000 years
ago. In year 1 this-of-the-stock-of-ideas index stood at 3.5: with the same resources at their 
disposal, better a€cetechnologiesa€D meant that the typical worker in year 1 was 3.5
times as productive as in the year -6000. By the year 1500 the stood at 4.7.

These are impressive changes. And, indeed, from the standpoint of -6000 the technologies of the 
year 1500, the Ming pottery or the Portuguese caravel or the wet-cultivation of rice
seedlings, are very impressive. But this growth, and the pace of invention, took enormous spans of 
time: 0.02% per year for the entire span years from 1 to 1500a€”that is only
0.5% over an average 25-year lifetime of that age.

And did greater knowledge about technology and human organization cause life in 1500 to be much 
sweeter than it had been in 8000 BC? It turns out not. The human population
grew at an average rate of 0.06% per year from year 1 to 1500. While the elite lived far better in 
1500, typical human peasants and craftsmen lived little or no better than their
predecessors.

Agrarian Age humans were desperately poor: a subsistence-level society. On average 2.03 children 
per mother survived to reproduce. A typical woman (who was not among the one
in seven who died in childbirth or the additional one in five who died before her children were 
grown) spent perhaps 20 years eating for two: nine pregnancies, six live births, three
children surviving to age five, and the life expectancy at birth of her children under and perhaps 
well under 30.

Keeping your children from dying is the first and highest goal of every parent. Humanity in the 
Agrarian Age could not do so. That is an index of how much pressure from material
want humanity found itself under.

Over the millennia, 1.5% average population growth per generation added up. In 1500 there were 
about three times as many people as had lived in year 1. Five hundred million
rather than 170 million. Additional humans did not translate to less individual material want. As 
of 1500 advances in technological and organizational knowledge went to
compensate for fewer natural resources per capita. Thus economic history remained a slowly-changing 
background in front of which cultural, political, and social history took
place.


The ice started to break after 1500. Or perhaps a better metaphor is crossing a divide and entering 
a new watersheds” you are now going downhill, and things are flowing in a
different direction. That happened after 1500, and we call it the SoeCommercial Revolution^□. The 
pace of inventions and innovation sped up. And then a second watershed was
crossed around 1870: we call the century before 1870 the Soelndustrial RevolutionSD for a reason. 
By 1870 the heroic-assumptions index of the value of knowledge stood at 16:
more than three times its value of 1500. It had taken 7500 years to nearly quintupled from 1 to 
4.7. Then in 370 years it more than tripled to 15.

But there were then 1.3 billion people alive, and so farm sizes were only two-fifths as large as 
they had been in 1500. The bulk of human population was still in or on the edge of
the extreme poverty.

And then around 1870 we crossed over into a third new watershed. So it was during the Long 20th 
Century that there came explosion.

Our 7.8 billion people today have a global value of knowledge index of 420. Pause to marvel. The 
value of knowledge about technology and organization grew at an average rate of
2.3% per year. Since 1870, the technological capability and material wealth of humankind has 
exploded beyond previous imagining. Today the typical human family no longer faces
as its most urgent and important problem how to acquire for the next yearS ”or the next 
weeks’’enough food to avoid being desperately hungry, enough shelter to avoid the
elements, and enough clothing.

From the techno-economic point of view, 1870-2016 was the age of the industrial research lab and 
the bureaucratic corporations. One gathered communities of engineering practice
that supercharged economic growth, the other communities of competence that deployed the fruits of 
invention. It was only slightly less the age of globalization: cheap ocean and
rail transport that destroyed distance as a cost factor and allowed humans in enormous numbers to 
seek better lives, and communications links that allowed us to talk across the
world in real time.

The research laboratory, the corporation, and globalization powered the wave of discovery, 
invention, innovation, deployment, and then global economic integration that have so
boosted our global useful-economic-knowledge index. Marvel still. In 1870 the daily wages of an 
unskilled male worker in London, the city then at the forefront of world economic
growth and development, would buy him and his family about 5,000 calories worth of wheat-made bread 
each. That was progress: in 1800 the daily wages would have bought him
and his family perhaps 4000 coarser-bread calories, and in 1600 some 3000 calories, coarser still. 
(But isnS™t coarser, more fiber-heavy bread better for you? YesS”if you are
getting enough calories. In the old days you were desperate to absorb as many calories as possible, 
and for that whiter and finer bread is better.) Today the daily wages of an
unskilled male worker in London would buy him 2,400,000 wheat calories: nearly 500 times as much.

From the bio-sociological point of view, the wealth creation process of 1870-2016 drove it to be 
the century in which it ceased to be the case that the typical woman spent twenty
years eating for twoS”pregnant or breastfeeding. Today, it is more like four years. And it was the 
century in which we stopped watching more than half our babies die in
miscarriages, stillbirths, and infant mortality S’’and stopped watching more than a tenth of 
mothers die in childbed.

From the nation-and-political point of view, that wealth creation and distribution process drove 
four things, of which the first was by far most important: It made 1870-2016 the
century in which the United States of America was a superpower, a hyperpower, a hegemon. Second, it 
made a world primarily of nations rather than of empires. Third, it made an
economy with a center of gravity consisting of large oligopolistic firms ring-mastering value 
chains. Finally, it made a world in which political orders would be primarily
legitimated,  at least notionally, by elections with universal suffrages’’rather than the claims of 
plutocracy, tradition, Scefitness,SD leadership charisma (usually in the service of
the exaltation of a particular largely-fictitious ethnos), or knowledge of a secret key to 
historical destiny.

Much that our predecessors would have called SoeutopianSD has been attained step by step, via 
economic improvements year by year, each of which is marginal, but which
compound.

Yet as of 1870 such an explosion was not foreseen, or not foreseen by many. Yes, 1770-1870 did see, 
for the first time, productive capability begin to outrun population growth and
natural resource scarcity. By the last quarter of the nineteenth century, the average inhabitant of 
a leading economiesS”a Briton, a Belgian, a Dutchman, an American, a Canadian,
or  an Australians’’had perhaps twice the material wealth and standard of living of the typical 
inhabitant of a pre-industrial economy.

Yet was that enough to be a true watershed?

Back in the early 1870s John Stuart Mill, BritainS™ s leading economist, moral philosopher, public 
intellectual, and feminist activist (arrested for distributing birth control leaflets
in the streets of London), put the finishing touches on the final edition of the book that people 
seeking to understand economics then looked to: Principles of Political Economy, with
Some of Their Applications to Social Philosophy. His book gave due attention and place to the 
1730-1870 era of the British Industrial Revolution. But he looked out on what he saw
around him, and saw the world still poor and miserable. SceHithertoSD, he wrote, looking at the 
world and at the Great Britain and Ireland of his day:

it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the dayS™ s toil of any 
human being. They have enabled a greater population
to live the same life of drudgery and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and 
others to make fortunes. They have increased the
comforts of the middle classes...

One word in MillS™ s paragraph stands out to me: imprisonment.

With more and richer plutocrats, a larger middle class, but the world Mill saw as of 1871 was not 
just a world of drudgeryS”a world in which humans had to work long and tiring
hours at tasks that came nowhere near to being sufficiently interesting to engage the full 
brainpower of an East African Plains Ape. The world Mill saw was not just a world in
which most people were close to the edge of being desperately hungry. The world Mill saw was not 
just a world of low literacy S’’where most could only access the collective
human store of knowledge, ideas, and entertainments partially and slowly. The world Mill saw was a 
world in which humanity was imprisoned: not free, in a dungeon, chained and
fettered. And Mill saw only one way out: if the government were to take control of human fecundity 
and require child licenses, prohibiting those who could not properly support
and educate their children from reproducing, only thenS”or was he thinking SceifSU?S”would 
mechanical inventions wreak the Scegreat changes in human destiny, which it

is in their nature and in their futurity to accomplish SD

And there were others who were much more pessimistic than even Mill. In 1865 then 30-year old 
British economist William Stanley Jevons made his reputation by prophesying
doom for the British economy: it needed to start, immediately, cutting back on industrial 
production in order to economize on scarce and increasingly valuable coal.

Not only was it not foreseen, not only was the explosion in economic growth not foreordained, it 
was dangerously misconstrued by some.

Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels had in 1848 already seen science and technology as Promethean forces 
that would allow humanity to overthrow its (mythical) old gods and give
humanity itself the power of a god. Science, technology, and the profit-seeking entrepreneurial 
business class that deployed it had:

during its rule of scarce one hundred years ,S [created more massive and more colossal productive 
forces than have all preceding generations together.
Subjection of Natures™ s forces to man, machinery, application of chemistry to industry and 
agriculture, steam-navigation, railways, electric telegraphs,
clearing                                                                  of whole continents for 
cultivation, canalisation of rivers, whole populations conjured out of the groundS”what earlier 
century had even a
presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?S!

Engels snarked that in their overlooking of the power of science, technology, and engineering mere 
economists (like Mill) had demonstrated that they were simply the paid hacks of
the rich.

But Marx and EngelsS™ s promise was not that there would someday be enough to eat, shelter, 
clothing, let alone the exponential increase in the value of global knowledge, or
even a nearly unlimited choice of music to listen to. Slouching, galloping economic growth was but 
a necessary paroxysm on the way to utopia. MarxS™ s few and thin
descriptions in works like his Critique of the Gotha Program of life after the socialist revolution 
he foresaw as inevitable echoS’’deliberately, but with what authorial intent?S”
the descriptions of how people who have attained the Kingdom of Heaven behave: each will contribute 
Soeaccording to his ability SD (Acts of the Apostles: 11:29) and each will
draw on the common, abundant store Soeaccording to his needsSD (Acts of the Apostles 4:35). And 
Mill hoped for his version of the same thing: an end to the imprisonment and
drudgery of poverty, and then in a society rightly ordered by the principles of his libertarianism, 
all people could be truly free.

But economic improvement, attained by slouch or gallop, matters.

How many of us today could usefully find our way around a kitchen of a century ago? Before the 
coming of the electric current and the automatic washing machine, doing the
laundry was not an annoying but minor chore but was instead a major part of the households™ sS”or 
rather the households™ s womenS™ sS”week. Today few among us

are gatherers, or hunters, or farmers. Hunting, gathering, farming, herding, spinning and weaving, 
cleaning, digging, smelting metal and shaping wood, assembling structures by
handS’’those are now the occupations of a small and dwindling proportion of humans. And where we do 
have farmers, herdsmen, manufacturing workers, construction workers,
and miners, they are overwhelmingly controllers of machines and increasingly programmers of robots. 
They are no longer people who make or shape thingsS”/acrMr^S”with


UICH      rnuriu.

What do modern people do instead? Increasingly, we push forward the body of technological and 
scientific knowledge. We educate each other. We doctor and nurse each other. We
care for our young and the old. We entertain each other. We provide other services for each other 
to take advantage of the benefits of specialization. And we engage in complicated
symbolic interactions that have the emergent effect of distributing status and power and 
coordinating the 7.4-billion person division of labor of today a€™ s economy.

We have crossed a great divide between what we used to do in all previous human history, and what 
we do now. Utopia, it is true, it is not.

USC economic historian Richard Easterlin noted the assumption from psychologist Abraham Maslowa€™ s 
hierarchy of wants that a€oethe satisfaction of material wants is but
one, lower, stage in human evolution and that economic growth brings with it a movement toward 
higher nonmaterialistic endsa€da€”ends fitting for humans in Utopia, or at least
pursuing Aristotlea€™ s eudaemonia. He noted that historical experience told us that was not so.

With increasing wealth, what were necessities cease to be of concern or even notice in our minds. 
But conveniences turn into necessities. Luxuries turn into conveniences. And we
envision and then create new luxuries.

Easterlin, bemused, puzzled over how a€oematerial concerns in the wealthiest nations today are as 
pressing as ever, and the pursuit of material needs as intense.a€D He saw
humanity on a hedonic treadmill, with a€regeneration after generation think[ing] it need[ed] only 
another ten or twenty percent more income to be perfectly happya€!. In the end,
the triumph of economic growth is not a triumph of humanity over material wants; rather, it is the 
triumph of material wants over humanity.a€D We do not use our wealth to
overmaster our wants. Rather, our wants use our wealth to continue to overmaster us.

But only a fool would wittingly or ignorantly slouch or gallop backwards to near-universal dire 
global poverty.

* * * *

The consequences of the changes that made the Long 20th Century what it wasa€”the industrial 
research lab and the associated communities of engineering practice, by the modern
corporation and its powers to bureaucratically distribute and diffuse knowledge into production 
worldwide, and by globalization that moved hundreds of millions of people from
continent  to continent and brought all places cheek-by-jowl, as far as shipment of non-fragile 
staples was concerneda€’’ramified far. I count ten ramifications, which are themselves
themes of the many substories I tell:

The source of all, from which all else flows, was the without-any-precedent explosion of material 
wealth: that the Long 20th Century saw the material wealth of humankind
explode beyond all previous imagining so that wea€”at least those of us who belong to the upper 
middle class and live in the industrial core of the world economya€”are now far
richer than the writers of even previous centuriesa€™ utopias could imagine.

• History was economic: As a result of the economic changes that were the explosion of wealth, the 
Long 20th Century was the first century ever in which its history
was predominantly economic. The economy was the dominant arena of events and change, and economic 
changes were the driving force behind other changes, in a
way never seen before in any single century.

2. The expanding cornucopia of technological knowledge: Enabling the enormous increase in material 
wealtha€”its essential prerequisite, in facta€”was the explosion
in human technological knowledge. This required not just a culture and educational system that 
created large numbers of scientists and engineers, and means of
communication and memory so that they could stand on each othersa€™ shoulders as well as those of 
earlier giants, but also that the market economy be structured in
a     way that made it worth peoplea€™ s while to funnel resources to scientists and engineers so 
that they could do their jobs.

3. The victory of public health: Typical human lifespans went from 25 to 70 or more years. They did 
this despite how globalization brought new plagues and types of
plaguesa€”the 1918-1919 influenza epidemic and, just beyond our end point, the 2020 coronavirus 
epidemic. Enough said: that increase in life expectancy by itself
meant that humanity at the end of the Long 20th Century was living in what all previous eras would 
have regarded as a fabulous utopia.

4. The demographic transition: The Long 20th Century saw, we think, the approaching end of the era 
in which technology and biology increased human numbers: it
looks like the world is headed for zero population growth at a population of roughly 10 billion in 
2050. And during the Long 20th Century the population explosion that
carried the earth from 1 to 7.5 billion people placed huge demographic burdens on poor 
countriesa€’’burdens now ebbing as the demographic transition to low fertility
and extended lifespan finish their spread across the globe.

5. Feminism: The Long 20th Century saw the substantial liberation of women from the role imposed by 
patriarchy and Malthusian pressures. At the start of the Long 20th
Century the typical woman spent about 20 years eating for two: pregnant or breastfeeding. At the 
end of the Long 20th Century the typical woman spent about 4 years.
Should this be theme number one? Perhaps.

6. American exceptionalism: Resourcesa€’’derived by conquesta€”and ingenuity produced wealth and 
prosperity in the United States beyond the measure of that
attained in any other portion of the globe. That prosperity fueled the ascenta€’’economic, 
military, cultural, and politicala€”of an America committed extremely
imperfectly to broad principles of democracy, rule of law, and human rights. All of these proved 
supportive in varying measure to economic growth and the prospering
of  human potential. Even those philosophically or practically opposed to freedom of speech, 
religion, occupation, and thought and fearful of democracy had to reckon
with their immense attractiveness to many in their own land, and to the observed correlation 
between American aspirations, American institutions, and American
prosperity and power.

7. Progress toward inclusion and hierarchy attenuation: To an extent that earlier human observers 
would have found hard to credit, human societies became, to a
remarkable degree, much less instrumentalities for advancing the interests and comforts of men of 
the right backgrounds’’and global society became, to a degree that
would have seemed even more remarkable to human observers as of 1870, much less instrumentalist for 
advancing the interests and comforts of men of a white
northwest-European background. Even if it is still the case that a€oewhite males play the videogame 
that is society on the a€~easya€™ setting ,a€D others began to
count.

8. Tyranny multipliers: The Long 20th Centurya€™ s tyrannies were more brutal and more barbaric 
than those of any previous centurya€”and these tyrannies were in
strange, complicated, and confused ways closely related to the forces that made the explosion of 
wealth so great.

9. Wealth gulfs: The Long 20th Century saw the relative economic gulf between different economies 
grow at an astonishingly rapid pace as the world became, relatively,
a more unequal place than ever beforea€”save possibly for the days when some East African Plains 
Apes knew how to make fire and others did not. It is a scandal and
a disgrace that today one-quarter of the human race have lives thata€”save for public healtha€”are 
not that distinguishable from the lives of our Agrarian Age
predecessors.

10. 10.Finally, Disorganization, mismanagement, insecurity, and dissatisfaction: The governments of 
the Long 20th Century had little clue as to how to regulate the un-
self-regulating market to maintain prosperity, or ensure opportunity, or produce substantial 
equality.

I write this book to engrave these themes on your brains. The only way I know for me to do that is 
to tell you the story, and the substories. The place to start is in the year 1870, with
humanity still in the clutches of the Devil of Malthus:

