Subscribe now

ONE AUDIO: Michael DeLong on Insurance, Racism, & More:

Amber, Erika, & Michael DeLong: Ep 77 a€“ We Aina€™ t in Good Hands After All: Racism and the 
Insurance Industry: a€~On this episode, Amber and Erika are joined by Michael DeLong, Research and 
Advocacy Associate from the Consumer Research Federation of America, to discuss how racism 
insidiously and nefariously impacts the American insurance
industry. Michael walks us through the factors that are used to calculate the cost of insurance for 
most people a€“ credit, education, zip code, and job titles, just to name a few. As expected, the 
racial disparities inherent in those factors naturally spill out into the pricing of insurance and 
handling of insurance claims. We discuss some real world examples of insurance
discrimination and the impact it has on Black families trying to protect their most valuable 
assets. And then we conclude with Michael providing the Brokers some practical tips on how to spot 
whether theya€™re experiencing discrimination and what steps can be taken if thata€™ s true. Tune 
in and get the scoop!a€!

Share

ONE IMAGE: Azt Nick Bostrom Email:


From 1996:

I have always liked the uncompromisingly objective way of
thinking and speaking: the more counterintuitive and
repugnant a formulation, the more it appeals to me given
that it is logically correct. Take for example the following
sentence:

Blacks are more stupid than whites.

I like that sentence and think it is true. But recently I


have begun to believe that I won't have much success with
most people if I speak like that. They would think that I
were  a "racist": that I _disliked_ black people and thought
that it is fair if blacks are treated badly. I don't. It's

just that based on what I have read, I think it is probable
that black people have a lower average IQ than mankind in
general, and I think that IQ is highly correlated with what
we normally mean by "smart" and stupid". I may be wrong
about the facts, but that is what the sentence means for me.
For most people, however, the sentence seems to be
synonymous with:

My point is that while speaking with the provocativness of
unabashed objectivity would be appreciated by me and many
other persons on this list, it may be a less effective

strategy in communicating with some of the people "out
there". I think it is laudable if you accustom people to the
offensiveness of truth, but be prepared that you may suffer
some personal damage.

Ian Leslie has the context:

Ian Leslie: Moral Hygiene: A philosopher's apology and why it failed'. a€~ After repudiating his 
earlier assertiona€! he then spent more space discussing those issues than he had spent 
apologising. This has been, understandable, badly received.  He [then] added thisa€! to the front 
page of his websitea€!. a€oesometimes I have the impression

that the world is a conspiracy to distract us from whataC™ s importantaC” alternatively by 
whispering to us about tempting opportunities, at other times by buzzing menacingly around our ears 
like a swarm of bloodthirsty mosquitosaCD. The aCoeswarm of bloodthirsty mosquitosaCD has been 
taken to refer to the people who have been upset
by his apology. Hardly a phrase calculated to improve the situation. Bostrom has made a classic 
politiciana€™ s error: his apology wasna€™t really an apology and he then blamed his critics for 
focussing on the issueaC!

People who feel put upon and dona€™ t understand why others are asking for an apology keep digging. 
People who want to apologize say not aCoethat did not represent my viewsa€D but rather: a€cel am 
profoundly embarrassed that I was the person who wrote that. I very much hope I am not that person 
now. I apologize unreservedly.a€D FULL STOP.

Not to mention, there are all the intelligence issues around, not being a moron and not being a 
dick. A very basic part of the basic human-intelligence portfolio is to understand at a very early 
age that language is, substantially, simply a bag of the words that you use. Relying on the fine 
parsing of sentence structure and taking refuge in the a€ceuse-mentiona€C
distinction never saves you from being thought of asa€”from beinga€”a moron, and an asshole, nor 
should it.

In Nick BostromaC™ s casea€”and in many othersaC’’there seems to be a definite inverse correlation 
between the types of mental behaviors they value on the one hand, and what normal people think of 
as aCoenot being really stupidaCD on the other.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted

• Doug North: Institutions a€ I

•  John Gruber: The Billions-Dollar VR/AR Headset Question: a€~Ita€™ s like Alan Kaya€™ s 1972 
Dynabooka€! which clearly articulated the laptops and tablets that now dominate personal computing, 
and but wea€™re as far from practical AR glasses today as we were from KayaC™ s Dynabook in the 
early a€™ 80sa€!

• Augusta Saraiva: Key Inflation Gauge Cools Further, Paving Way for Smaller Fed Rate HikeaC!

• Damon Linker: The Two Americas (on Religion)a€!

•  Kristine Aquino: Intel Woes: a€~Intel shares fell as much as 11% in premarket trading after it 
gave one of the gloomiest quarterly forecasts in its historyaC! a painful admission for a firm that 
has been attempting a multiyear comebacka€!

• Peter Valdenez-Depena: Consumer Reports calls Ford's automated driving tech much better than 
Tesla'sa€!

•  Cory Doctorow: a€~Here is how platforms die: first, they are good to their users; then they 
abuse their users to make things better for their business customers; finally, they abuse those 
business customers to claw back all the value for themselves. Then, they diea€!.

• Sidney Pollard: Peaceful Conquest: The Industrialization of Europe, 1760-1970a€!

•  Michael Tomasky: The least surprising poll of all time: a€~Just 27 percent of Americans think 
Republican leaders in the House have shown the right priorities so fara€!. Eight percent of 
Democrats saya€! 24 percent of independentsaC!. Republicans? Only 51 percentaC!. The new GOP 
HouseaC! in their early debt-limit chess movesaC! have no idea
what theya€™ re doingaC!

•  Brian Potter: Goolsbee and Syverson on Construction Productivity: a€~a€oeBy 2020, while 
aggregate labor productivity and TFP were 290 percent and 230 percent higher than in 1950, both 
measures of construction productivity had fallen below their 1950 values^V3^\. The observed 
construction productivity decline in BEA dataa€! depends on the
accuracy of the BEAa€™ s construction price index...

• Izabella Kaminska: The Blind Spot for 01/28/2023
Leave a comment

AJs:


Eric Foner: The Constitution Has a 155-Year-Old Answer to the Debt Ceiling: a€~Our Constitution is 
not self-enforcing. The 14th Amendment concludes by empowering Congress to carry out its 
provisions. But if the current House of Representatives abdicates this responsibility, throwing the 
nation into default by refusing to raise the debt limit, President Biden
should act on his own, taking steps to ensure that the federal government meets its financial 
obligations, as the Constitution requires...

Dan Drezner: The End of the Intellectual Focal Point: a€~Thought leaders might not want to be 
constrained bya€! but they do want to be talked about by establishments. They like long profiles 
about their intellectual arc or consideration of just how transgressive their ideas really are.  
Twitter had proved to be a useful focal pointa€!. Elon Musk managed to change

all of that in less than four months. As a news aggregator it still has some utility. As a place 
for commentary and analysis it has become a ghost town...

Matthew Ball: Why VR/AR Gets Farther Away as It Comes Into Focus: a€~The immense difficulty of XR 
also explains why aCcethe graphics look like theya€™re from the Wiia€C is actually a 
complimenta€”ita€™ s a bit like saying an adult ran 100 meters as fast as a 12-year-old, even 
though the adult was wearing a 50-pound backpack and solving math
problems at the same time. The unveiling of AppleaC™ s mixed-reality device this spring will bea€! 
importanta€! [because] Applea€! routinely crack[s] opena€! long-stagnant or slowly developing 
computing modelsa€!

Jonathan V. Last: Charles McGonigal and the Deep State: a€~If the McGonigal allegations are proven, 
then we have an entirely new set of problems. Not just that one political party was willing to 
become the cata€™ s paw of a foreign government, but that a key part of Americaa€™ s law 
enforcement apparatus was in on the game. In other words: An actual Deep
State. As always, projection is the sincerest form of Trumpisma€!

Matthew Yglesias: a€~Ia€™ ve found it very challenging to have a space where people acknowledge the 
reality that sex chromosomes and associated hormones are a big deal in life without the discourse 
immediately evolving in a dehumanizing and hateful direction. The whole situation gives me a lot of 
agita and I can see why a large number of people prefer to just
duck it. Ita€™ s really gross and unpleasant to be associated with the not-dead-yet bloc of 
rightists who never reconciled themselves to marriage equality and want gay people back in the 
closet. ThereaC™ s also a lot of people whose main interest in this topic seems to be that they 
enjoy being recreationally cruel to trans adults...

Give a gift subscription


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

