Subscribe now

Now if only I can find a place for this in my book msa€!.

The question is about how original Thomas Robert Malthusa€™ s argument isa€”that humanity is doomed 
by fecundity to poverty, with patriarchy, monarchy, and orthodoxy being the only path to build not 
a good but a not-totally-horrible society:

Unleashing the Devil of Malthus, by Stable Diffusion via NightCafe
Matthew Yglesias asks a questiona€!

Ia€™ ve always wondered if [Malthus is] the conventional reference precisely because it was 
becoming wrong a€” are there lots of random uncontroversial 16th century texts making the same 
argument?a€! 1
I think the answer is: Not really.

On the one hand, there are enough people talking that you can pretty much find somebody saying 
something that you can, from your perspective, retcon into an early crude expression of whatever it 
is you want to find.
The real question is: Did what they said immediately die out? Or was it re-transmitted and did it 
have echoes, even in a relatively minor way, in its time and place?

Then the next order questions here are: Was Malthus a genius, who put the points exceptionally 
well? Or was the intellectual network environment then such that, this time, the idea would go not 
just viral but globally viral?
The answer to that question is: Yes.

Malthus was an extremely sharp guy. His Essay on the Principle of Population 2 hit the world at a 
moment in which the idea that Utopia might be fueled by material and moral progress, and might be 
in our future, was gaining traction in a way that, to my knowledge, it never had before. It was, 
however, debatable. And there were lots of people who had strong
material and even moral attachment to the anti-progressive conservative case. And so, in the 
network intellectual environment then, Malthusa€™ s Essay on Population was the very first 
Slatepitch.

I cannot, back before 1500, find anyone of even minor note and influencea€”Posidonios of Rhodes is 
the closest I have come 3a€”arguing that Utopia may be in our future because there is an arrow to 
material and moral knowledge. All the utopias I have found are either elsewhere, in the past, or a 
matter of divine intervention: Morea€™ s Utopia on a distant island
newly made accessible by the caravel; lots of stories of Golden Ages in the past; and, of course, 
the new Jerusalem descending from the clouds. Utopias in some past Golden Age seem to me to be 
especially common in Western Europe after the fall of the Roman Empirea€”when people could just 
look arounda€”and perhaps in China after the fall of the Han Empire,
when literati would weaponize the memory of the accomplishments of the ancients, when emperors were 
just, counselors were wise, public order was maintained, and barbarian warriors were in their 
place.


Starting around 1600, however, we have a shift. We have Tommaso Campanellaa€™ s City of the Sun. 5 
We have Francis Bacona€™ s New Atlantis. 6

The first talks about how there has been more invention in the past century then in all of previous 
history, and thus how the City of the Sun is in our future. Unfortunately for us, the effect is 
rather ruined by his attribution of the shift to the astrological influence of Scorpio and of the 
Moon.
The second calls for large-scale government subsidization of scientific research and development in 
the institutional form of Salomona€™ s House a€oeto the enlarging of the human empire, and the 
effecting of all things possiblea€D.

These books had their circulation at their time, and can mark a shift to an episteme in which 
technology a€’’and, later, moralitya€’’did have an arrow of progress.

Thereafter, in Western Europe at least, you have growing assertions that we moderns are more 
accomplished in pretty much every way than those ancients. You have the coming of the 
Enlightenment. You have the idea of Progress and of the Arc of History.

But from 1600 to 1780 these ideas are clearly speculativea€”not something to base actual policies 
or, indeed, much thought on. The Dutch Republic saw itself a, mostly, restoring its ancient feudal 
privileges after their erosion by foreign absolutist monarchs. English Whigs were as likely to 
appeal to the Ancient Constitution and to Anglo-Saxon liberty. You start to get
things like Novus Ordo Seclorum 7a€”a new order of the agesa€’’inscribed by Charles Thompson, 
Secretary of the U.S. Congress under the Articles of Confederation, on the Great Seal of the United 
States, along with the eye and the unfinished pyramid. (And even there the reference is to a line 
of Virgila€™ s about the restoration of the past Golden Age of Saturn.8)

There is an active debate in Political A’conomy about the standard of living of the common people. 
But it is a balanced argument about whether a good society is one in which the common people are 
worse off or better off, other things equal. The argument that a society with a poorer commons is, 
in fact, a better society, points to the fact that if the poor are really poor
they are willing to work for peanuts, and thus a given amount of social power crystallized in the 
form of wealth can command more work either for the military purposes of the government or to 
satisfy the consumption desires of the rich. The counter-argument is that a society with a wealthy 
commons has a middle class with assets and has strong commodity flows,
both                                                                                                
                                                                      of which can be taxed.

In 1776 Adam Smith argues strongly that a better society has a richer commons:

Is this improvement in the circumstances of the lower ranks of the people to be regarded as an 
advantage, or as an inconveniency, to the society? The answer seems at first abundantly plain. 
Servants, labourers, and workmen of different kinds, make up the far greater part of every great 
political society. But what improves the circumstances of
the greater part, can never be regarded as any inconveniency to the whole. No society can surely be 
flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are poor and miserable. It is 
but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of the people, should 
have such a share of the produce of their own labour
as to be themselves tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodgeda€! 9

But he does not go on to say that a€oeand technological and moral progress are leading us to that 
better societya€D. Instead, Smith almost makes the Malthusian argument:

Every species of animals naturally multiplies in proportion to the means of their subsistence, and 
no species can ever multiply beyond it. But in civilized society, it is only among the inferior 
ranks of people that the scantiness of subsistence can set limits to the further multiplication of 
the human species; and it can do so in no other way than by
destroying a great part of the children which their fruitful marriages producea€!

Thus, Smith say, coming closest to Malthus it is only in countries in which the economy is growing 
rapidly that wages can be above subsistence:

It is not the actual greatness of national wealth, but its continual increase, which occasions a 
rise in the wages of labour. It is not, accordingly, in the richest countries, but in the most 
thriving, or in those which are growing rich the fastest, that the wages of labour are highesta€!. 
Though the wealth of a country should be very great, yet if it has
been long stationary, we must not expect to find the wages of labour very high in ita€!. If in such 
a country the wages of labour had ever been more than sufficient to maintain the labourer, and to 
enable him to bring up a family, the competition of the labourers and the interest of the masters 
would soon reduce them to the lowest rate which is
consistent with common humanity. China has been long one of the richest, that is, one of the most 
fertile, best cultivated, most industrious, and most populous, countries in the world. It seems, 
however, to have been long stationarya€!

But Smith does not draw Malthusian conclusions from this. Rather, he denounces the cruel and 
oppressive British East India Company:

Want, famine, and mortality, would immediately prevaila€! till the number of inhabitants in the 
country was reduced to what could easily be maintained by the revenue and stocka€! which had 
escaped either the tyranny or calamitya€!. This, perhaps, is nearly the present state of Bengala€! 
a fertile countrya€! where subsistence^! should not
be very difficult, and where, notwithstanding, three or four hundred thousand people die of hunger 
in one yeara€!. The difference between the genius of the British constitution, which protects and 
governs North America, and that of the mercantile company which oppresses and domineers in the East 
Indies, cannot, perhaps, be better
illustrated than by the different state of those countriesa€!

(Note that Smitha€™ s a€oecivilized societya€D reference here captures Smitha€™ s belief that the 
rich are undergoing the Demographic Transition^’’although it does not sound as though he sees that 
as an unambiguously good thing:

A half-starved Highland woman frequently bears more than twenty children, while a pampered fine 
lady is often incapable of bearing any, and is generally exhausted by two or three. Barrenness, so 
frequent among women of fashion, is very rare among those of inferior station. Luxury, in the fair 
sex, while it inflames, perhaps, the passion for
enjoyment, seems always to weaken, and frequently to destroy altogether, the powers of 
generationa€!

The natural questions for us at this point would be: Is continuous improvement in the arts and 
sciences that allows for a perpetual escape from the stationary state, and thus for a high, even if 
not growing, level of wages for the commons possible? Or is humanity doomed in the long run to the 
miserable stationary state, in which there are always a few rising societies
where the commons are prosperous, and declining societies of mass famine?

Smith simply drops these long run, historical destiny of the human race questions. Instead, he 
veers off into various observations on short-term wage fluctuations.

It is left to Malthus to highlight, put the pedal-to-the-metal, and focus on the Malthusian 
argument proper: that material technological progress cannot help. And it is Malthus who goes on to 
make Hirschmana€™ s a€ceperversitya€D argument 10a€”who goes on to say that what Godwin and 
Wollstonecraft call moral progress is actually moral regress.
What is needed, says Malthus, is simple: Patriarchy, Monarchy, and Orthodox.

•  Patriarchy, so that daughters cannot get their fathersa€™ permission to marry until their 
potential husband have prosperous farms of their own, which means until their late 20s, for 
delaying childbearing until nearly 30 pushes down the birth rate and allows for a large wedge 
between sociological and biological subsistence.

•  Monarchy, by having the kinga€™ s figure as father of the people buttress the position of the 
father as king of the family

• Orthodoxy, so that women are convinced that premarital sex will send them to hell.

Keep patriarchy, monarchy, and orthodoxy strong, says Malthus, and you can have a society in which 
the commons are prosperous. Give wayy to the siren song of Enlightenment believers in 
a€ceprogressa€D like Godwin, and that Harvey Wollstonecraft, and you doom humanity to starvation, 
misery, and endemic famine.

It is not so much that Malthus writes and the Malthusian argument comes to the forefront when it is 
a€oebecoming wronga€D. It is, rather, that Malthus writes and the Malthusian argument comes to the 
forefront when the counterargument, that there can be progress, becomes strongly and frequently 
enough expressed to be irritating to right wingers. The environment
has to be one in which people see a chance that the Enlightenment is going to win. And that does 
not happen until the Age of Revolution starting in 1776.

[1]: Matthew Yglesias: a€™I have always wondereda€!

Matthew Yglesias @mattyglesias

@StefanFSchubert Ia€™ ve always wondered if hea€™ s the conventional reference precisely because it 
was becoming wrong a€” are there lots of random uncontroversial 16th century texts making the same 
argument?
2:05 PM r™ Jan 8,2023

85Likes 1 Retweet

[2]: Thomas Robert Malthus (1798): Essay on the Principle of Population chttps: //ww w.gutenberg 
.org/ebooks/4239>

[3]: Lucius AnnAIus Seneca Minor (64): On the Part Played by Philosophy in the Progress of Man



Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality

READING: Lucius Annaeus Seneca Minor (64): Moral Letters to Lucilius 90: On A34e Part Played by 
Philosophy in A34e Progress of Man

Lucius Annaeus Seneca Minor (64): Moral Letters to Lucilius 90: On the Part Played by Philosophy in 
the Progress of Man: a€™ Who can doubt, my dear Lucilius, that life is the gift of the immortal 
gods, a€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 1 comment A- Brad DeLong

[4]: Aflius Aristides (co. 143): The Roman Oration chttps:Z/www.jstor.org/stable/1005702>

[5]: Tommaso Campanella (1623): The City of the Sun <https ://ia904502.us .archive 
.org/30/items/thecityofthesun02816gut/tcots 10 .txt>

[6]: Francis Bacon (1627): The New Atlantis <https://www.gutenberg 
.org/files/2434/2434-h/2434-h.htm>

[7]: Wikipedia: Novus Ordo Seclorum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Novus ordo seclorum>

[8]: Publius Vergilius Maro (ca. a€“38): Eclogues <https://gutenberg.org/ebooks/230>

[9]: Adam Smith (1776): An Inquiry into the Nature & Causes of the Wealth of Nations <https 
://www.gutenberg .org/cache/epub/3300/pg3300-images .html>
[10]: Albert Hirschman (1991): The Rhetoric of Reaction: Perversity, Futility, Jeopardy <https 
://archive .org/details/rhetoricofreactiOOOOhirs>

Leave a comment
Share

Subscribe now

