As the last panelista€’’always a hazardous place to bea€”let me incorporate by reference all of the 
very good and interesting and true things have already been said by the previous panelists.


Three Panelists Before
Me...

Hart: The ubiquity of theory/the
political  stakes/thesis  xi/practical
theories are ruthlessly simplified/
global  interdependence/
conjunctures: ends 13:29


Karras: Theory is crystalized history/
need it to be comparative/liberalism
&   its challenges/big, difficult books/
history value-relevant: ends 13:37


“I teach social theory & economic
sociology/"

1. Vacancy—economics has become
anti-institutional... 2. Competition—
rational & behavioral... 3. Network
analysis, & c.... 4. Opportunity?

Expansion & rejection of PE
approaches


Engine not camera

But let me not repeat them.
Let me not bore you.

Let me take a different tack: Let me ask: What are we doing when we do political economy?

Here is one approach: Take half the growth rate of world population, and add it to the worldwide 
average growth rate of real income. Take that as an index of the power of the human race and its 
economy to manipulate nature and organize humansa€”in ways for good and for illa€’’worldwide. If 
you do that, you then find that:

•  from the year one to the year 1500 the average growth rate of that index is 0.035%/year: 35-one 
thousandths of a percent per year.

•  Shift to the the Imperial-Commercial Revolution Age 1500-1770, and find that the average index 
growth rate is something like 0.15%/year.

• Move to the Industrial Revolution Century 1770-1970, and find that it is something like 
0.45%year.

•  And for the past 150 years, since the date Simon Kuznets declared the start of the Modern 
Economic Growth age, it averages 2.06% per year.

What Is Political


Take half the growth rate of
population, and add to it the
average    growth rate of real income
worldwide:

1-1500: 0.035%/year

1500-1770: 0.15%/year

1770-1870: 0.45%/year


1870-2020: 2.06%/year

We have, in a sense, more technological and organizational change in the world economy now in every 
two years than we had in any century back before 1500.

That makes me think this: Political economy is social theory in the age of this extraordinary 
transformation of technology, understood as human powers to transform naturea€”not always in a good 
waya€”and to organize humansa€”not always in a good way at all.

Political economy is social theory in


the age ot extraordinary

transformation of technology
transformation of nature and
organization of humans...

Aside: Granovetter...


Note that it is not that economists or political scientists have any special expertise in figuring 
out what the appropriate social theory for this age of extraordinary transformation of technology 
is.

Sociology definitely has a major place to play: I was having a discussion with two other economists 
last weeka€’’finance economist Noah Smith and labor economist, Aaron Dube. I said something like: 
a€oeWell, I have found, in thinking about these questions around the minimum wage and labor 
organization and soforth, that themost insightful person I ever took acourse from was Mark 
Granovettera€n. At which point Noah said: a€oeThat's interesting,
because I was about to say the most insightful person I ever took a course from about this was Mark 
Granovettera€D. And then Arin chimed in saying he, too, found that he'd been profoundly influenced 
in this by the course he took from Mark Granovetter.

We all three, at some fairly deep level thought, we were economic sociologists pretending to be 
economists, because we were all very conscious of the network sociological-underpinnings of things 
that economists would usually model as competitive market outcomesa€”and so understood why things 
like the low-wage labor market did not, when you looked closely at them, behave much like a 
perfectlycompetitive market in equilibrium at all.
Political economy is appropriate social theory for the age of this extraordinary transformation of 
technology in the economy, for the economy is changing and changing so rapidly and those changes 
ramify so far that they pretty much have to be at the core of whatever analysis you might 
undertake.

Now: rubber, meet road: What should we teach?

Rubber, Meet Road..

* What should we teach?

* Complexes of ideas & linked chains
of interdependence


* We hang theorists’ names on these
approaches

* Storytelling animals

* The Barrington Moore model: Do
we read big, difficult books?

We want to teach complexes of ideas and linked chains of interdependence. We want to teach our 
students that there is not one jawbone of an ass with which we slay all of the intellectual 
Philistines we encounter. We need different tools and different approaches and different formal and 
informal models for different situations. Plus we are storytelling animals: We need human 
protagonists and narrative plots if we are to remember much of what we might learn.
That means that it is inevitable, if we are to teach well, that we hang theoristsa€™ names on 
different conceptual approaches, never mind that doing so is never fair to the theorists so 
Procrusteanized.


And should we follow the Barrington Moore model? Should we, as Alan Karras strongly advocated, make 
our students read big, difficult books? It is true that reading big, difficult books is a very 
important skill, and is enormously rewarding.
But that requires a very high degree of engagement from students. I, at least, have found that much 
harder to maintain over this past plague year.

The upshot? We do have to, in some sense, pick some theorists. Then show how we apply their 
theoriesa€”or rather theories and conceptual approaches that are named after thema€”to the elements 
of the real world that we want to study.
The question, then, is: Which theorists?

I have periodic discussions with Rakesh Bandari about how Hobbes, Locke, Smith, and Mill, in 
grappling with liberalism and its challenges in their day, evolved theories that are excellent for 
helping you to understand the world between 1640 and 1840. And, Marx, Weber and Durkheima€”the core 
of the original version of the Barrington Moore political economy approach, the one I was exposed 
to way back in 1978-1979, when Shannon Stimson led seven of
us through those books and others in Harvarda€™ s Social Studies 10a€”molded my mind into a shape 
wonderfully prepared to understand and analyze the world of Northwestern Europe over 1840-1940.

If only I'd been plopped down in Northwest Europe in 1900!

People would have thought I was such a genius! But, unfortunately, I have been trying to deal with 
the world of 1985-2020.

Our students will hit the kind of peak of their influence of their careers, and of their desires 
both to change the world and survive in it, sometime around the year 2040. So who should we teach 
them? Who are say the three or four or five political-economy and social-theory theorist who will 
be the best guides to the world of 2040?

Theory for 2040...

* Hobbes, Locke, Smith, Mill—theory
fnr 1 £40-1 RZtA


* Marx, Weber, Durkheim—theory
for 1840-1940

* What should we teach now?

* Polanyi, Keynes, ?

I for one, continue to be very, very impressed with the continued relevance of Karl Polanyi. Lots 
of people have thought me a genius over 2015-2020 whenever I open my mouth and make a Polanyian 
point.

I also am continually impressed by the continued relevance of John Maynard Keynesa€”but in large 
part that relevance has been generated by the economics profession^™ s rejection of Keynes after 
1980, so that his ideas have had to be very painfully relearned. And do not see Keynes as a narrow 
economist: he is a political actor and a sociologist as well, and evena€”especially?a€”as an 
upper-class twit had many sharp perspectives on the nature and the
worth and the cultural contradictions of the bourgeoisie and its capitalism.

Rut tV^o           ”1 of mo loo^ro fhom oc nuaofinn marVo T am Irv/AVinrr            pan Ji 
JafAoa^1


I for one, continue to be very, very impressed with the continued relevance of Karl Polanyi. Lots 
of people have thought me a genius over 2015-2020 whenever I open my mouth and make a Polanyian 
point.

I also am continually impressed by the continued relevance of John Maynard Keynesa€”but in large 
part that relevance has been generated by the economics profession^™ s rejection of Keynes after 
1980, so that his ideas have had to be very painfully relearned. And do not see Keynes as a narrow 
economist: he is a political actor and a sociologist as well, and evena€”especially?a€”as an 
upper-class twit had many sharp perspectives on the nature and the
worth and the cultural contradictions of the bourgeoisie and its capitalism.

But for the other threea€”let me leave them as question marks. I am looking for candidatesa€!

Under the auspices ofN2PE: Network for a New Political Economy: <https://twitter.com/N2PE 
Network/status/1367943000639242241> <https://newpoliticaleconomy.berkeley.edu>. Whole thing at: 
<https://github .com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/nnpe-teaching-panel-2021-03-05.txt>

