I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish
to join the group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: Unsatisfactory Musings on the Rise of the Neoliberal Order

One of my friends last week at coffee said that the biggest problem with my forthcoming Slouching 
Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> was that it lost coherence when it reached the late 1970s, and I 
had to write about how post-World War II social democracy had failed its own sustainability test 
and was replaced by neoliberalism, and its three a€celefta€D,
a€oerighta€n, and a€oeoutsidea€D flavors.

My problem, he said, was that I really could not believe that it had happened, and hence no real 
policy to propose other than to once again double-down on social democracy.

But, back in the 1980s and 1990s, that was a non-starter. Left-of-center movements had to figure 
out in real time other than to die, electorally, on that same hill. They had to figure out how to 
construct a framework in which, as Bill Clinton wanted to say in his 1995 SoTU, although a€oethe 
era of Big Government is over, the age of every man for himself must never
begin.a€D

Widen the scope, and the problem is even larger. Leave to one side the global south, where the 
balance sheet for neoliberalism is, I think, very different. In the Global North neoliberalism has 
failed to accomplish any of its goals: it has not reinvigorated and restored the pace of economic 
growth, it has not reinforced a moral order of a€oegood behaviora€D, and it has
not created a peaceful world led by the U.S. as hegemon. Advocates of neoliberalism are reduced to 
claiming that it has not failed, but rather that it was failed by unworthy standard-bearers. That 
trick never works.

No. That is not quite right. Neoliberalism has accomplished one thing: It has made the rich much 
richer, and the non-rich somewhat poorer. This was supposed to incentivize the job-creating rich to 
work harder and create more jobs, and incentivize the non-rich to work harder to avoid penury and 
buckle down to live more moral lives. In fact it has only made the rich
richer, and somewhat more corrupt: plutocracy creates more opportunities for kleptocracy, after 
all.

And yet neoliberalism continues to hold on, with lots of complaints about its failure to satisfy, 
yet the orders mooted as its replacementsa€’’authoritarian state surveillance capitalism with some 
egalitarian aspirations, out-and-out kleptocracy, etho-nationalist developmental-state 
mercantilism, neo-fascist ethno-nationalisma€”do not seem at all attractive.
I have been thinking about this, because the highly estimable Gary Gerstle has written a very good 
and interesting book on The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the 
Free Market Era <https://www.amazon.com/Rise-Fall-Neoliberal-Order-America/dp/0197519644/>.

I am still digesting his book.

But this morninig I see that the high-minded, well-intentioned, and smart Robert Kuttner has a 
review of Garya€”a review I find unsatisfying.

Bob Kuttner has, I think, the same problem responding to Gary that I had in writing Slouching: that 
he cannot really believe in his heart that social democracy failed its sustainability test in the 
late-1970s, wants to go through the motions again in the hope that, this time, the trick will work, 
and cannot acknowledge the world we have lived in since the 1980sa€”the
world of the stubborn persistence of neoliberalism, one in which a€oeBig Governmenta€D is no longer 
a trusted institution, and one in which we are fighting desperately to try to keep the era of every 
man for himself from becoming further entrenched.

I understand.

I share the feeling.

But that does not lead to a clear-sighted view of the political-economy roads forward in the 1990s, 
the 2000s, the 2010s, or today.

Thus in Robert Kuttnera€™ s telling (not in Gary Gerstlea€™ s!) it is Ralph Nadera€™ s embrace of 
deregulation, Bill Clintona€™ s opportunism, and Barack Obamaa€™ s inexperience and caution that 
are to blame. While I agree that Ralph Nadera€™ s influence on the American left and on America has 
been hugely disastrous in so many ways, I do not think that
position of Kuttnera€™ s can be sustaineda€”and not (or not just) because I was on the side at the 
time of thinking that Clinton and Obama had very little room for maneuver, and were doing a pretty 
good job of maneuvering:

Robert Kuttner: Free Markets, Besieged Citizens: a€~Gary Gerstle: The Rise and Fall of the 
Neoliberal Order: America and the World in the Free Market Era^\. The neoliberal credo claims that 
markets work efficiently and that government attempts to constrain them via regulation and public 
spending invariably fail, backfire, or are
corrupteda€!. Neoliberalism has relied on deregulation, privatization, weakened trade unions, less 
progressive taxation, and new trade rulesa€!. [producing] widening inequality, diminished economic 
security, and reduced confidence in the ability of government to aid its citizens. The Republican 
embrace of this doctrine is hardly surprisinga€!
[but]   the allure of neoliberalism to many Democrats is a puzzle worth exploringa€!. The New Deal 
model faltered in the 1970s with the improbable combination of inflation and stagnation^! the 
cultural left also found the libertarian and antibureaucratic aspects of neoliberalism 
appealinga€!. Was it a success or a failure? That depends on
who                                                                                                 
                                                        you are. For economic elites and the 
Republican Party, it has been a splendid success. For the Democratic Party, the neoliberal order 
has been a catastrophea€!

LINK: <https://www.nybooks .com/articles/2022/07/21/free-markets-besieged-citizens-gerstle-kuttner/>
And I object where Kuttner says things like:

Politically, the consequence [of the Clintonite embrace of left-neoliberalism] was a broad loss of 
confidence in Democrats as the party that championed the interests of working people, and in 
government as an instrument of broad public benefita€!. As late as the 1996 presidential election, 
counties that were at least 85 percent white and earned
less than the national median income split about evenly between Democrat Bill Clinton and 
Republican Robert Dole. In the 2016 election, such counties went 658 for Donald Trump and two for 
Hillary Clintona€!

But the Clintonite embrace was consequence, not cause. And the definition of working-class counties 
as a€oecounties that were at least 85 percent white and earned less than the national median 
incomea€n a€”it would have been much wiser, I think, for Kuttner to write a€oea broad loss of 
confidence in Democrats as their representatives by the white segment of the
working class, a segment torn between their class interest in reinforcing social democracy and 
their status interest in maintaining white supremacyaCD.

And the Clintonite position was alwaysa€! more nuanced than Kuttner allows. Kuttner talks about how 
Biden is a€oecloser to the New Deal, with greater public investment, more regulation, progressive 
taxationa€!a€D And I object again. Bidena€™ s pushes for more public investment have run into the 
congressional mire, just as Clintona€™ s did. It was the
Clinton administration that launched U.S. v. Microsofta€”and, by restraining Microsoft via 
litigation and threat, kept it from casting devastating shade on rising Google and Apple. And as 
for progressive taxationa€”the 1993 Clinton Reconcilation Billa€™ s EITC expansion and higher top 
rates moved the tax system more in a progressive direction than anything
Biden has done. Now dona€™t get me wrong: I think Bidena€™ s policies are good, and his proposals 
that have run into congressional mire in the form of the filibuster, Manchin, and Sinema are 
better. But you need to place huge weight on small differences in nuancea€’’differences that run in 
both directionsa€”to see a big policy swing from Clinton to Biden, in
most issue areas.

There is a difference in rhetorica€”the Biden team is not on the defensive against a 
then-attractive right-neoliberalism, as Clinton was. There is definitely a difference in the 
attitude towards labor unions: Clinton was a southern Democrat from a a€oeright-to-worka€n state, 
with many southern Democratic senators and some southern Democrative representatives in
his coalition; Bidena€™ s coalition is very different.

Clinton was gung-ho on expanding free trade, seeing exports as a powerful source of American 
prosperity (correctly, I would think). Biden, by contrast, is continuing Trumpa€™ s failed trade 
war against Chinaa€”which was, I think, one of the very stupidest of the many stupid moves of the 
Trump administration. The Obama plan was to establish the TPP to gain
substantial leverage, and then have all the TPP partners negotiate as a block with China. Trump 
blows up the TPP. Then, without leveragea€”Dhaving disarmed himselfa€’’launches his a€oepopular and 
easy to wina€D idiocy. I genuinely cannot see this as a win for social democracy.

As I said, I am still digesting Garya€™ s latest. But earlier, with Steve Fraser, Gary Gerstle 
edited the brilliant <https://archive.org/details/risefallofnewdea1980unse>. It sets the stage for 
the analysis of the rise and fall of the neoliberal order, and implicitly the tasks of anyone who 
needs to understand why neoliberalism seemed attractive in the late 1970s and what any
order that seeks to replace it will have to do:

Decay began to set in as a result of growing gaps between what the New Deal order promised its 
constituentsa€! and what it actually delivered. A gap emerged first in the early 1960s in regard to 
the disenfranchised and poverty-stricken status of American blacks; another appeared in the moral 
turbulence and growing drain of international
military commitments on domestic prosperity occasioned by the Vietnam War; and a third and related 
gap appeared in middle-class youtha€™ s alienation from the highly organized, bureaucratized 
character of the New Deal order thata€! stifleda€! authenticity and individualitya€!. Tensions were 
aggravated by the often vacillating and
halfhearted efforts of Democratic party elitesa€!. Eeach smoldering tension would trigger a 
political explosion. The cumulative effects of such explosions would shatter the Democratic party 
as a majority party and discredit its liberal doctrines. By the mid-1970s, as a result, the New 
Deal political order had ceased to exista€!

This was the environment in which Democratic political leaders starting in the 1980s had to 
operate. Yet Kuttner does not seem to recognize that.

Kuttner dismisses Democratic political leaders as a€oeembrac[ing] an economic credo that 
annihilated their own public philosophy and its appeal to the electorate^□. And why? All because of 
Bill Clintona€™ s a€ceopportunis[m]a€D and Barack Obamaa€™ s a€oea€~captiv[ity] to his own 
inexperience and resulting cautiona€™. An important aspect of the
neoliberal capture of Obama was his reliance on the Clinton economic team.a€D Kuttner then requotes 
a passage from Gerstle: Larry Summersa€™ s comment in a 2006 obituary for Milton Friedman that 
a€oeany honest Democrat will admit that we are now all Friedmanitesa€D. Kuttnera€”and Gerstlea€”see 
this as guiding policy views in the very different
situation of 2010.

And once again, I object. This is simply not in context. 2006 was not 2010. An obituary comment is 
not a policy brief. And here it matters. Neither Kuttnera€”nor Gerstlea€’’tells their readers that 
the initial Obama-appointed a€oeClinton economic teama€D was, with the exception of non-economist 
Tim Geithner, trying hard to pull Obama to the right against very
strong resistance from the spinmaster and Obama himself. The center-of-gravity of the economists on 
Obamaa€™ s initial team was, I think, well captured by Larry Summers (and my) call for the federal 
government to speed recovery by pushing the government purchases pedal to the metal, on the grounds 
that when interest rates were at the zero lower bound you
could rely on the faster growth generated to keep government finances in long-run balance 
<https://www.brookings.edu/bpea-articles/fiscal-policv-in-a-depressed-economy/>.

This has turned into more of a rant against Kuttner than I wanted it to be. And, as I said, I have 
not yet managed to digest Gerstle.

But hold tight to this. This is the main point: Kuttner fumbles the football here. The reason 
policy in the United States since 1980 has not been the social democracy that Kuttner (and I) would 
prefer. But it is not because of Clintona€™ s opportunism, Obamaa€™ s inexperience and caution, and 
the appointment in 2009 of some economic-policy staffers who turned
out to be on the left wing of the administration (and far left of the congressional median) in 
2009-2012. It is not that simple.

Why has policy in the United States since 1980 has not been the social democracy that Kuttner (and 
I) would prefer? That is the question. I have some ideas that I set out in my Slouching. But so 
far, the verdict on them has not been great. My coffee partner finds them problematic. Paul Krugman 
says that they are a€oeinteresting but not wholly persuasivea€D. And
Bob Reich says: a€oeyou may disagree (I dona€™t buy all of it)a€D.

So I will think some morea€!

Dona€™ t blame Obama or Clinton, or Nader. (Well, you can blame Nader.) Dona€™ t blame the players: 
blame the game. The question is: Why was this the game?


Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish
to join the group of supporters, please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


W    6  H

Subscribe now

