Something that rarely happens happened this morning. The Atlantica€™s Conor Friedersdorf showed up 
in my inbox.

Aslam cranky, I will tell you exactly what I think: It reminded me that I think that you have 
limited bandwidth to read things, that you have a duty to your brain to curate what you
read, and healthy curating requires that you exclude Conor Friedersdorf and his ilk from your 
reading list.

This conclusion is part of a discussion I have been having with myself about how to maintain 
clarity of thought in an age of unlimited misinformation.

So what does this imply for your own internet hygiene? You should read people in order to observe 
the world, and also read people who interpret the world. Of those who interpret
the world, these consideration tell you to read those who are (1) knowledgable, (2) smart, (3) 
engaging, and (4) benevolenta€”in the sense of wishing people well, and using their
intelligence and knowledge to guide people to a better understanding of the world and to make 
better decisions. I am coming to the conclusion that, while you only need two out of
(1),   (2), and (3), you definitely need (4). If they dona€™t have (4), you should mute or ban 
thema€”for they are using their intelligence and knowledge to make a cognitive attack
on your brain. A good marker of someone using their intelligence and knowledge to make a cognitive 
attack on your brain is the argument that we should not do the right thing
today because it would set a precedent of some sort. An argument that it is not, in fact, the right 
thing in this case is almost always a legitimate one. The argument that even though
it  is the right thing in this case it might set a precedent is rarely legitimate. How is it bad to 
set a precedent that you should do the right thing? That argument can be coherent and
legitimate, but it is a very heavy lift.

And, since I always think better with a concrete case: consider Conor Friedersdorf of the Atlantic 
(writing for which, I parenthetically note, is a black mark against you (although
not a dispositive one), as it means that you had the approval of a late editor who thought it was 
just fine and dandy to hire someone who had explicitly called for women who had
abortions to be hanged). Reading Friedersdorf is not a way of observing the world. His specialty is 
interpreting the world. He fails (4) above. The conclusion: there are better people
on  the internet to read than Conor; for your braina€™ s sake, read them instead of him:

For quite a long time now I have thought that Conor Friedersdorfa€™ s thought was of this very low 
quality. What pushed me over the edge, I think I remember, was his attempt, a
decade ago, to persuade the liberal audience of the Atlantic that they should not vote in the 
presidential election. Why? Because the most important thing was stopping the U.S.
security services from torturing people, and Obama was not enough better than Romneya€”even though 
at that moment Romney and his team were boasting that if they won the
presidency the American security services would resume waterboarding people. FriedersdorfaC™ s 
a€ceargumenta€D then:

How do you get worse thana€! the extrajudicial assassination of American citizens?a€! Obama did 
that too. Would Romney? I honestly dona€™ t know. I
can imagine hea€™ d kill more Americans without trial and in secret, or that he wouldna€™ t kill 
any. I can imagine that hea€™ d kill more innocent
Pakistani kids or fewer. His rhetoric suggests he would be worsea€!

Now comes, once again, Conor Friedersdorf: Conor Friedersdorf: a€™ A thought exercise for this is 
an easy question folks on the left: if Peter Thiel were CEO of Twitter or
Facebook, would you still think removing a politician who acts very badly has no at least 
concerning implications beyond the case in question? Of course not.

The best single response: Matthew Yglesias: a€™Like I try to write good articles. But if a 
different, bad writer, had access to my email list he might send them bad articles instead.
I dona€™ t think thata€™ s a reason for me not to writea€”ita€™ s a reason for me to try to do a 
good job rather than a bad onea€!

Plus: Steve M.: Therea€™ s Nothing Like This on Our Side 
<https://nomoremister.blogspot.eom/2021/01/theres-nothing-like-this-on-our-side.html>: a€~I resent 
the questionaC!. If
a right-winger or libertarian banned a left-leaning politician, even a liberal president, from a 
platform, the only relevant question would be whether the punishment fit the crimea€!.
Peter Thiela€! bann[ing] Joe Biden or Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez for ideology, that would be very 
different from Twitter banning Trump fora€! undermining democracy with a
series                                                                                  of massive 
lies, then giving aid and comfort to a violent, seditious moba€!. Trumpa€™ s Twitter feed has been 
Rwandan radio for some time now, and he has a large
following eager to burn the government down. Until therea€™ s something comparable on our side, 
Friedersdorfa€™ s question is moota€!

Tom Snyder: The American Abyss <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/01/09/magazine/trump-coup.html> : 
a€~When we give up on truth, we concede power to those with the wealth
and charisma to create spectacle in its place. Without agreement about some basic facts, citizens 
cannot form the civil society that would allow them to defend themselves. If we
lose the institutions that produce facts that are pertinent to us, then we tend to wallow in 
attractive abstractions and fictions. Truth defends itself particularly poorly when there is not
very much of it around.... Social media... supercharges the mental habits by which we seek 
emotional stimulation and comfort, which means losing the distinction between what
feels true and what actually is truea€!

Haley Bird Wilt: The Consequences of Lying to People 
<https://uphill.thedispatch.eom/p/the-consequences-of-lving-to-people>: a€~Republican lawmakers 
misled millions of
people into believing the results of a legitimate election could be overturned. Many of them viewed 
contesting the outcome as a relatively easy way to gain political currency among
Trump supporters, knowing all the while that their efforts would have no real impact on who will be 
sworn into office in two weeks. The deceptiona€’’primarily led by Trump, yet
enabled by members of Congressa€”set the stage for the violence that unfolded at the Capitol 
Wednesday. Four people died.  The normally dry procedural affair of counting of the

Electoral College votes was viewed by everyday Republicans and zealots alike as the place to make a 
final stand to overturn the electiona€”even though elected Republicans knew
the outcome would ultimately remain unchanged. As my colleague Jonah writes this morning, 
a€oeConvincing people they need to prevent a coup when no such coup exists is a
recipe for violence .a€D This was the energy that fueled the horde on Wednesdaya€!

PLUS:

Must-Read:

Should-Read:

DeLongTODAY: Why Storm the Capitol Building & Then Do Nothing But Take Selfies?2021-01-08
Project Syndicate: What Next for the MAGA Insurrection? 2021-01-08

BRIEFLY NOTED:


