Subscribe now

One of our standard workhorse modelsa€”the Diamond OLG model, the one I learned in the second week 
of my first class from Olivier Blancharda€”says this:

1. Suppose the real interest rate on government debt r is less than the proportional rate of growth 
of per capita income g (or, possibly, g+n, the sum of that growth rate g and the population growth 
rate «a€”it depends on your view of equity across generations and with respect to immigrants).

2. Then the economy lacks sufficient safe assets with which to transfer wealth securely from the 
present into the future.

3. And then there is no cost to government borrowing: rather than government borrowing being 
something that requires a government to offer value to its counterparties and thus draining 
resources for other uses, keeping its counterparties^™ wealth safe is something the counterparties 
are willing to pay for, and is a profit center for the government, increasing the resources that it 
can use for other purposes.
The immediate and powerful implication is that there is a free lunch for the government to grasp by 
issuing debt, and continuing to issue debt unless and until such debt issue raises the real 
interest rate r on government securities up to the growth rate of per capita income (and perhaps 
the sum of that rate and the population growth rate).

DIAMOND: NATIONAL DEBT                    1133


s

Diagram 2

Share

Now there is the question of how the government should use the resources it gains by keeping its 
counterparties^™ wealth safe. And there is the question of what steps the government should take to 
guard against risks that the situation might change. Those are important questions. But they do not 
overturn the basic result. Any use of the resources at all will leave societal well-being enhanced. 
The risks are not real downside risks: they area€”unless the
government messes up massivelya€”are not proper downside risks, but only the risk that a good 
thing, a free lunch opportunity, will come to an end. And a government that finds a way to mess up 
massively is likely to do so: refusing to eat a free lunch in order to keep the messing from taking 
one particular form does not seem to me to be very wise.

When the real interest rate on government debt is less than the income growth rate, the government 
is in the position of the Renaissance Medici Bank. The Medici Bank did not pay interest to 
depositors in return for the loan of their purchasing power today; the Medici Bank charged fees to 
its counterparties for performing the service of keeping their wealth safe and accessible.

What the human psychology is and how institutions have evolved in such a way as to get us into this 
situation in which government borrowing is not a cost but a profit centera€”that is a very 
interesting and knotty question. But we are here. And our standard workhorse model is unambiguous: 
there is a free lunch by grasp by running up the governments™ s debt and then using the social 
power over resources thus transferred to the government to do useful
things. What are the best useful things to doa€”let us have that discussion. The government could 
pay to build useful things. The government could finance private corporations by buying their 
stock. The government could simply send out checks to people in general. I favor the first. But let 
us recognize that this is a political discussion, and that all 50 Democratic and Independent (and 
perhaps 10 Republican) senators have to sign on, or else the free lunch will
be wasted.

How to guard against riska€”let us have that discussion too. However, I see very little in the way 
of risk to be guarded against. The riska€”that is not really a downside, but rather the going-away 
of an opportunity a€”is that interest rates will rise so that, when it comes time for the debt to 
be rolled over, the terms on offer are not favorable. The obvious way to manage that risk is to 
raise taxes and so reduce the market float of government debt to the appropriate,
manageable level. These taxes can be raised from the economy as a whole. These taxes can be raised 
from high rollersa€’’primarily those who benefitted from the massive asset price increases that 
accompanied the coming of this g > r. Or taxes can be raised indirectly, using regulatory tools to 
require that financial institutions that benefit from the governments™ s provision of deposit 
insurance and of a financial lender-of-last-resort in financial crises hold
whatever amount of government debt seems optimal. This would not be in any way inequitable: finance 
has never paid for the lender-of-last-resort function, and has paid much less than the value of 
deposit-insurance guarantees, from both of which it has profited immensely. Such holding 
requirements are not an institutional innovation: this was a large chunk of how President Abraham 
Lincoln and Treasury Secretary Salmon Chase financed the Union Army
during the Civil War. It is not a new or an untried or a norm-breaking policy move.

Any questions?

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Yes, I see a hand in the backS!

You are saying that I am using the Diamond model as an intuition pump, applying it to a new and 
strange situation that we did not think we would get to? And that this is wrong? You are saying 
that economistsS™ models are not intuition pumps but filing systems? Convenient ways of keeping 
track of experiential knowledge? And when the conclusions of models run counter to the judgments of 
the great and the good, we should turn to other models? And that
the great and good are now judging that we have already run up the debt too far?

PerhapsS!

But this is not using the Diamond model as very much of an intuition pump. Market economies work, 
when they do, because they provide people with incentives to create very useful and valuable 
things. Right now, with g > r, government debt is incredibly useful and valuable. And the 
government can easily create it. So why not respond to the signals the market is sendingS”nay, 
yelling and screaming at usS”and act accordingly?
Let me, however, on the other side, set forth a quote from John Maynard Keynes:

John Maynard Keynes (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Chapter 12. The 
State of Long-Term Expectation: S'Enterprise.  Only a little more than an expedition to the South 
Pole, is it based on an exact calculation of benefits to come. Thus if the animal spirits are 
dimmed and the spontaneous optimism falters, leaving us to depend on nothing but a mathematical 
expectation, enterprise will fade and

die....

This means. that economic prosperity is excessively dependent on a political and social atmosphere 
which is congenial to the average business man. If the fear of a Labour Government or a New Deal 
depresses enterprise, this need not be the result either of a reasonable calculation or of a plot 
with political intent;S”it is the mere consequence of upsetting the delicate balance of spontaneous 
optimism.

In estimating the prospects of investment, we must have regard, therefore, to the nerves and 
hysteria and even the digestions and reactions to the weather of those upon whose spontaneous 
activity it largely depends...

LINK: <https://www.marxists.org/reference/subiect/economics/keynes/general-theory/chl2.htm>

References:

Dean Baker, J. Bradford DeLong, & Paul Krugman (2005): Asset Returns and Economic Growth 
<https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2005/01/2005a bpea baker.pdf>

J. Bradford DeLong (2018): Economists' Models: Analysis Pumps or Filing Systems? And Do Countries 
with Reserve Currencies Need to Fear Solvency Crises? 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2018/11/economists-models-analysis-pumps-or-filing-systems-and-do-c
ountries-with-reserve-currencies-need-to-fear-solvency-crises.html>

Peter Diamond (1965) National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model <https://www.aeaweb 
.org/aer/top20/55.5.1126-1150 .pdf>

John Maynard Keynes (1936): The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. Chapter 12. The 
State of Long-Term Expectation <https ://www.marxists 
.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/ch 12 .htm>

1275 words
Leave a comment

