Subscribe now

FIRST: Progress Studies!

I should so something with this, but I do not know what. Interviews that I have not initiated 
always make me feel as though I said smart things but in the wrong way, and it will take
a lot of work to figure out what they really are.

And a€oeProgress Studiesa€n: I do not know what they will become. After all, they say the owl was a 
bakera€™ s daughter. Lord, we know what we are, but know not what we
may be. Indeed, with a€oeProgress Studiesa€D I do not know what they now are.

In short: This is not yet ready for prime time at all:

Me, from the EXPERT ROUNDTABLE: WHAT DOES PROGRESS LOOK LIKE? 
<https://bigthink.com/progress/progress-agenda/>:
1/ How do you define progress?

Three elements:

First, getting out from under the hammer of necessity, which for most of human history has been the 
Harrow of Malthus: A world in which you see half your babies die,
your life expectancy is 25, you go to bed hungry lots of the time, and much of your planning has to 
be simply, "How do I keep this biological machine going for one day?"
Progress is getting away from that: acquiring power to manipulate nature, and power to 
successfully, and politely, and peacefully organize humans to actually get things
done. Progress is power to escape from the kingdom of necessity, and enter the kingdom of freedom.

Second, progress has to be relatively egalitarian. An A©lite of thugs with spears assisted by tame 
accountants, propagandists, and bureaucrats running a force-and-fraud
exploitation-extraction-and-domination grift rA©gime does not become a€oeprogressa€D when you add 
laser weapons to it. Ming the Merciless, Emperor of Mongo, is
not what we are looking for.

And third, there's the question of actually using your power to manipulate nature and figure out 
how to organize ourselves, so we can actually have a sophisticated
functioning, hence highly productive division of the labor, figuring out what we then want to do, 
in order that we live lives is worth living.

2/ What are the essential elements required for progress to happen?

Technological powera€”plus what humans want in terms of reward and respect, so that we can organize 
ourselves in what Charlie from Trier said the goal was: a€cea
free society of associated producersa€D. People not only need to have material stuff and social 
powers to achieve their purposes, they also need to feel that they are
respected, and even more they need to feel that they're making a contribution. Those three elements 
have to be built on top of technological competence and excellence.
As    for the utilization of technological power, you have got to say: "Let 100 flowers bloom." 
Progress will be when people can thoughtfully let their best selves choose what
the goals they wish to accomplish in their lives are

3/ What would a a€oeprogress agendaa€D look like? What changes are required in how we approach our 
most significant problems?

Much more attention to the downsides of technology. Winston Churchill, writing after World War I, 
looking backward, noted how the people like him who had marveled
at all the technological inventions of 1870 to 1914 had not fully realized what that meant for how 
destructive war would be. And Churchill had been First Lord of the
Admiralty: the person in charge of procuring the guns with the 15-inch barrels that throw multi-ton 
shells 15 miles where they then go boom. Where our technology is
taking   us, and how we need to form it in such a way that it empowers people rather than 
bureaucracies and the... I don't want to say remnants, but the functioning force-
and-fraud exploitation, extraction, and domination machine, the thugs with spears with their tame 
accountants, propagandists, and bureaucrats. Stewart Brand's Whole
Earth Catalog, Steve Jobs and company's 1984 Macintosh commercial. Technology in the service of the 
individual human mind, rather than technology in terms of the
inhuman systems that dominate us all.

4/ What do you see as some of the most significant barriers to progress right now?

We are jumped-up East African Plains Apes, with brains arely competent to figure out where we left 
the keys in the morning. To ask us to think deeply and well about
how to organize an 8 billion-node anthology intelligence for collective progress and human 
betterment, is well beyond us. The barriers are our fear and contempt, for
when we get ourselves in a good place and recognize that we might well have been the people on the 
other side of the globe who have big problems then we can pull out an
enormous altruistic, charitable effort to help people far away who we never knew and never will 
know. We have been growing this moral sense for quite a long time. It is a
very                                                                               good sense to 
grow.

5/ What are the easiest opportunities for progress in your opinion? What are the areas in which a 
few critical interventions or changes could unlock a disproportionate amount of
progress?

The government should be funding a lot more research and development. Michael Kremer's ideas about 
big prizes for actually accomplishing missions. The market is a
very nice mercenary institution in its place. But there is absolutely no way that it can generate 
the right kind and right amount of science and technological development.
Science is an absolutely wonderful fiduciary institution, as Michael Polanyi would have put it, but 
it generates knowledge that's relatively abstract: the kinds of
knowledge  that a person or a team can discovered then get enormous reputation credit for. There's 
this space in the middle of developing useful technologies and
figuring   how to apply them. It requires the public spirit and the enthusiasm about deploying and 
disseminating it of the scientist, but also the focus on the bottom line and
a€oelet's make this actually work cheaply at scale" that the market-driven corporation can achieve. 
So we really need something in the middle: something that marries
the Cathedral and the Bazaar.

6/ And conversely, what do you see as the most important places we need to make progress (even if 
ita€™ s going to be more difficult)?

We have managed to successfully transfer public health technology all around the glob. Pretty much 
everyone's life expectancy at birth now is 70 or more, But the world
is still extraordinarily, astonishingly unequa: there are still 500 million of our brothers and 
sisters who live at less than $3 a day in real terms. And, even in the United
States, greater San Francisco is four times as rich as rural Mississippi.

Figuring out how to do for the ability to productively contribute to the global division of social 
labor what we figured out how to do in spreading public health
technologies around the world successfully a€’’that is job one. Job two is to push ahead the 
technological frontier. And, of course, then there are jobs three and jobs four:
keep nuclear weapons from blowing us up, and keep global warming from cooking the planet, probably 
by causing someone to use nuclear weapons.

The fact that the monsoon is 200 miles south of where it ought to be this year, with consequences 
that are not funa€”that is not a canary in the coal mine. It's a giant awk
that's screeching at maximum volume.

7/ People seem to be more pessimistic about the potential for progress moving forward than they 
have been in the past. Do you think thata€™ s true and if so, why?

No. There are now 8 billion of us. We're better educated than before. We can better communicate 
than before. We have been a successful anthology intelligence since we
learned to speak at various scales. At bigger scale we should be more poweful and competent.

One argument is that we've finally reached the scale beyond which the anthology intelligence that 
is the human group can function, that our global anthology intelligence
human mind is going insane. And if humanity is best thought of as a global anthology intelligence, 
it is a very, very loosely wrapped one. It is not tightly wrapped at all.

But communication is on our side. It is much harder now for fights among friends and neighbors to 
end in deadly violence, than it is if you were say, in the Highlands of
Scotland where you rarely see strangers, in which case it's very easy to divide people into clan 
members to be helped and assisted, clan enemies to be killed, and strangers
to   be simply robbed. It ought to be harder and harder to do this. It ought to require more and 
more effort on the part of those who are performing the ethno-nationalist
grift: "I'm going to get some kind of power by persuading you that people who look slightly 
different than you, who live in a slightly different place than you, or who, God
forbid, want to major in lesbian dance therapy, are your enemies, and you need me to figure out how 
you can efficiently and effectively kill them, or at least keep them


UUWI1.

That is becoming a harder and harder thing to do as communication becomes better and better. But 
that'sjust a hope.

The arc of the universe does not tend in any direction at all, except possibly to heat death 
followed by random Boltzmann brains due to quantum fluctuations.

9/ How can we work to ensure that progress benefits everyone?

Adopt the hard utilitarian mindset: The greatest good of the greatest number, with a strong 
recognition of how fast the marginal utility of wealth declines. Trust in human
agencya€”in technologies that get people the information and then ask them to take action, as 
opposed to technologies to force people to do what some planner at the top
has decided. We need gardeners and fertilizers, not bosses and commanders. That is where we're 
trying to guide our technologies. Authoritarian state surveillance
capitalism, no matter how many utopian and egalitarian aspirations it has, is probably not the 
right place to go.

10 / Are you optimistic about the future?

As I person, I am generally happy. I don't know whether I'm optimistic. When people ask me if I am, 
I reach either for Gramsci or for Camus. Even if you have
pessimism of the intellect, you aren't going to get anything done if you do not have optimism of 
the wil. Depression is a biological mechanism to make you move little
while                                                                                you heal. 
That's not the right response to anything today. Camusa€™s line is: "We must imagine Sisyphus 
happy^€D That is deliberately ambiguous. Is it the
logic of the situation that compells us, when we consider it fully, to realize that it is 
impossible for a rational being to think that Sisyphus is anything but happ?. Or is it
that if we do not think Sisyphus is happy then we cannot live, and so we go kill ourself today. 
That ambiguity is an important thing to register.

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Must Read

Ita€™ s all fun and games even after a lot of people lose their lives:

Scott Lemieux: Our Complacent Insiders: 'Balls & Strikes: "[Nina Totenberg's] Dinners With Ruth 
works through an identity crisis in real time: Is it a
biography, a memoir, or yet another spine on the shelf of Supreme Court a€oebehind the curtaina€D 
books? Totenberg herself doesna€™t know....

Totenberg does acknowledge a couple ethical violationsa€! plagiarizing quotesa€! writing an op-ed 
in support of Ginsburga€™ s nomination to the D.C.
Circuit while she was reporting on the judiciary. But those moments of candor pale in comparison to 
the rosy, uncomplicated stories of her friendships with
multiple justices. Antonin Scalia, whom she a€oeloveda€Da€! days after D.C. v. Heller, the 2008 
case that ungrammatically discovered an individual right
to  bear arms in the Second Amendment, Totenberg and her husband hosted a dinner party with the 
Scalias in attendance. Totenberga€™ s husband placed
plastic squirt guns in each soup bowl and later aimed a Super Soaker at Scalia. This, Totenberg 
recalls, a€oebrought down the housea€D with laughter.

Absent from this narrative, of course, is Americaa€™ s gun violence epidemic and its connection to 
Scaliaa€™ s Heller opinion. But as Scalia himself says
in another anecdote, 'Ia€™ m a Supreme Court justice. I can do what I want'. Thanks to reporters 
like Totenberg, whose ideas for rigorous questions for the
justices include a€~red wine or white?a€™ , hea€™ s right...

Leave a comment

