
Eager to not be a community, but rather to start a fighta€”with both Sharks and Jets both trying to 
stay on their side of the a€celinea€D and tricking the other side to cross it, so it can be blamed 
for the fight that both sides want. The proper response is that of Mercutio: a€oeA pox on both your 
houses!a€D
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

Alan Cole: How C0VIDa€“19 Broke My Favorite Labor Economics Chart: a€~A longstanding connection 
between wage growth and employment levels has broken downa€! <https ://fullstackeconomics 
.com/how-covid-19-broke-mv-favorite-labor-economics-chart/>

Julia Ioffe: Tales from the CNN Trump-Era Green Room: a€~Kirsten Powers, who went from liberal on 
Fox News to anti-Trump voice on CNN, explains what happens when the shouting matches end, the 
cameras turn off, and youa€™re stuck in the green room with Santorum. And how to handle it all, and 
more, with a little gracea€! <https://puck.news/tales-from-the-cnn-trump-
era-green-room/>

Noah Smith: Much of What Youa€™ve Heard About Carter & Reagan Is Wrong: a€~Debunking our narratives 
of the late 70s and early 80sa€!. It was Jimmy Carter who appointed Volcker as the Fed chair, in 
1979a€!

oahpinion

Much of what you've heard about Carter and Reagan is wrong

If you, like me, grew up in the United States of America, youa€™ ve probably heard a story of the 
late 1970s and early 1980s that goes something like this: a€oeln the 70s, Cartera€™ s liberal 
big-government policies resulted in runaway inflation. Reagan came in and defeated inflation, and 
produced an economic boom with deregulation and tax cuts. Reagan also embaa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 56 likes A- 47 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Zachary D. Carter: Joe Biden, FDR, & the Democratic Partya€™ s Battle of Ideas: a€~Bidena€™ s 
agenda has taken some big hits, but hea€™ s winning the war for his partya€™ s futurea€! LINK: <

IN THE

LONG
RUN


In The Long Run

Joe Biden, FDR, and the Democratic Party's Battle of Ideas

My latest piece is up in Politico Magazine, looking at how Biden in faring in his quest to return 
the Democratic Party to its New Deal roots. The shortest version of the story is: Manchin and 
Sinema have done a lot of damage to Bidena€™ s agenda and the partya€™ s electoral prospects, but 
Biden is winning the intellectual battle. a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- Zachary D. Carter

• Jonathan M. Katz: The Far RightaC™ s Secret Weapon: a€~Have some extreme reactionism you need to 
sell? Call the politics desk of the New York Timesa€!

The far right's secret weapon

Liberals woke up to some bad news yesterday: The governora€™ s race in Virginia, a state Biden won 
by double digits, went to a previously unknown Republican. More worryingly, Glenn Youngkin seems to 
hava€!

Read more

a year ago A- 10 likes A- 3 comments A- Jonathan M. Katz

•  Ben Dreyfuss: Everyone Who Is Mad About This Chris Pratt Thing Has Brain Worms: a€~Twitter is a 
place where Occam doesna€™ t have a razor and if he did, hea€™ d be planning something devious with 
ita€!



Everyone who is mad about this Chris Pratt thing has brain worms

Chris Pratt is married to Katherine Schwarzenegger. Ita€™ s her birthday in a few weeks. He posted 
a nice little Instagram post about how much he loves his wife. Guys. For real. Look how shea€™ s 
looking at me! I mean. Find you somebody that looks at you like that!! You know!? We met in church. 
Shea€™ s given me an amazing life, a gorgeous healthy daughter, she ca€!

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- Ben Dreyfuss

• Alex Kantrowitz: The Case to Reform the Share Button, According to Facebooka€™ s Own Research'. 
New leaked document shows Facebooka€™ s Share button spreads misinformation pervasively after two 
hops down the chaina€!


Big Technology

The Case To Reform The Share Button, According To Facebooka€™ s Own Research

Hello from Lisbon! Ita€™ s been a pleasure getting to see many of you here at Web Summit this week. 
Thanks to all those who signed up. Welcome aboarda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 5 likes A- Alex Kantrowitz

Paragraphs:

Michael Pettis: Will Chinaa€™s Common Prosperity Upgrade Dual Circulation?: a€~Will Chinaa€™ s 
Common Prosperity Upgrade Dual Circulation?Chinese leaders know that they want to discontinue the 
countrya€™ s existing growth model, but they havena€™ t yet landed on what the sustainable 
alternatives are. Beijinga€™ s new common prosperity policy will only help shift domestic
demand at the margins, but a full-fledged rebalancing will require a more radical transformation^!. 
There is a contradiction at the heart of the dual circulation formulationa€l. The goal of the 
common prosperity campaign, it seems, is to rebalance income levels through transfers from those 
who are rich to those who are nota€!. First, donations by foundations set up by Chinese businesses 
and
wealthy individuals accounted for roughly 0.2 percent of GDP in 2017. (By comparison, charitable 
giving in the United States amounted to around 2.3 percent of GDP in 2020 .)a€! Second, by forcing 
the private sector to bear the brunt of the adjustment costs for rebalancing Chinese income 
distribution, the common prosperity campaign risks undermining the dynamism of the Chinese
economya€!. But the third reason is by far the most important one for why it would be prudent to be 
cautious about the projected success of the common prosperity campaign: Beijing may be seeking to 
resolve Western forms of income distortion instead of Chinese forms of income distortion in 
ChinaaC™ s very different economic contexta€!

LINK: <https://carnegieendowment.org/chinafinancialmarkets/85571>

Doug Jones: The World in 1600: a€~World population, about 545 milliona€!. In the century after 
1492, West Europeans mastered the winds and currents of the worlda€™ s oceans. The shock to the 
rest of the world would be comparable in some ways to the earlier shock resulting from the spread 
of nomadism on the Eurasian steppesa€!. Mega-empires. In Eastern Europe and Asiaa€! the
landscape was dominated by huge empires: Russia, the Ottomans, Safavid Persia, Mughal India, Ming 
China. These have sometimes been called a€oegunpowder empires,a€D emphasizing the role of cannon in 
establishing centralized power. But they could also be considered the aftermath of the Mongol 
conquestsa€!. These empires developed in centrifugal fashion, with power collapsing at the
old Mongol center, and new states arising along the Mongol marches. Charlemagne + 800. Another 
centrifugal episode of state formation took place in Western and Central Europe, on a smaller 
scale, over a longer period of timea€!. By 1600a€! military competition had produced more powerful 
absolutist states. Medieval liberties survived best in lands where military threats had been less
intense, on islands (England and Scotland), on an isolated peninsula (Scandinavia), in the 
mountains (Switzerland) or soggy lowlands (Holland), or just far from the madding crowd (Poland)a€!

LINK: <https://logarithmichistory.wordpress .com/2021/11/04/the-world-in-1600-7/>

Steven Johnson: Designing a Workflow For Thinking: a€~Wea€™ re living in a golden age of tools for 
thought. But with so many options, ita€™ s important to carve out time every year or two for a 
a€oecreative inventorya€D of how you discover and organize your ideasa€!. what Ia€™ m going to do 
here at Adjacent Possible is share a series of documents that are all structured around the key
questions you should ask yourself in designing that creative workflow. Questions like: how do you 
capture your own hunches? How do you capture ideas from other people? How do your ideas evolve over 
time? How do you engineer surprise and serendipitous discovery into your routine? (My hope is that 
it will be useful to everyone, no matter what your profession happens to bea€”I wona€™t
just focus on book-related tools.) For each question Ia€™m going to write a short essay 
supplemented by an annotated list of the tools and strategies that Ia€™ ve found interesting; Ia€™ 
11 update the documentsa€!


LINK:


Adjacent Possible

Designing a Workflow For Thinking

[TLDR summary: Ia€™ m going to be publishing a series of essays about building the most effective 
creative workflow, including annotated lists of some of the best tools and techniques out there. 
This series will only be available to paying subscribers, so if youa€™ re interested, I encourage 
you toa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 9 likes A- 3 comments A- Steven Johnson

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

