Subscribe now

1'he 2022 L'C Berkeley
Stone Center Lecture

JLOUCHING

'TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. Bradford DeLong

Bcchtd Sibley Auditorium. L C Bertdey

hx-xU}. * ember 29,>io -    pm

<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/the-annual-stone-lecture-slouching-towards-utopia-tickets-457921504547
?aff=ebdssbdestsearch>

Nov 29

The Annual Stone Lecture: Slouching Towards Utopia

Join us for the annual Stone Lecture, featuring economist J. Bradford DeLong

By UC Berkeley, College of Letters & Science

Tue, November 29,2022,5:10 PM a€“ 6:30 PM PST :: Sibley Auditorium [virtual option available] UC 
Berkeley Berkeley, CA 94720

Around 1870 came a great shift: invention sprinted forward, doubling our technological capabilities 
each generation, utterly transforming the economy again and again. The possibility of being able in 
the not-too-distant future of
baking a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to someday have enoughcame into view. Surely 
then we would be able to shift governance and politics so that we could collectively build a 
utopia? Surely it was the baking of the
sufficiently large economic pie that was the large problem. Surely the slicing and tasting the 
piea€’’equitably distributing humanitya€™ s immense technology-enabled wealth, and utilizing it so 
that people felt safe and secure and were
healthy and happya€”were second-order, more-easily-solved problems?

Ji^oin us for a talk by Berkeley Economics Professor Brad DeLong, followed by audience Q&A. The 
event will be followed by a reception. Live-streaming available as well.
Ti»^his event is sponsored by The James M. and Cathleen D. Stone Center on Wealth and Income 
Inequality at UC Berkeley.

SLOUCHING
JOWIRDT

w ywW •••*

Al   BIN***®   —

nr THE TWEMT1FTH CBTWT


"A magisterial history."

-Paul Krugman

ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

a€~Learnedly and grippingly tells the story of how all the economic growth since 1870 has created a 
global economy that today satisfies no one's ideas of fairness. The long journey... will 
continuea€!a€™ a€”Thomas Piketty
"A magisterial history. "a€”a€<Paul Krugman

a€oelf you want to follow the conversation right now on global economic history, you should check 
out Brad DeLonga€™ s Slouching Towards Utopia.a€Da€«Adam Tooze, on The Ezra Klein Show
a€oeDeeply engaginga€!a work of strikingly expansive breadth and scope.a€Da€•Benjamin M. Friedman, 
Harvard Magazine

a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia is an impressive achievement, written with wit and style and a 
formidable command of detail.a€D a€*The Economist

The James M. and Cathleen D. Stone Center on Wealth and Income Inequality at UC Berkeley was 
created to serve as a research hub for campus and beyond, enabling UC Berkeleya€™ s world-leading 
scholars to deepen our
understanding of the inequality in society and formulate new approaches to address the challenge of 
creating a more equitable society. The Center serves as the primary convening point at UC Berkeley 
for research, teaching and data
development concerning the causes, nature, and consequences of wealth and income inequalities with 
a special emphasis on the concentration of wealth at the very top. Learn more

<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/the-annual-stone-lecture-slouching-towards-utopia-tickets-457921504547
?aff=ebdssbdestsearch>
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

