Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

First:

English has a really big advantage over Latin. English hasa€”and Latin lacksa€”both the indefinite 
article a and the definite article the. The existence of these is an enormous aid to quickly saying 
exactly what one means. But it is also a great aid to creating strawmen that you can then light on 
fire. Here Sean Wilentz uses this linguistic feature. He says not that Holton and Taylor say that 
white
supremacy has been a driving force of American history, but that they say it has been the driving 
force.

Hijinx ensue:

Sean Wilentz: The Paradox of the American Revolution'. a€~Recent books by Woody Holton and Alan 
Taylor offer fresh perspectivesa€! overemphasize the importance of white supremacy as its driving 
forcea€!. Descriptions of AmericaaC™ s egalitarian founding principles as covers for white 
supremacya€”a€oeformulated to promote exclusion and
oppressiona€Da€”have gained a sudden currency. By these lights, the Revolution was in large measure 
a proslavery secession sparked by American fears of British threats to slaverya€!. Two ambitious 
new studies, Liberty Is Sweet by Woody Holton on the Revolution and American Republics by Alan 
Taylora€! take up the array of political and social transformations
that      shaped the nationa€™ s growtha€!. Yet both books advance claims in accord with 
interpretations of white supremacy as the driving force of American history. Holton and Taylor are 
serious scholars, and given the larger stakes involved, the reliability of their conclusions on 
these matters assumes importance in debates that go far beyond the academya€!

LINK: chttps://www.nybooks .com/articles/2022/01/13/the-paradox-of-the-american-revolution/>

Was white supremacy a driving force behind the American Revolution? Leta€™ s look at the 
Pennsylvania Journal & Weekly Advertiser of December 6,1775:
Not in the legions of horrid Hell can come a devil more damna€™ d In evils, to top D*****e.

By His Excellency the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of DUNMORE, His MAJESTY'S Lieutenant and Governor 
General of the Colony and Dominion of VIRGINIA, and Vice Admiral of the same.

A PROCLAMATION.


As I have ever entertained Hopes that an Accommodation might have taken Place between 
GREATa€DBRITAIN and this colony, without being compelled by my Duty to this most disagreeable but 
now absolutely necessary Step, rendered fo by a Body of armed Men unlawfully assembled, bring on 
His MAJESTY'S
Tenders, and the formation of an Army, and that Army now on their March to attack His MAJESTY'S 
troops and destroy the well disposed Subjects of this Colony. To defeat such unreasonable Purposes, 
and that all such Traitors, and their Abetters, may be brought to Justice, and that the Peace, and 
good Order of this
Colony may be again restored, which the ordinary Course of the Civil Law is unable to effect; I 
have thought fit to issue this my Proclamation, hereby declaring, that until the aforesaid good 
Purpofes can be obtained, I do in Virtue of the Power and Authority to ME given, by His MAJESTY, 
determine to execute Martial
Law, and cause the fame to be executed throughout this Colony: and to the end that Peace and good 
Order may the sooner be, I do require every Person capable of bearing Arms, to His MAJESTY'S 
STANDARD, or be looked upon as Traitors to His MAJESTY'S Crown and Government, and thereby become 
liable to the
Penalty the Law inflicts upon such Offences; such as forfeiture of Life, confiscation of Lands, &c. 
&c.

And I do hereby further declare all indentured Servants, Negroes, or others, (appertaining to 
Rebels,) free that are able and willing to bear Arms, they joining His MAJESTY'S Troops as soon as 
may be, for the more speedily reducing this Colony to a proper Sense of their Duty, to His 
MAJESTY'S Leige
Subjects, to retain their Quitrents, or any other Taxes due or that may become due, in their own 
Custody, till such Time as Peace may be again restored to this at present most unhappy Country, or 
demanded of them for their former salutary Purposes, by Officers properly authorised to receive the 
fame.

GIVEN under my Hand on board the ship WILLIAM, off NORPOLE, the 7th Day of NOVEMBER, in the 
SIXTEENTH Year of His MAJESTY'S Reign.
DUNMORE.

(GOD Save the KING.)

BY  Ilk  Excellency  the  Right  Honondrc  JOHN  Earl  of.  DUNMOR  E,  Ilia


MAJESTI'S  Lieutenant  and  Governor  General  of

VIRGIMA, and Vice Admiral of the feme.

the CuZbuy a ml Domuupn o

I

A    PROC    L    A    Mfl

AS I luivc ever entertained Hope?! tltat an         Accommodaikn ur^h: Jiave

taken Place between Gaur-lLuri»^ and this Colony, without lacing

<ronipid!c<i by tny Duty to 'ids irxof. difagrccablc but now abfo’utc'yneccfi.tr/
Step, rendered fo by a Cody of ann-cd Men unlawfully kJ, on His
MAJESTY* lender*, .uid feneZlio’ of m Army, and t: *r Amy r-W n

their March to attack TJAJE/T?S Troops and deftrny f c wdi ETpcTctZ

fcclt of this Colony. To defeat fuch trcafonablc Ftreofw, end that ail nidi
Traitors, and their Abaters, may be brought io Juftke, and that the 1 and

rood Outer of this Colony ms’* be igt-n refored, which tins erdinarv Courfc


of ihc Ch'1 Law is unable tv dlccc; I have thought fit to Hluc this my Fro*
dwatinn, hereby, declining, that until the .iFo«r:ucl good Puryofes cm Ie ob-

twined, I du in Virtue of the Pawar and .Vatharity to ME by IPs MAJE-

•                                                                                             ••• M 
•                  "*'»’• ’1

STY, determine to execute           Law, ana caufc tire fame to be executed

tlnoughnut  this  Colony!  rnd  io  the  end  that  Peace  and  good  Cider  n.^y  the
foxier  cf-ctu-J*  ~  ’.J  y-rs  c"?ry  r,<r^:  n  capable  of  bearing  Arm1;,  to  rduyt

• •r  *^'*1 ■> 1

to  Hit  MAJESTV'S  81  AX  CARD*  or  be  Imbed  upon  er  T  mi  torr  to  Hi*

MAJESTY’* Crown and Government, and i hereby become Iru’'e n th a Zend ty'
the Law in Hieta upon filch OGcnccs; f^oh as Hrf_‘iturc*OF Life, co nil f.r lien or

Lands, See. Set- Au I 1 dt hereby funher declare all indent-1 Servant*, Ac/rejs,
or ochii'i, (ap’icrr.Hnriig t«» Rebels.) Mt that arc able and w* ling tv b-.;r Arr^s,
they joining U.W MAJESTY’* Trrope ai foon as m;y hr, for the more Iptctiily
reducing thi« Colony co a jwopcr Senfe of their Duty, to Hi:

Crown  and  Dignity.  I  dn  further  order,  and  require,  all  His  M?.jrrT»’»  Lt'^e
Subj<d<, to retain their Qiiii^cntt, or any other Taxes due er that m"y become

due, in their owivCtrflody, rill fueb T: ne M Peace m?y bo a~ain reftured to this

4

at prefent mod unhappy Country, or c cmandcJ nF them (ur t'uii* funner falu-

t.iry Purpnks by Officers properly authorikd to receive the lame.



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Picture:

GLOBAL GDP

Gross domestic product (GDP) serves as a barometer for a country’s
economic health. It measures the total market value of final goods
and services produced in a country during a given year.

Together, the U.S. and China account for 42% of global GDP.
Here is GDP by country according to IMF estimates.


- PHL

SO 39T

Japan


~ India

S2.95T

THAILAND

TAIWAN

17 COUNTRIES

®China

$16,861

nf Lhi               UH

both Japan (20 4      net mam

i j Bank

SWEDEN

OCEANIA*

13 COUNTRIES

C SWITZERLAND

SO 811


nited States

S22.9AT

i he finance. Insurance, and real
estate industry contributes
roughly S4.7T to U.S. GOP

Source: Statists

w POLAND

SO.661

France

£ SPAIN

S1.44T

*PRT

CZE

HUN UKR

REST OF
EUROPE

11 BELGIUM

$OJ58T


NIGERIA

;; DEN

Germany

NORWAY

RUSSIA
S1.65T


SOUTH
AFRICA

REST OF
AFRICA*

a nn

M.23T

HERLANDS


Very Briefly Noted:

•  Zachary D. Carter: Why We Love Rudolph'. a€~The red-nosed reindeera€’’brought to you by a 
department store, General Electric, and a Jewish songwritera€’’remains a fable about the American 
dreama€! 
<https://www.huffpost.com/entry/rudolph-the-red-nosed-reindeer-reinvented-christmas_n_5dfcda5ce4bQ84
3d35fac37f>

•  Martin Gurri: A Conversation About Liberal Democracy. a€~I dona€™ t believe what matters is this 
question of professionals or amateurs. What matters is the distance between rulers and ruled, 
which, under the principle of equality, should never be very great. And professional cliques 
invariably close ranks against outsiders and resist scrutiny or questioning. Fortunately, ita€™ s
not an all-or-nothing proposition^ I 
<https://www.hberalcurrents.com/a-conversation-about-liberal-democracy/>

•  Katsuji Nakazawa: When Chinaa€™ s Leading Paper Ignores Xi, All Bets Are Off: a€~How firm is 
Chinese President Xi Jinpinga€™ s grip over the country? His rejection of predecessors Deng 
Xiaoping, Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao is drawing pushback: Commentary piece extols Deng Xiaoping and 
successors but not Mao Zedonga€!<https://asia.nikkei.com/Editor-s-Picks/China-
up-close/Analysis-When-China-s-leading-paper-ignores-Xi-all-bets-are-off>

•  Aaron Rupar: Russiaa€™ s Descent into Authoritarianism & What We Can Learn from It: a€~a€oeThe 
opposition has collapseda€D: a Q&A with Sarah Hurst, author of The Russia Reporta€!



Public Notice

Russia's descent into authoritarianism and what we can learn from it

Enjoy this free edition of Public Notice. If youa€™ d like to get this newsletter directly in your 
inbox, please subscribe. Even free subscriptions are much appreciated. And if youa€™ d like to take 
part in a subscriber-only Q&A on Thursday or just want to a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 8 likes A- Aaron Rupar

•  Noah Smith: Greg Sargent on the Threat of Election Subversion: a€~Ita€™ s scary, but there are 
reasons for hope, and lots we can doa€!

Noahpinion

Video interview: Greg Sargent on the threat of election subversion

Greg Sargent is a political reporter at the Washington Post, who writes the Plum Line blog. He has 
consistently sounded the alarm about continued efforts by Trump supporters to pave the way for an 
even worse repeat of 2020s attempted election denial, and hasa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 18 likes A- 11 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Adam Gurri: Ending Safety as a Writer & a Reader: a€~James Baldwina€™ s great essay, a€oeThe 
White Mana€™ s Guilt.a€D The first time I read that essay, and every time since, I have been drawn 
to Baldwina€™ s description of a€oethose who imagine that history flatters thema€D as being 
a€oeimpaled on their history like a butterfly on a pina€D therebya€!
The End of Safety

Ending Safety as a Writer and a Reader

When I started The End of Safety, I was hoping to name it based on some phrase in James Baldwina€™ 
s great essay, a€oeThe White Mana€™ s Guilt ,a€D The first time I read that essay, and every time 
since, I have been drawn to Baldwina€™ s description of a€oethose who imagine that history flatters 
thema€D as being a€oeimpaled on their history like a butterfly on a pina€D thereby a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- 2 comments A- Adam Gurri

Paragraphs:

Alex Hochuli: The Brazilianization of the World: a€~Brazil is a middle-income country 
a€’’developed, modern, industrialized. But Brazil is also burdened by mass poverty, backwardness, 
and a political class that seems to have advanced little since its days as a slaveholding landed 
elitea€!. For the better-off societies in the South, now called a€oeemerging markets ,a€D 
neoliberal development
aped the tacit assumptions of modernization theory in assuming these countries were just 
a€oelate,a€D but that they would get there eventuallya€”they would become a€oelike us.a€D Just look 
at the shopping malls springing up in SA£o Paulo or Bangkok or Cairo!a€! Mexico, South Korea, and a 
handful of countries in Eastern Europe joined the OECD in the 1990s, with Chile following in
2010. It was only a matter of timea€!. [But] BrazilaCI finds itself stucka€! modern but not modern 
enougha€L The Global Northa€! todaya€! not just inequality and informalization of work, but 
increasingly venal elites, political volatility, and social ungluing. Is the rich world not also 
becoming a€oemodern but not modern enough,a€D but in reverse?a€!

LINK: <https://americanaffairsjournal.org/2021/05/the-brazilianization-of-the-world/>

Alvy Ray Smith: The Real Story of Pixar: a€~Pixar, at that point, was stilla€! a lousy hardware 
company. We faileda€! ran out of money and couldna€™t pay our bills or our employees. If wea€™d had 
any other investor than Steve, we would have been dead in the water. But at every 
failurea€’’presumably because Steve couldna€™t sustain the embarrassment that his next enterprise 
after the
Apple ouster would be a failurea€”hea€™ d berate those of us in managementaC! then write another 
checka€!. Then, at last, Moorea€™ s Law saved us. The ever-falling cost of processing power finally 
made The Movie economically feasible. We said we could make The Movie, and Disney stepped forward 
to finance it, saving Steve Jobsa€™ s face (and investment) and saving Pixar the
companya€!. Steve Jobsa€! was a hardware man. The Movie had been our dream and goal since the 
1970sa€!. During the next four years, Pixar completed The Moviea€”Toy Storya€”and it premiered in 
1995. Toy Story was wildly successful almost as soon as the movie was in the can. Pixar and Disney 
took it to New York City for a first glimpse by critics, and their enthusiasm was electrica€!

LINK: <https://spectrum.ieee .org/the-real-story-of-pixar>

Eric Topol: The Very Bad Day at the CDC: a€~the CDC performance is disappointing and unacceptable, 
despite high hopes and a boosted budget to perform well. This was a very bad day. We can ill afford 
any more of these. The pandemic has a ways to go into 2022. We need this federal agency to 
a€oestick to the sciencea€D as promised, provide critically important data in a timely way, and
avoid publishing alarming and erroneous data based on limited sampling. Leta€™ s hope for a 
turnaround as fast as one we hope to see with Omicrona€!

LINK:


Ground Truths

The very bad day at the CPC

One of my favorite books this year was Michael Lewisa€™ s The Premonition: A Pandemic Story, a 
page-turner in which he traced the problematic issues of the CPC long before and intra-Covid-19 and 
gave it a different acronym: CPOR, the Center for Disease Observation and Reports. I did ana€!

Read more

a year ago A- Eric Topol

Jeet Heer: The Global Crisis of the Center Right'. a€~A splintered right plays out differently in 
the two party system of the United Statesa€!. In a two party system, moderate conservatives are 
faced with a much starker choicea€!. Pisgusted by Trumpa€! [come] have become moderate Pemocrats. 
But that shift has been minora€!. Trump mostly held the Republican coalition together a€ I by
offering policies (conservative judges, a nationalist foreign policy, tax cuts) that pleased 
traditional Republican constituencies. Trumpism doesna€™ t seem to be costing the Republicans 
enough voters to create an incentive to give it upa€!. There could eventually be a political cost 
to Trumpism, but thata€™ s in the far futurea€!. Anti-establishment nationalists are likely to 
thrive in the United
States much more than elsewherea€!

LINK:


Ihe TIME of MONS TERS



<https ://w ww.y outube .com/watch?v= 11 ZozKfRqv A>

Put me down as a bigger fan of the a€oe Wheel of Timea€D TV series 
<https://www.amazon.com/Wheel-Time-Season-l/dp/B09F59CZ7R> than I was of the books. Strongly 
recommended. (Although I do think a€oeThe Expansea€D 
<https://www.primevideo.eom/detail/The-Expanse/OMW6F85MD8486AE43GONNOR5Fl> is better.)

