Subscribe now

CONDITION: Healthy Payroll Employment Growth

The big question: How does healthy payroll growtha€”263,000 seasonally-adjusted in Septembera€”fit 
with what appears to be very low, in fact nearly zero, real income and expenditure growth?

X

Justin Wolfers @JustinWolfers

Payrolls rose a robust +263k in September, a touch above expectations. Unemployment down a tick to 
3.5%, equal to the lowest level in fifty years. Revisions also positive. This is an economy that's 
still growing nicely. All that recession talk was empty.
12:32 PM r™ Oct 7, 2022

1,512Likes533Re tweets

I confess I am Team a€oeThe Fed Should Pausea€D right now. Is that simply because I am not updating 
my beliefs fast enough in response to new dataa€’’especially to the news that is the OPEC+ price 
cut? Or is the Fed being stupid, and following a knee-jerk reaction function in which it raises 
rates as long as a lagging indicator is not indicating recessiona€”a policy rule that guarantees 
stop-go overshoot, and almost guarantees a big recession in our future?
Share

FIRST: Lessons from Slouching Towards Utopia for Today?

What seems to me to be a very smart meditation on the relationship between economic history, 
economic theory, and economic policy:

Zach Carter: On Economic History: a€~Brad DeLong's new book Slouching Towards Utopia 
<bit.ly/3pP3Krk> offers a corrective to months of madness: I reviewed Brad DeLong's long-awaited 
Slouching Towards Utopia for the good people at Dissenta€!. Go read my review, then go read Brad's 
booka€!. Brada€! knew he was swinging for the fences and he cared about getting it right. There's 
an intellectual flexibility at work in the book that I find
really admirable, even when I don't necessarily agreea€!.

Economic history isa€! unusual field. Good economists study it closely, but there is nevertheless 
an allergy to history in some cornersa€!. Economists who love math think stories about the past are 
unscientific, and theya€™re right. But numbers without narrative are meaninglessa€!. Understanding 
economics from an historical perspective helps demystify ita€”we come to grips with how different 
economic policy initiatives are supposed to work,
and what problems they were developed to solvea€i. Starting with the financial crisis of 2008, a 
lot of smart people who had taken the economic orthodoxy of the 1990s for granted started to look 
more carefully at its intellectual and political rootsa€! discarded the strictest elements of the 
1990s orthodoxy for free trade and balanced budgetsa€! acknowledged that budget deficits are not 
the apocalyptic threat they were once presented to bea€!
monetary policy is not the ideal or only appropriate tool for economic management, that austerity 
is politically dangerous, and that under-investment and unemployment are the most serious economic 
problems facing the worlda€!.

Over the past few months, however, we've watched central banks in Europe and the United States 
pivot to what strikes me as an indefensibly bleak view of economic managements’’the insistence that 
higher interest rates and higher unemployment are not only an effective way to combat inflation, 
but also somehow humane and, in any case, unavoidablea€!. One day Larry Summers says we need 
sustained, high unemployment to cure inflation, and
the next he points out that unemployment is jet fuel for fascism. Jason Furman rails against 
student debt relief as a 0.2 percent tax on the poor, and then calls to add more than four million 
names to the unemployment rolls. If you are concerned about the plight of the poor, in my view, it 
is a bad idea to throw them out of work by the millions, especially if you think doing so will 
enhance the appeal of authoritarian politicsa€!.

In June, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell was thoughtfully emphasizing the limits of monetary 
policya€l. Gas prices are down dramatically since June, and to the limited extent that inflation 
expectations can be quantified in financial markets, those expectations have been falling for 
months. And yet with no apparent revision to his summertime framework, Powell abruptly vowed in 
September to continue tightening monetary policy until
inflation disappears, all consequences for employment, investment and social stability be damned. 
Nor is this a strictly American problema€!. Nobody can really say why we have to throw so many 
people out of work, but apparently everyone really wants to do ita€!.

And do read the review.
Let me set out a few quick points:

1. Economic theory can be nothing other than distilled or crystalized economic history a€’’after 
all, what else can it possibly be?

2. When applied to policy issues, people relying on economic theory need to realize that it is not 
only concentrated historical examples and analogies, but also that it has been adulterated with 
ideologya€’’and they had better hope the adulterant is only oregano, and not something like peyote.

3. Why is it adulterated with ideology? Because every single generation since 1870 has been trying 
to figure out how to cobble together, running Econo social code on top of a brand new set of 
technological forces of production. Since the technological forces of production are brand new, 
there is no experience to guide us. andsince pretending that things are working,even when they are 
not can get you another year or decade or generation in power, the standard
move becomes "my ideas did not fail: they were failed". And thus history gets contaminated with 
ideology.

4. How reliable are the underlying historical examples and analogies? Not at all. Every generation, 
as I just said, face is the problem of building, Econo, social software code for humanity that will 
run on top of a brand new set of technologically enabled forces of production hardware. Thus 
claiming that our problem, today is essentially the sameas the problem of anypast generation is 
certain to be wrong.

5. Since 1870 we have been continually in the situation that teams warned us about back in 1924: 
a€oeWe lack more than usual a coherent scheme of progress, a tangible ideal. All the political 
parties alike have their origins in past ideas and not in new ideas.... No one has a gospel. The 
next move is with the   heada€!a€D

6. With respect to Larry Summers's views of our current inflation problem... Look: There were and 
are three dangers: (1) insufficient support for a struggling economy that lands us back in 
secular-stagnation semi-permanent depression, as happened in 2010; (2) insufficient monetary 
tightening at the appropriate time that lands us in stagflation; (3) a Federal Reserve that does 
not react early to a strengthening economy and then, when it feels it has fallen behind the
curve, panics, and so lands us back into (1) after a short episode of (2).

Larry is right to worry about (3), and looks to have wise and prescient with his early warnings 
about how it would be advisable not to get into a situation in which (3) was a danger.
But we have, and it now is.

Would Larry look prescient but for Vladimir Putin, OPEC+, and Biden's choice of a highly competent 
Republican Worthy rather than a Democratic macroeconomist to lead the Fed through this?
Perhaps not.

But I will certainly not die on the hill of claiming that he would not.

5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

3.0

A     A

...


My view? If the bond-market five-year-ahead five-year breakeven inflation ratea€”what the bond 
market a€ceexpectsa€D inflation to be between 5 and 10 years from nowa€”is above 2.8%, it is a 
clear sign from the bond market that the Feda€™ s monetary policy is not restrictive enough, not 
because the bond market is infallible but because bond market expectations of inflation are a 
driver of inflation. If bond-market five-year-ahead five-year breakeven
inflation ratea€”what the bond market a€ceexpectsa€D inflation to be between 5 and 10 years from 
nowa€”is below 2.3%, it is a clear sign from the bond market that the Feda€™ s monetary policy is 
too tight. This sign is not dispositive. Other things enter into the general expectations that 
matter than the bond marketa€™ s view. Specifically prices at the gas pump have a lot to do with 
consumer inflation expectations.

But here in the U.S. there are no signs of the bond-market vigilantes who showed up in Little 
England last week

UK 10 year Gilt

UK10YG

YIELD TODAY'S CHANGE            1 YEAR CHANGE

4.26 1 0.023 / 0.54% ♦ +293.72%

Summary     Charts


1D 3D 1W 1M 6M 1Y 3Y 5Y                                                                 Comparisons

4.00

3.00

2.00

1.00


January July
2018

January July
2019

January
2020

July         January

2021

July        January

2022

July


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-LISTEN: Charles Ignatius Sancho; From Slavery to High Society

Dan Snow & Patterson Joseph: a€~Charles Ignatius Sancho was born on a slave ship crossing the 
Atlantic Ocean, in what was known as the Middle Passage. He was soon orphaned and then brought to 
England, where he was enslaved in Greenwich, London, by three sisters who opposed any attempt at 
education. So how did Charles Ignatius Sancho later go on to meet the King, write and play highly 
acclaimed music, become the first Black person to vote in Britain and
lead the fight to end slavery? Paterson Joseph is an actor and writer. Paterson joins Dan on the 
podcast to share Sanchoa€™ s extraordinary storya€” a€<one that begins on a tempestuous Atlantic 
Ocean, and ends at the very centre of London lifea€!

<https://overcast.fm/+GH8ICofOw>
Leave a comment

One Image: French Usage


A friend
or lover

Someone you
don't formally
know

Your          Your          Your          Your
spouse father-in-law            boss         teacher


Tu            God?

NO

Is your spouse
former President
Jacques Chirac?

Best
to ask

Do you work
at a company
like Le Google
where no one
wears neckties
and everyone
is “tu"?

Is your
teacher
young
enough to be
your daugh­
ter or son?


Vous    YES

Is this someone
considerably
older (say, a
half generation
or more) than
you?

NO     Tu

YES   Vous

NO

Vous


SWEAR
TO GOD

Tu

NO

Did you participate in the
French May 1968 riots
demanding government
reform and free love?

YES

Come on.

really?       YES

OK. MAYBE NOT

NO

T

Were you at

Woodstock?

This is a “vous" situ­
ation. Except... did
your boss just really
tick you off. and you
want him to know it?

Tu       Vous



Do you consider this person a peer,
that is, a fellow student, the coworker
in the next cubicle, an Internet chat
room acquaintance, or someone you

met in a bar last night and just woke

► Vous       Do you feel
lucky? Well, do

you, punk?


up next to?

-v--o-u--sz<vCn

EI—gx.

Tu

Give a gift subscription

Must-Read: What Is Going on with Muskker?

Elon Musk gets his three-week stay of his deposition, and the subsequent trial, over the objections 
of Twitter. But what price did he pay for it?

Chance: The Chancery Daily: a€~Judicial estoppela€!. The theory would only apply if the relief was 
granted, just merely filing the brief doesn't do ita€!. I go to look up judicial estoppela€!. I 
come to Twin Willows! The last specific performance, prevention doctrine case we covered back in 
August!a€!

Judicial estoppel “prevents a
litigant from advancing an argument that contradicts a position previously taken that the
court was persuaded to accept as the basis for its ruling.’’ Motorola Inc. v. Amkor Tech.,
Inc., 958 A.2d 852, 859 (Del. 2008).


The thing to do now is to comb back through the letter brief 
<https://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/23126626/musk-01-motion-to-stay-w-cos.pdf> and figure out 
what this really sticks them with, and how damning it could be for the bulk of Musk's merits cases, 
defenses, and counterclaims.

The theory would be that Chancellor McCormick saw Muska€™ s claim that, never mind all the problems 
with Twittera€™ s behavior they had seen, he a€oeagreed to do exactlya€D consummating the closing, 
and granted Musk his stay in reliance upon this representation. Thus Chancellor McCormick will 
then, if the closing does not happen on October 28, rule that Musk has estopped himself from 
claiming that the problems he had seen are sufficient to release him from
his obligation to buy Twitter at $54.20 a share. The idea is that you can make alternative 
arguments in the hope that the judge buys one of them, but that once a judge has bought one of your 
arguments, you are stuck with it.

Interesting theory.

Get 25% off a group subscription

MO AR Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Colby Smith: US employment growth cooled in September: a€~263,000 positions added last month as 
Federal Reserve rate rises take effecta€L The data, released on Friday, come just days after 
figures showed employers slashed more than Imn job openings in Augusta€”one of the sharpest monthly 
declines in two decades. That pushed the ratio of job vacancies to unemployed people down from 2 to 
1.7a€!

• Lucio Russo: The Forgotten Revolution: How Science Was Born in 300 BC and Why It Had to Be 
Reborna€l

•  John Culver: How We Would Know When China Is Preparing to Invade Taiwan: a€~If China has 
actually decided to go to war with Taiwana€! how would we know?a€!. It almost certainly would not 
be subtlea€!. China would have already started surging productiona€! tak[ing] visible steps to 
insulate its economy, military, and key industries from disruptions and sanctionsa€! preparing 
their people psychologically for the costs of wara€!

•  Adrian Kennedy and Alice Truong: Our Best Reads of the Week: a€~Ita€™ s bad for one person to 
wield too much power for too long, Clara Ferreira Marques writes for Bloomberg Opinion. The long 
tenure of Putin, now 70, helps explain his a€oecrippling paranoia, imperialist obsessions and 
insulation.a€!

•  Jamie Dupree: Democrats After voting against aid, Florida Republicans now want help ASAP: a€~A 
group of U.S. House Republicans from Floridaa€”who last week all voted against $18.9 billion in 
disaster relief for FEMAa€”now want Congress to quickly approve a disaster relief bill to aid 
Florida victims of Hurricane Iana€!. Ten years agoa€! Florida Republicans voted against Hurricane 
Sandy reliefa€’’because it helped repair federal facilities damaged
by Hurricane Sandy. But Republicans said that was porka€!

•  Jonathan Bernstein: Why Republicans Wound Up With Herschel Walker: a€~Walkera€™ s other ugly 
personal historya€l pointed a gun at his ex-wifea€™ s heada€! had multiple secret childrena€!

•  Janice Eberly: The Value of Intangible Capital: a€~Special properties of intangibles allow firms 
to essentially expand at will, at least in some dimensions. Jonathan Haskell, Paul Mizen, and I 
show that this turned out to be especially useful during the COVID-19 pandemica€!

• Gita Gopinath Managing a Turn in the Global Financial Cycle: a€~When a countrya€™ s financial 
markets are deep and its debt is well below the debt limit, the textbook prescription of relying 
exclusively on interest rates and flexible exchange rates can work well. But there are other cases 
when such a policy response does not sufficea€!
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

