Subscribe now

The future of integrated electronics is the future of electronics itself. The advantages of 
integration will bring about a proliferation of electronics, pushing this science into many new 
areas.

Integrated circuits will lead to such wonders as home computersa€”or at least terminals connected 
to a central computera€’’automatic controls for automobiles, and personal portable communications 
equipment. The electronic wristwatch needs only a display to be feasible today.
But the biggest potential lies in the production of large systems. In telephone communications, 
integrated circuits in digital filters will separate channels on multiplex equipment. Integrated 
circuits will also switch telephone circuits and perform data processing.

Computers will be more powerful, and will be organized in completely different ways. For example, 
memories built of integrated electronics may be distributed throughout the machine instead of being 
concentrated in a central unit. In addition, the improved reliability made possible by integrated 
circuits will allow the construction of larger processing units. Machines similar to those in 
existence today will be built at lower costs and with faster turn-around.
Share

I. PRESENT AND FUTURE

By integrated electronics, I mean all the various technologies which are referred to as 
microelectronics today as well as any additional ones that result in electronics functions supplied 
to the user as irreducible units. These technologies were first investigated in the late 1950a€™ s. 
The object was to miniaturize electronics equipment to include increasingly complex electronic 
functions in limited space with minimum weight. Several approaches evolved,
including microassembly techniques for individual components, thin-film structures, and 
semiconductor integrated circuits.

Each approach evolved rapidly and converged so that each borrowed techniques from another. Many 
researchers believe the way of the future to be a combination of the various approaches.

The advocates of semiconductor integrated circuitry are already using the improved characteristics 
of thin-film resistors by applying such films directly to an active semi-conductor substrate. Those 
advocating a technology based upon films are developing sophisticated techniques for the attachment 
of active semiconductor devices to the passive film arrays.
Both approaches have worked well and are being used in equipment today.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

IL THE ESTABLISHMENT

Integrated electronics is established today. Its techniques are almost mandatory for new military 
systems, since the reliability, size, and weight required by some of them is achievable only with 
integration. Such programs as Apollo, for manned moon flight, have demonstrated the reliability of 
integrated electronics by showing that complete circuit functions are as free from failure as the 
best individual transistors.
Most companies in the commercial computer field have machines in design or in early production 
employing inte- grated electronics. These machines cost less and perform better than those which 
use a€ceconventionala€O electronics.

Instruments of various sorts, especially the rapidly in- creasing numbers employing digital 
techniques, are starting to use integration because it cuts costs of both manufacture and design.

The use of linear integrated circuitry is still restricted primarily to the military. Such 
integrated functions are ex- pensive and not available in the variety required to satisfy a major 
fraction of linear electronics. But the first applications are beginning to appear in commercial 
electronics, partic- ularly in equipment which needs low-frequency amplifiers of small size.

HI. RELIABILITY COUNTS

In almost every case, integrated electronics has demon- strated high reliability. Even at the 
present level of productiona€”low compared to that of discrete componentsa€”it offers reduced 
systems cost, and in many systems improved performance has been realized.

Integrated electronics will make electronic techniques more generally available throughout all of 
society, performing many functions that presently are done inadequately by other techniques or not 
done at all. The principal advantages will be lower costs and greatly simplified designa€’’payoffs 
from a ready supply of low-cost functional packages.

For most applications, semiconductor integrated circuits will predominate. Semiconductor devices 
are the only rea- sonable candidates presently in existence for the active elements of integrated 
circuits. Passive semiconductor el- ements look attractive too, because of their potential for low 
cost and high reliability, but they can be used only if precision is not a prime requisite.

Silicon is likely to remain the basic material, although others will be of use in specific 
applications. For example, gallium arsenide will be important in integrated microwave functions. 
But silicon will predominate at lower frequencies because of the technology which has already 
evolved around it and its oxide, and because it is an abundant and relatively inexpensive starting 
material.

IV. COSTS AND CURVES

Reduced cost is one of the big attractions of integrated electronics, and the cost advantage 
continues to increase as the technology evolves toward the production of larger and larger circuit 
functions on a single semiconductor substrate. For simple circuits, the cost per component is 
nearly inversely proportional to the number of components, the result of the equivalent piece of 
semiconductor in the equivalent package containing more components. But as
components are added, decreased yields more than compensate for the increased complexity, tending 
to raise the cost per component. Thus there is a minimum cost at any given time in the evolution of 
the technology. At present, it is reached when 50 components are used per circuit. But the minimum 
is rising rapidly while the entire cost curve is falling (see graph). If we look ahead five years, 
a plot of costs suggests that the minimum cost per component might
be expected in circuits with about 1000 components per circuit (providing such circuit functions 
can be produced in moderate quantities). In 1970, the manufacturing cost per component can be 
expected to be only a tenth of the present cost.

The complexity for minimum component costs has in- creased at a rate of roughly a factor of two per 
year (see graph). Certainly over the short term this rate can be expected to continue, if not to 
increase. Over the longer term, the rate of increase is a bit more uncertain, although there is no 
reason to believe it will not remain nearly constant for at least ten years. That means by 1975, 
the number of components per integrated circuit for minimum cost will be
65000.

I believe that such a large circuit can be built on a single wafer.

io5

IO4

io5


< IO h
UJ

< I ------------------ 1   .   1       I       I     

w I 10 io2 io3 io4 io5

NUMBER OF COMPONENTS PER INTEGRATED
CIRCUIT

Fig. 1.

V. TWO-MIL SQUARES

With the dimensional tolerances already being employed in integrated circuits, isolated 
high-performance transistors can be built on centers two-thousandths of an inch apart. Such a 
two-mil square can also contain several kilohms of resistance or a few diodes. This allows at least 
500 components per linear inch or a quarter million per square inch. Thus, 65000 components need 
occupy only about one-fourth a square inch.

On the silicon wafer currently used, usually an inch or more in diameter, there is ample room for 
such a structure if the components can be closely packed with no space wasted for interconnection 
patterns. This is realistic, since efforts to achieve a level of complexity above the presently 
available integrated circuits are already under way using multilayer metallization patterns 
separated by dielectric films. Such a density of components can be achieved by present
optical techniques and does not require the more exotic techniques, such as electron beam 
operations, which are being studied to make even smaller structures.

VI. INCREASING THE YIELD

There is no fundamental obstacle to achieving device yields of 100%. At present, packaging costs so 
far exceed the cost of the semiconductor structure itself that there is no incentive to improve 
yields, but they can be raised as high as is economically justified. No barrier exists comparable 
to the thermodynamic equilibrium considerations that often limit yields in chemical reactions; it 
is not even necessary to do any fundamental research or to replace present
processes. Only the engineering effort is needed.

In the early days of integrated circuitry, when yields were extremely low, there was such 
incentive. Today ordinary integrated circuits are made with yields comparable with those obtained 
for individual semiconductor devices. The same pattern will make larger arrays economical, if other 
considerations make such arrays desirable.


LOGe OF THE
NUMBER OF COMPONENTS
PER INTEGRATED FUNCTION



Fig. 3.

YEAR

VII. HEAT PROBLEM

Will it be possible to remove the heat generated by tens of thousands of components in a single 
silicon chip?

If we could shrink the volume of a standard high-speed digital computer to that required for the 
components themselves, we would expect it to glow brightly with present power dissipation. But it 
wona€™t happen with integrated circuits. Since integrated electronic structures are two 
dimensional, they have a surface available for cooling close to each center of heat generation. In 
addition, power is needed primarily to drive the various lines and capacitances
associated with the system. As long as a function is confined to a small area on a wafer, the 
amount of capacitance which must be driven is distinctly limited. In fact, shrinking dimensions on 
an integrated structure makes it possible to operate the structure at higher speed for the same 
power per unit area.

VIII. DAY OF RECKONING

Clearly, we will be able to build such component-crammed equipment. Next, we ask under what 
circumstances we should do it. The total cost of making a particular system function must be 
minimized. To do so, we could amortize the engineering over several identical items, or evolve 
flexible techniques for the engineering of large functions so that no disproportionate expense need 
be borne by a particular array. Perhaps newly devised design automation
procedures could translate from logic diagram to technological realization without any special 
engineering.

It may prove to be more economical to build large systems out of smaller functions, which are 
separately pack- aged and interconnected. The availability of large functions, combined with 
functional design and construction, should allow the manufacturer of large systems to design and 
construct a considerable variety of equipment both rapidly and economically.

IX. LINEAR CIRCUITRY

Integration will not change linear systems as radically as digital systems. Still, a considerable 
degree of integration will be achieved with linear circuits. The lack of large-value capacitors and 
inductors is the greatest fundamental limitation to integrated electronics in the linear area.

By their very nature, such elements require the storage of energy in a volume. For high it is 
necessary that the volume be large. The incompatibility of large volume and integrated electronics 
is obvious from the terms themselves. Certain resonance phenomena, such as those in piezoelectric 
crystals, can be expected to have some applications for tuning functions, but inductors and 
capacitors will be with us for some time.
The integrated RF amplifier of the future might well consist of integrated stages of gain, giving 
high performance at minimum cost, interspersed with relatively large tuning elements.

Other linear functions will be changed considerably. The matching and tracking of similar 
components in integrated structures will allow the design of differential amplifiers of greatly 
improved performance. The use of thermal feedback effects to stabilize integrated structures to a 
small fraction of a degree will allow the construction of oscillators with crystal stability.

Even in the micro wave area, structures included in the definition of integrated electronics will 
become increasingly important. The ability to make and assemble components small compared with the 
wavelengths involved will allow the use of lumped parameter design, at least at the lower 
frequencies. It is difficult to predict at the present time just how extensive the invasion of the 
micro wave area by integrated electronics will be. The successful realization of
such items as phased-array antennas, for example, using a multiplicity of integrated micro wave 
power sources, could completely revolutionize radar.

G. E. Moore is one of the new breed of electronic engineers, schooled in the physical sci- ences 
rather than in electronics. He earned a B.S. degree in chemistry from the University of California 
and a Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from the California Institute of Technology. He was one of 
the founders of Fairchild Semiconductor and has been Director of the research and development 
laboratories since 1959.

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


Even in the micro wave area, structures included in the definition of integrated electronics will 
become increasingly important. The ability to make and assemble components small compared with the 
wavelengths involved will allow the use of lumped parameter design, at least at the lower 
frequencies. It is difficult to predict at the present time just how extensive the invasion of the 
micro wave area by integrated electronics will be. The successful realization of
such items as phased-array antennas, for example, using a multiplicity of integrated micro wave 
power sources, could completely revolutionize radar.

G. E. Moore is one of the new breed of electronic engineers, schooled in the physical sci- ences 
rather than in electronics. He earned a B.S. degree in chemistry from the University of California 
and a Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from the California Institute of Technology. He was one of 
the founders of Fairchild Semiconductor and has been Director of the research and development 
laboratories since 1959.
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

