Subscribe now

First:

You cannot write a history of the 20th century without it, some time, grappling with the 
irresolvable question of whether there were two totalitarian movements in the 20th century or 
whether there was only one. George Orwell is very strong on the side that there is only one. And, 
in spite of himself, post-World War II English Marxist historian E.P. Thompson, one of the three 
great post-WWII English Marxistsa€’’Thompson, Hobsbawm, Milibanda€”is on
Orwella€™ s side of this as well.

Not, I hasten to say, that Thompson argues on Orwella€™ s side. Rather, he illustrates and 
validates it.

Here he is in the early 1970s, issuing a complaint against Polish ex-Communist Leszek Kolakowski. 
His major complaint? Not that Kolakowski tells lies about really-existing socialism. It is that 
Kolakowski tells the truth about it, and because he tells the truth in ways and places that 
Thompson thinks he should not, he commits unforgivable sins: the sin against the Holy Ghost. But 
when did Thompson think you should tell the truth? At the time he wrote his

Open Letter to Leszek Kolakowski, the answer was a€oenowhere and nowhena€D:

E.P. Thompson (1973): An Open Letter to Leszek Kolakowski'. a€~My criticisms of socialist reality 
have always been made in socialist journalsa€!. When I can no longer criticize socialism from such 
an unmistakeable anti-capitalist standpoint, I will fall silenta€!. No word of mine will wittingly 
be added to the comforts of that old bitch gone in the teeth, consumer capitalisma€L The apologists 
of capitalism appear with newly-soaped
faces, and offer their beast as a beast of changed nature. But I know that that beast is not 
changeda€!.

Capitalist ideology isa€! a very ancient hegemonya€! so assured that it can dispense with many of 
the more vulgar institutional means of imposing orthodoxya€!. Even the role of the Jester, which is 
a role you chose for yourself in the East, is a role which must be played with discretion. For the 
jester, if he jests in all company and jests unwisely, may provide arguments which acquire a 
different meaning when employed by the subalterns
of the Emperora€!.

Filmsa€! of revolutionary disenchantmenta€! [were] first made in about 1792a€!. A powerful version 
was made in the 1930s and it has been running to packed houses ever since. The reactive pattern, by 
which disenchantment in revolutionary aspirations leads on, after creative difficulties and 
conflicts, to ultimate reconciliation with the pre-existent status quoa€”or even zealous 
ideological partisanship on behalf of the status quoa€”is
deeply inscribed within western culture. And it has, within capitalist ideology today, a very 
important confirmatory and legitimating functiona€!.

Your predicament in this respect was anticipated by [Alasdair] MacIntyre as early as 1958: a€oeThe 
reassertion of moral standards by the individual voice has been one of the ferments of Eastern 
European revisionism^!. [But] one cannot revive the moral content within Marxism by simply taking a 
Stalinist view of historical development and adding liberal morality to it. Buthowever one 
maydisagreewith Kolakowskia€™ s theoretical
position, the kind of integrity involved in reasserting moral principles in the Polish situation is 
entirely admirablea€!. But to assert this position in the West is to flow with the stream. It is 
merely to conform.a€Da€! MacIntyre does less than justice to your thought at that time. But in 
coming to the Westa€! as you have done, you appear to fulfil a fifteen-year-old predictiona€!

LINK: <https ://www.marxists .org/archive/thompson-ep/1973/kolakowski .htm> [Alasdair MacIntyre, 
Notes from the Moral Wilderness, I, op. cit., p.93.]

Note that Thompson is not alone. I have elsewhere talked about his peer Eric Hobsbawm. And their 
peer Ralph Miliband strongly, strongly objected to North Vietnama€™ s overthrow of the Khmer Rouge 
and thus the interruption of the Cambodian genocide. Why? Because it washed the movementa€™ s dirty 
linen in public <https://www.marxists.org/archive/miliband/1980/xx/intervention,html>. In allcases 
thelogic seems to be this: Themovement has set a
direction, and once that direction has been set the Leader (or the Leadership) must not be 
questioned, for the most important thing is for the Party to present a unified, united phalanx to 
the outside world.

It is because of this attraction of follow-our-leader-right-or-wrong-and-especially-when-wrong that 
I come down mostly on the side of only one totalitarianism: a doctrine that claimed that the fatal 
flaw in liberal capitalist democracy was that it did not understand that people needed to be led by 
a leader or leader. The sources of the leader or leadersa€™ legitimacy differed: either an insight 
into the laws of historical materialism and its plan for humanity or a
charisma that enabled the setting of nationalist, communitarian, and ethnic power-goals that gave 
meaning to the fife of the leader or leadersa€™ subjects. But, still, the same-old same-old.

Later on, as of 1978, Thompson did somewhat change his mind, and would cry out a€oedoes the 
suppression of reason, and the obliteration of the imagination, have any place on a€~the Lefta€™ 
?a€da€’’without seeming to notice that he had been eager to deploy that slogan against the washing 
of really-existing socialisma€™ s linen in public as late as 1973 
<https://archive.org/details/povertyoftheoryoQ0thom/mode/2up>a€!
Share


One Picture:

12000

11000

10000

9000

8000

7nnn

Waves of COVID-19 cases in Gauteng

Dr Ridhwaan Suliman
twitter: @rid1 tweets



Paragraphs:

Leszek Kolakowski: My Correct Views on Everything: Reply to E.P. Thompson'. a€~The national health 
service, you say, is impoverished by the existence of private practice, equality in education is 
spoilt because people are trained for private industry, etc. You do not say that all reforms are 
doomed to failure, you only explain that as long as reforms do not destroy capitalism, capitalism 
is not destroyed, which is rtainly true. And you propose a€oea peaceful
revolutionary transition to an alternative socialist logica€D. You think apparently that this makes 
perfectly clear what you mean; I think, on the contrary, that it is perfectly obscure unless, 
again, you imagine that once the total state ownership of factories is granted, there remain only 
minor technical problems on the road to your utopiaa€!

LINK: chttps://socialistregister.com/index.php/srv/article/view/5323/2224>

Mohamed A. El-Erian: Can the Fed Overcome Its Transitory Policy Mistake?'. a€~The later the US 
Federal Reserve is in reacting properly to inflationary developments, the greater the likelihood 
that it will have to hit the policy brakes hard, causing market turmoil and unnecessary economic 
pain. The Fed must now do two things quickly. CAMBRIDGE a€“ It took way too long, but key officials 
at the US Federal Reserve have finally acknowledged that for
months they mischaracterized an inflationary surge that has proven larger and more persistent than 
they expected. That recognition is welcome, especially given the likelihood that inflation will 
remain uncomfortably high in the coming months. The challenge now, not just for the Fed but also 
more broadly for the United States and other major economies, is to navigate a policy terrain in 
which communication and implementation have been rendered significantly
more complex by a fundamental misreading of inflation as a€cetransitorya€da€l

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/us-federal-reserve-transitory-inflation-trap-bv-mohame
d-a-el-erian-2021-12>

Michael Hiltzik: Why Do We Fear Inflation?'. a€~Therea€™ s a right way and a wrong way to think 
about inflation. Herea€™ s a right waya€!. There are no signs that the inflation surge showing up 
in the latest statistics is caused by sustained overheating of the U.S. economy. The signs point to 
several short-term factors coming together all at oncea€!
LINK: <https://www.latimes .com/business/story/2021-11 
-26/right-way-and-wrong-way-to-think-about-inflation>

Victor Shih: a€™ Agree that a century is not meaningfully divided right at the year 00. For me, the 
20th century began in 1914 and ended in 2020. The 1910s saw the collapse or diminution of land 
based monarchies or nobilities in England, Russia and China, who had managed to hang on despite 
industrialization. So from the end of the agrarian economy (in a global sense) to the beginning of 
the attention economy? That before 1924 the industrial sector had
still been more the servant than the master of the agrarian economy? And after 2020 industrial 
capacity was no longer a constraints’’that the key was to grab consumer attention rather than build 
or buy factory time/spacea€!

LINK:

Victor Shih @vshih2

@delong @jfurlan!4 @RajaKorman Thanks thata€™ s my quick thought
12:42 AM r™ Nov 29,2021

David French: The Fox News Distortion Field & Other Media Maladies'. a€~Ita€™ s now been a little 
more than a week since my friends, colleagues, and Dispatch co-founders Steve Hayes and Jonah 
Goldberg announced their resignations from Fox News. After days of online vitriol (and support), 
the dust has settled a bit, and ita€™ s worth reflecting a bit on what they did and why it 
mattereda€!. There are a few things you should notice. First, Fox is the 800-
pound gorilla of conservative media. Unlike the more competitive environment in legacy media, where 
no single outlet comes close to comparable dominance, Fox isna€™ t just first, ita€™ s first by a 
milea€!. Second, look at whoa€™ s surging. Fox is in a state of very modest decline, most other 
sites are declining at a much faster rate, but the two outlets making dramatic gainsa€”the Epoch 
Times and Newsmaxa€”are, if anything, more aggressive than

Fox. Third, look at the utterly dreadful quality of many of the outlets on the lista€!. And of 
course Fox doesna€™ t just dominate online, it dominates on televisions!. Fox is conservative 
media, and almost everything that is not Fox is some variation on the Fox products!. IS™ m reminded 
of the awesome power of Rush Limbaugh during his early riseS!. New right-wing voices are often 
engaged in a de facto audition for that coveted Fox airtime. That
reality, combined with FoxS™ s own aggressive defense of its brand, is one reason why so very 
little right-wing Soemedia criticismSD is aimed at the largest, most powerful, and most profitable 
cable network in the land. Fox broadcasts Seth Rich conspiracies? Memory-holed. Fox gave airtime to 
Kraken lawyers? Well, they were just asking questions. Its streaming platform airs a deranged 
Patriot Purge documentary that re-imagines the reality of January 6?
Nobody watches Fox Nation anywayS!. Look again at the list of the top 20 conservative outlets. How 
many reliably highlight FoxS™ s errors unless theyS™ re attempting to scrape off part of their 
pro-Trump market share?S! The cultural and political consequences in the right-wing grassroots are 
considerables!. Activists donS™ t know what they donS™ t know in part because telling them the 
truth in right-wing spaces carries a costS”and not just in
reader disapproval. Fox, the most potent player in the market, will be displeased, and when it is 
displeased the ceiling on your career gets a little bit lower. And who needs that? After all, why 
focus on Fox? IS™ m sure the Washington Post has screwed something up. Leta€™ s take a look over 
therea€!

T INK-


Victor Shih @vshih2

@ delong @ jfurlan!4 @ Raj aKorman Thanks thata€™ s my quick thought
12:42 AM r™ Nov 29,2021

David French: The Fox News Distortion Field & Other Media Maladies'. a€~Ita€™ s now been a little 
more than a week since my friends, colleagues, and Dispatch co-founders Steve Hayes and Jonah 
Goldberg announced their resignations from Fox News. After days of online vitriol (and support), 
the dust has settled a bit, and ita€™ s worth reflecting a bit on what they did and why it 
mattereda€!. There are a few things you should notice. First, Fox is the 800-
pound gorilla of conservative media. Unlike the more competitive environment in legacy media, where 
no single outlet comes close to comparable dominance, Fox isna€™ t just first, ita€™ s first by a 
milea€!. Second, look at whoa€™ s surging. Fox is in a state of very modest decline, most other 
sites are declining at a much faster rate, but the two outlets making dramatic gainsa€”the Epoch 
Times and Newsmaxa€”are, if anything, more aggressive than

Fox. Third, look at the utterly dreadful quality of many of the outlets on the lista€!. And of 
course Fox doesna€™ t just dominate online, it dominates on televisional. Fox is conservative 
media, and almost everything that is not Fox is some variation on the Fox producta€l. Ia€™ m 
reminded of the awesome power of Rush Limbaugh during his early risea€l. New right-wing voices are 
often engaged in a de facto audition for that coveted Fox airtime. That
reality, combined with Foxa€™ s own aggressive defense of its brand, is one reason why so very 
little right-wing a€oemedia criticisma€D is aimed at the largest, most powerful, and most 
profitable cable network in the land. Fox broadcasts Seth Rich conspiracies? Memory-holed. Fox gave 
airtime to Kraken lawyers? Well, they were just asking questions. Its streaming platform airs a 
deranged Patriot Purge documentary that re-imagines the reality of January 6?
Nobody watches Fox Nation anywaya€l. Look again at the list of the top 20 conservative outlets. How 
many reliably highlight Foxa€™ s errors unless theya€™ re attempting to scrape off part of their 
pro-Trump market share?a€! The cultural and political consequences in the right-wing grassroots are 
considerablea€!. Activists dona€™ t know what they dona€™ t know in part because telling them the 
truth in right-wing spaces carries a costa€”and not just in
reader disapproval. Fox, the most potent player in the market, will be displeased, and when it is 
displeased the ceiling on your career gets a little bit lower. And who needs that? After all, why 
focus on Fox? Ia€™ m sure the Washington Post has screwed something up. Leta€™ s take a look over 
therea€!

LINK:

The Fox News Distortion Field and Other Media Maladies

Ita€™ s now been a little more than a week since my friends, colleagues, and Dispatch co-founders 
Steve Hayes and Jonah Goldberg announced their resignations from Fox News. After days of online 
vitriol (and support), the dust has settled a bit, and ita€™ s worth reflecting a bit on what they 
did and why it mattereda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 317 likes A- 514 comments A- David French
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


The French Press

The Fox News Distortion Field and Other Media Maladies

Ita€™ s now been a little more than a week since my friends, colleagues, and Dispatch co-founders 
Steve Hayes and Jonah Goldberg announced their resignations from Fox News. After days of online 
vitriol (and support), the dust has settled a bit, and ita€™ s worth reflecting a bit on what they 
did and why it mattereda€l
Read more

a year ago A- 317 likes A- 514 comments A- David French
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

