Subscribe now

FIRST: For Appeasement in Ukraine:

Yes, I am an appeaser.

The stake should be put in the ground:

• (a) full UN recognition of Muscovya€™ s borders including the Luhansk, Donetsk, and Crimea;

•  (b) in exchange for immediate EU accession of Ukraine, a Marshall Plan for Ukraine rebuilding 
funded by a tax on Muscovite oil and gas exports, and NATO a€cetraininga€D brigades permanently 
located outside of Kharkiv, Dnipro, Odesa, and Kyiv (and Kishinev, Vilnius, Riga, Tallinn, and 
Helsinki for good measure).

• If the Muscovites dona€™ t like the training brigades, or the tax, or the EU accession, then they 
can bargain for their removal in exchange for withdrawal from Crimea, Donetsk, and Luhansk.
Yes, it would be a betrayal.

Yes, we should again hold the meeting at which this betrayal deal is inked at Yalta.
But a bad peace is better than a good war.

However, for Henry Kissinger right now to call for (a) without the (b) is for him toa€! well, I 
cannot say a€cebecomea€D, can I?a€! once again be a stooge for murderous authoritarians:

Robert Farley: Russia-Ukraine War Update'. a€~Part of the problem with Kissingera€! is the sense 
that Moscow is owed a certain place in the sun and that thus we should refrain from 
a€oehumiliatinga€n Russiaa€!. I certainly dona€™ t hold to the idea that Russiaa€™ s delicate 
psyche needs to be protecteda€! or that the West needs to create the conditions under which Putin 
can declare victory.
Russians should fully and absolutely have every reason at the end of this war to conclude that 
Vladimir Putin took them into an unjust war in which they suffered disastrous defeats. That saida€! 
there needs to be some way back and at least parts of that way back cannot be contingent upon 
regime change in Moscow. Folks also arena€™t wrong that turning Russia into North Korea is unlikely 
to
generate the kind of political change that we want to seea€!

LINK: <https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2022/05/russia-ukraine-war-update>
And the learned and thoughtful Hilzoy reassures me that I am not completely crazy in thinking as I 
do:

hilzoy @hilzoy

1/ Since I am on team "off-ramps matter", I will take the (possibly unwise) step of disagreeing 
with Timothy Snyder, for whom I have enormous respect. Note: I will not argue that Ukraine should 
swap territory for offramps. The folly of "off-ramps"



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: The Palace of Nestor at Pylos:


Very Briefly Noted:

•  Erica Yokoyama: Japana€™ s Deep Ocean Turbine Trial Offers Hope of Phasing Out Fossil Fuels'. 
a€~Tested in one of the worlda€™ s strongest ocean currents, a prototype generator could herald the 
start of a new stream of renewable energya€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-05-30/japan-s-deep-ocean-turbine-trial-offers-hope-of-
phasing-out-fossil-fuels?srnd=green>

• Jackie Davalos & Drake Bennett: How Uber & Lyft Gamify the Gig Economy. a€~Whoa€™ s Really 
Winning?Ride-share drivers say that the pandemic has exacerbated the imbalance with their 
overlordsa€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-05-27/how-uber-and-lyft-gamify-the-gig-economy?srnd=bu
sinessweek-v2>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• Rob Henderson: 31 Lessons from 31 Years <

ob Henderson's Newsletter

31 lessons from 31 years

I started writing this as my 31st birthday approached and finally got around to finishing it. Here 
are 31 lessons Ia€™ ve learned so far in my unusual life. 1. Dona€™ t give unsolicited advice. 2. 
Have friends outside of your profession. 3. Events, both good and bad, are more often enjoyable 
when they become memoriesa€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 70 likes A- 11 comments A- Rob Henderson

•  Noah Smith: NFTs Will (Probably) Be Back'. a€~NFTs at least give some people a sense of 
ownerships!. It is a very unwise idea to invest your lifeS™ s savings into NFTs. The space is 
absolutely chock-full of scams, Ponzi schemes, pump-and-dumps, and products of dubious value being 
supported by hype and nonsenseS I <


NFls will (probably) be back

NFls are really the third use that people have found for blockchain technology. The first one was 
illicit value transfers; Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies may not be a very good form of money in 
general, but they make it easier to commit cybercrimes and to evade nationsa€™ capital controls. 
The second one was DAOs, which at least in theory allow people to form organizations without paying 
the overhead of hiring
lawyers (though as far as I can tell thisa€!

Read more

8 months ago A- 20 likes A- 26 comments A- Noah Smith

Paragraphs:

This is the long fight between, in Paul Krugman's terms, the Book I Keynesians and the Chapter 12 
Keynesians. Paula€™ s view, which I think is absolutely correct, is that Keynes himself was a 
Chapter 12 Keynesian and that the Book 1 aspects, while there, were definitely secondary to his 
vision. But the dominant strains in American macroeconomics have always found Book I to resonate 
much more with them than Chapter
12a€”when they have found value in Keynes at all. And Bill is right here to stress that the best 
parts of Zack Cartera€™ s excellent book are about how Samuelsona€™ s Book I-focused 
a€oeneoclassical synthesisa€D was extremely vulnerable to the assault from the right for which 
understanding what was going on in the macroeconomy was secondary to undermining the intellectual 
underpinnings of the New Deal:

Bill Janeway: The Master and the Prodigy. a€~Cartera€™ s most original and substantial 
contribution^! [is] a detailed account of how the genuinely radical a€oeEconomics of Keynesa€D was 
transformed into the narrowly constrained and conventional a€ceKeynesian economics,a€D which was 
more palatable for policymakers in post-war capitalist America, but also more vulnerable to attack 
by
economic libertarians starting in the 1970sa€!. Samuelsona€™ s solution was to construct a 
a€oeneoclassical synthesis.a€Da€!. With the state operating as a visible hand to do the work of 
Saya€™ s Law, microeconomics could revert to the pre-Keynesian model of perfect competition as the 
mode by which to allocate resources efficiently. But Samuelson turned his back on the behavioral 
micro-
foundations of The General Theorya€l. By abandoning Keynesa€™ s behavioral micro-foundations, 
Samuelsona€! left his neoclassical synthesis open to a radical assault from the righta€!

LINK: <https://www.billianeway.com/the-master-and-the-prodigy>

Remember that reporters trying to cover Ferguson were faced not just with lies from the police and 
abuse from the right, but with contempt and scorn from their own colleagues and editors:

Duncan Black: Objectitudinal: a€~Lowery was very young and sent by the WaPo to cover Ferguson and 
got nothing but constant shit from his editor and coworkers for attempting to accurately cover the 
situation: Wesley Lowery: "Hopefully this settles the industry debate about whether reporters are 
being a€~activists and not journalistsa€™ by pointing out that coverage is often too deferential to
police and that the mediaa€™ s role should be to provide rigorous, skeptical interrogation of 
police claimsa€!

LINK: <https ://www.eschatonblog .com/2022/05/ob jectitudinal .html>

Buta€! buta€! buta€! If one is playing for the long game, soft power is what matters for any nation 
that thinks it has a special, holy mission. Alexander Ia€™ s army can march beneath the Arc de 
Triomphe in 1814, and he can dance in the Palais du Luxembourg. But the tools for Russia to deploy 
are much more Pushkin and Tolstoy than tanks and missiles:

Stephen Kotkin: Russia After The War: a€~Russia is a remarkable civilization: in the arts, music, 
literature, dance, film. In every sphere, ita€™ s a profound, remarkable placea€”a whole 
civilization, more than just a country. At the same time, Russia feels that it has a a€oespecial 
placea€D in the world, a special mission. Ita€™ s Eastern Orthodox, not Western. And it wants to 
stand out as a great
power. Its problem has always been not this sense of self or identity but the fact that its 
capabilities have never matched its aspirations. Ita€™ s always in a struggle to live up to these 
aspirations, but it cana€™ t, because the West has always been more powerfula€!

LINK: <https://nucleardiner.wordpress.com/2022/05/29/russia-after-the-war/>

This seems to be very puzzling to me: a panic attack based on a 10% probability bad case 
macroeconomic scenario. But I suppose that one can be in the forecasting game or the 
attention-grabbing game:

The Information: Sequoia Warns Founders of a€~Crucible Moment,a€™ Advises How to a€~Avoid the Death 
Spirala€™: a€~Its latest warning to its portfolio companies takes the form of a 52-slide 
presentation, a copy of which was viewed by The Information. Sequoia described the current 
combination of turbulent financial markets, inflation and geopolitical conflict as a a€oecrucible 
momenta€D
of uncertainty and change. Sequoia told founders not to expect a speedy economic bounceback akin to 
what followed the start of the pandemic because, it warned, the monetary and fiscal policy tools 
that propelled that recovery a€oehave been exhausted.a€D The firm suggested founders move fast to 
extend runway and to fully examine the business for excess costs. a€oeDona€™t view [cuts] as a
negative, but as a way to conserve cash and run faster,a€D they wrotea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.theinformation.com/articles/sequoia-warns-founders-of-crucible-moment-advises-how-to-av
oid-the-death-spiral?rc=b4kz7m>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

