Subscribe now

FIRST: On Hannah Arendt, Modernity, & Fascism:

I am so much in the target demographic for Sean Illinga€™ s new podcast series that it is not even 
funny:

Sean filing: a€™ Hannah Arendt is truly an indispensable thinker and it was such fun to finally do 
this podcast on her legacy [with Lyndsey Stonebridge] <https://t.co/MUXHP821 ZA>a€!

Sean filing @seanilling

Hannah Arendt is truly an indispensable thinker and it was such fun to finally do this podcast on 
her legacy

Lyndsey Stonebridge @LyndseyStonebri

I first spoke to @seanilling back in 2016. He's a fabulous interlocutor. Here we are six years 
later, two-in-one dialoguing about # Arendt, the totalitarianism that won't go away, loneliness, 
and sheer terror. https://t.co/MUXHP821ZA
3:42 PM r™ Apr 27,2022

28Likes6Retweets

<https://www.vox.com/vox-conversations-podcast/23048597/vox-conversations-hannah-arendt-totalitarian
ism-the-philosophers>


Furt Furtney @furtney

This series on philosophers is my jam. Great work @seanilling and crew!

Vox

Conversations

pca.stThe Philosophers: Loneliness and totalitarianism - Vox ConversationsSean Tiling talks with 
professor Lyndsey Stonebridge about the philosopher Hannah Arendt, author of The Origins of 
Totalitarianism. Arendt might be best known for coining the phrase a€oethe banality of evila€D in 
her reporting on the trial of Adolf Eichmann in 1961, but in this episode Sean and Lyndsey da€!
2:45 PM r™ May 2,2022

Back in the old days, almost everybody lived overwhelmingly in a social-network society. Who you 
were was overwhelmingly determined by what your social-network connections were. Overwhelmingly, 
you did not get to choose them yourself. And if you had nonea€”well, then, you were a beggar, a 
penniless widow or orphan, or a a€oemasterless mana€D, and it was quite likely your only chance for 
survival was to find some social-network position, usually
one of very mean estate, and slot yourself into it. Often the social-network society was, to you, 
oppressive. But you were not lonely. And you did not have a choice as to who you would become, and 
how you were going to live your life. (Religion was sometimes a potential option, not that it 
allowed you escape from the social-network society, but rather that it allowed you to transform 
your place in it: starting from whatever-you-had-been, you could become part
of the Cult of Isis, or of Bacchus, or of Mithras. You could become a Christian.)

Then, after 1500, there arrives Commercial Society. There is now the possibility that you can 
choose your own social network, and even survive if you have to exit from your old before you 
develop your new network. How? The market becomes not just a place for the trading of luxuries and 
surplus. The market becomes an arena in which you can, potentially, live your life and find work: 
as long as you deliver value for money, and as long as your last temporary
employer will recommend you to your next such.

You can reinvent yourself.

Moreover, given that so many people found the social networks into which they were born and 
assigned oppressive, reinventing yourselfa€’’usually by moving to the citya€’’becomes something 
that is semi-standard for people to do. They become modern, defined by Marshall Berman as 
a€oeattempt[ing] to become subjects as well as objects of modernization, to get a grip on the 
modern world and make themselves at home in ita€!a€D
But do people want a society that does not require they stay in their fixed old but letsa€”or even 
forcesa€”them to choose a new identity?

Berman says: often not. There is:

the widespread and often desperate fear of the freedom that modernity opens up for every 
individual, and the desire to escape from freedom (this was Erich Fromma€™s apt phrase in 1941) by 
any means possible. This distinctively modern darkness was first mapped by Dostoevsky in his 
parable of the Grand Inquisitor (The Brothers Karamazov, 1881). a€oe Man prefers peace,a€D the 
Inquisitor says, a€oeand even death, to freedom
of choice in the knowledge of good and evil. There is nothing more seductive for man than his 
freedom of conscience, but nothing that is a greater cause of suffering.a€D He then steps out of 
his story, set in Counter-Reformation Seville, and directly addresses Dostoevskya€™ s 
late-nineteenth-century audience: a€oeLook now, today, people are persuaded that they are freer 
than ever before, yet they have brought their freedom to us and
laid it humbly at our feet.a€D

The Grand Inquisitor has cast a somber shadow over the politics of the twentieth century. So many 
demagogues and demagogic movements have won power and mass adoration by relieving the peoples they 
rule ofthe burden of freedom. (Irana€™ s current holy despot even looks like the Grand Inquisitor.) 
The Fascist regimes of 1922a€‘T945 may turn out to be only a first chapter in the still unfolding 
histor y of radical authoritarianism.
Many movements in this mold actually celebrate modern technology, communications and techniques of 
mass mobilization, and use them to crush modern freedoms. Some of these movements have won ardent 
support from great modernists: Ezra Pound, Heidegger, Celine. The paradoxes and perils in all this 
are dark and deep. It strikes me that an honest modernist needs to look longer and deeper into this 
abyss than I have done so
fara€!

To this, I want to add this kicker:

Back in the era of Commercial Societya€”1500 to 1770, saya€’’humanitya€™ s technological prowess 
was still little more than glacial. The value of the stock of useful ideas about manipulating 
nature and organizing humans discovered, developed, deployed, and diffused throughout the human 
economy, grew at roughly 5% per generation. Thus things in total when you were 50 were little 
different from what they had been when you were 25, which were little
different from what they had been when you were born. You could, if you could manage it, easily 
slot yourself into a social-network place very similar to what your mother and father had been 
slotted into. You did not have to, you were not forced to, back in the Imperial-Commercial 
Revolution era, use your modernist freedom.

Things changed somewhat in the era of the British Industrial Revolution, 1770a€‘T870. The ice 
cracked and broke. Then, if you were in the charmed circle of 300 miles around Dover, England (or 
in the English settler colonies), human technological prowess deployed and diffused grew by perhaps 
25% per generation. (It grew by less than half that outside that charmed circle plus the dominions 
(and ex-dominion.)) That meant that many social-network places in
society vanished. Andrew Carnegiea€™ s grandfather was a fairly prosperous Scottish handloom 
weaver. Andrew Carnegiea€™ s father tried to follow his footsteps, starved, and found himself 
forced to find a new place. So he migrated to America. For most, the modernist forging of your own 
identity was still optional. But not if your entire occupation was destroyed by the workings of the 
market impelled by technological change.

The edge was sharpest in textiles. Hence Heinrich Heinea€™s (Handloom) Weaver-Song'.

Their gloom-enveloped eyes are tearless,

They sit at the spinning wheel, snarling cheerless:
"Germany, we weave your funeral shroud,

A threefold curse be within it endowed-
We're weaving, we're weaving!

A curse on God to whom we knelt


When hunger and winter's cold we felt,
To whom we flocked in vain and cried,

Who mocked us and poxed us and cast us aside,
We're weaving, we're weaving!

A curse on the king, the wealthy men's chief
Who was not moved even by our grief

Who wrenched the last coin from our hand of need,
And shot us, screaming like dogs in the street!

We're weaving, we're weaving!

A curse on this lying father-nation

Where thrive only shame and degradation,
Where every flower's plucked ere it's bloom
And worms thrive in the dank rot and gloom-
We're weaving, we're weaving!

O shuttle fly! Loom crank away!

We weave unfailing, night and day-

Old Germany, we weave your funeral shroud,
A threefold curse be within it endowed-
We're weaving, we're weaving!

Note that these are not industrial factory workers who are singing. These are those who wish things 
to stay as they were for thema€”as in their grandfathersa€™ daya€”and find that the 
technology-enabled global market economy will not allow it to be so.

And with 1870 there comes Modern Economic Growth and the roaring of the cataract. The value of the 
stock of useful ideas about manipulating nature and organizing humans discovered, developed, 
deployed, and diffused throughout the human economy doubles every single generation, and then 
doubles again in the next. By the time you are 50 is more likely than not that the occupation your 
father or mother had when you were born has vanished, or has at
least been transformed utterly. As a result of the two or three waves of economic technology-driven 
creative-destruction you see over your life, you are free to choose your place in society, but you 
are definitely not free to choose that things just stay the same.

a€oeSe vogliamo che tutto rimanga coma€™ A" bisogna che tutto cambia€Da€"For everything to remain 
the same, everything must changea€”so says Tancred to his uncle in Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusaa€™s 
II Gattopardo. a€oeAlle StA^ndisch und Stehende verdampfta€Eld€-”aZZ that is solid melts into 
aira€”or, I prefer a€oeevery established order and practice is steamed awaya€D. So wrote, from 
their perches at the very edge of the Dover Circle,
Charlie from Trier and Freddie from Barmen in 1848 in their Manifesto of the Communist Party. (And, 
remember, Marx and Engels were dealing with the Industrial Revolution-era 25% per generation rate 
of change, rather than the doubling every generation of the posta€“1870 Modern Economic Growth 
eraa€™ s rate.) Thus a€Ualles Heilige word entweiht, und die Meachen Sind endlich gezwungen, ihre 
Lebensstellung, ihre gegenseitingen Beziehundgen mit
nAUchternen Augen anzusehen"a€”aZZ that is holy is profaned, and man is at last compelled to face 
with sober sense, his real conditions of life, and his relations with his kind

Or not. Humans might and sometimes do turn tail, and run as fast as they can away from their 
existentialist freedom that modernity forces upon them.

And so to: Sean Illing & Lyndsey Stonebridge: Hannah Arendt: The Philosopher Who Warned Us About 
Loneliness & 
TotaZztarZanzsm<https://www.vox.com/vox-conversations-podcastZ23048597/vox-conversations-hannah-aren
dt-totalitarianism-the-philosophers>:

Lyndsey Stonebridge: a€™ Ita€™ s important not to separate loneliness from the material conditions 
that produce it. Shea€™ s talking about things like the disillusionment of people with the elites 
who are running Europe, unemployment, the end of the bourgeois dream, inflationa€!. [Arendt] 
understood loneliness as this peculiarly modern problema€! that comes with individualism^! 
capitalisma€! modernitya€! uprootednessa€l

Lyndsey Stonebridge: a€~What she sees everywhere she looks is that loneliness is the result of a 
lack of a common ground of experience. This is what shea€™ s getting at when she writes, a€oeThe 
ideal subject of totalitarian rule is not the convinced Nazi or the convinced Communist, but people 
for whom the distinction between fact and fiction, in other words, the reality of experience, and 
the distinction between true and false a€!
people for whom those distinctions no longer exista€!a€D

Sean Illing: a€™In her book on totalitarianism, Arendt talks about the emergence of a€cethe 
masses,a€D which is distinct from what we might think of as classes or interest groups, because 
those are groups that are by definition fighting for some common interest. Shea€™ s talking about 
the rise of an a€ceunorganized massa€D of a€oemostly furious individualsa€D with nothing in common 
except for their contempt for the present
order. She calls this a€oenegative solidaritya€D and ita€™ s the raw material of totalitarianism, 
because ita€™ s a world without connection and friendship, where the only basis of collective 
action is some kind of awful combination of anger and desperation. How did the world get so lonely 
in the first place for her? Was it just the rise of capitalism and individualism?a€!

Lyndsey Stonebridge: a€™ [Arendt] saysa€! that a€oethe massesa€™ escape from reality is a verdict 
against the world in which theya€™re forced to live.a€D Often the question is, well, how can people 
be so stupid? How can anyone fall for this? Thata€™ s the wrong way to think about it. Totalitarian 
politics is a verdict against the world in which people are forced to live. Ita€™ s a slap in the 
face. Ita€™ s a finger up against the
real conditions of existencea€!

Lyndsey Stonebridge: a€™ Starting with real angera€! the creation of a€oethe mass[es]a€D and it 
isna€™t just fascisma€! [and] populism. This is totalitarianism propera€!

Lyndsey Stonebridge: a€™People arena€™t stupida€!. As important as loneliness is cynicisma€! 
[which] allows people to say, a€oeTheya€™re all the same, ita€™ s all bullshit, isna€™t it? Ita€™ s 
just politics, isna€™t it?a€D What cynicism allows you to do is be gullible and disbelieving at the 
same timea€!

Lyndsey Stonebridge: a€™ [Arendt] woulda€™ ve thoughta€! tragic wasa€! being algorithmized into 
social mediaa€!. You dona€™t geta€! politicsa€! sitting in roomsa€! trying to get something donea€L 
What really woulda€™ ve appalled her today is the hemorrhaging of so much political energya€!

References:

Marshall Berman (1982): All That Is Solid Melts Into Air: The Experience Of Modernity 
<https://libgen.rocks/ads.php?md5=0fca5a5dae5533f51d536485ffe9e297>

Heinrich Heine: The Weaver-Song 
<https://poetrvpoem.com/cgi-bin/index.pl?poemnumber=190349&sitename=verseofapoet&poemoffset=0&displa
vpoem=t&item=poetrv>

Sean Illing & Lyndsey Stonebridge: Hannah Arendt: The Philosopher Who Warned Us About Loneliness & 
7b^ZZtorz7mz5An<https://www.vox.com/vox-conversations-podcast/23048597/vox-conversations-hannah-aren
dt-totalitarianism-the-philosophers>

Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa: Il Gattopardo <https:Z/en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The Leopard>

Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels (1848): Manifesto of the Communist Party<hWps: //w w w.marxists 
.org/archive/marx/works/do wnload/pdf/Manifesto .pdf> 
<https://www.ibiblio.org/ml/libri/eZEngelsFMarxKH ManifestKommunistischen s.pdf>

Share


One Image:

Home Price / Median Income Ratio

Jan 31. 1952    ► Jan 31. 2022


Home Price / Median Income Ratio


Very Briefly Noted:

• Nicholas Gruen: How Economics Found Science d€\& Lost Its Subject Ma#er<https://www 
jneteconomics.org/perspectives/blog/how-economics-forgot-its-subiect-matter>

• Walter Scheidel: Roman Economic Performance & Inequality: In Defense of the Big Picture<h\.\.ys: 
//zenodo .org/record/6320776#. Yna8 SC-B1 R9>

•  Andrew Cunningham: a€ceStar Trek: Strange New Worldsd€dis Either Good or Ita€™ s Just so 
Comforting that I Dona€™ t Care: a€~The latest Trek series plays it almost too safe, but it still 
feels righta€! 
<https://arstechnica.com/gaming/2Q22/Q5/star-trek-strange-new-worlds-is-either-good-or-its-iust-so-c
omforting-that-i-dont-care/>


•  Scott Lemieux: The Ballad of Kathleen Parker: a€™ Republicans have long been working a doublea€! 
assuring their base that their judges will overrule Roea€! persuading] gullible pro-choice 
suburbanites and Savvy pundits that no such thing would ever happen. The peaka€! was reached by 
Kathleen a€oeDonald Trump winning will be just finea€D Parker in 2018a€! 
<https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.eom/2022/05/the-ballad-of-kathleen-

parker>

• Shawn Donnan: Culture Wars Are Coming for the U.S. Economy 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-05-07/culture-wars-are-coming-for-the-u-s-economy-b
loomberg-new-economy?cmpid=BBD050722 NEF>

•  Robert Jackson Bennett: If Ia€™ d Written the Prequels: a€~ Anakin acting asa€! Lucifera€! a 
scarred thinga€!. Like many who have been abused and lived lives of fear, he comes to respect the 
only thing that has dominated his life since he was a childa€”strength, power, and paina€! 
<https://www.robertjacksonbennett.com/if-id-written-the-prequels>

• Felicia Wong: Overview: Post-Neoliberalism at a Crossroads 
<https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/64/overview-post-neoliberalism-at-a-crossroads/>

• Guy-Uriel Charles: Giving the People What They Want: Supplying the Demand for Disinformation 
<https://balkin.blogspot.eom/2022/04/giving-people-what-they-want-supplying.html>

• Chris Blattman & Dylan Matthews: Why Wars Start, & How To Prevent Them 
<https://www.vox.eom/future-perfect/2022/4/28/23041726/chris-blattman-why-we-fight-war-peace>

• Josh Marshall: Putting Together the Pieces on The Campaign to Stop Roberts 
https://talkingpointsmemo.com/edblog/putting-together-the-pieces-on-the-campaign-to-stop-roberts

Twitter & a€~Stack

•  Julia Davis: a€™ Senior military expert on Russian state TV argued that mobilization wouldna€™ t 
accomplish a whole lot, since outdated weaponry cana€™ t easily compete with NATO-supplied weapons 
and equipment in Ukrainea€™ s hands and replenishing Russiaa€™ s military arsenal will be neither 
fast nor easy <https://t.co/jzkU7RiZFz>a€!

Julia Davis @JuliaDavisNews

Senior military expert on Russian state TV argued that mobilization wouldn't accomplish a whole 
lot, since outdated weaponry can't easily compete with NATO-supplied weapons and equipment in 
Ukraine's hands and replenishing Russia's military arsenal will be neither fast nor easy.

8:26 PM r™ May 7,2022

17,284Likes4,383Retweets

Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions
Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut SUBSCRIBER ONLY CONTENT Below:

Paragraphs:

The hope for place-based policies becomes even more vain. A powerful point that the road to a 
better America runs through anti-NIMBYism instead:

Shawn Donnan: Culture Wars Are Coming for the U.S. Economy: a€~Overturning Roe v. Wade would likely 
reverse decades of economic gains for women and to increase inequality. What it may also trigger is 
a geographic reordering of labor and talent that ends up being more significant than a half-point 
tweak to the Feda€™ s target ratea€!
LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-05-07/culture-wars-are-coming-for-the-u-s-economy-b
loomberg-new-economv?cmpid=BBD050722_NEF>

Unfortunately, unless I am reading America wrong, it is a a€cethina€D racial liberalism that is 
a€oemarket neutrala€D plus a strong commitment to the value of diversity plus a strong recognition 
that meritocratic ticket-punches are a lot easier to obtain when you are male and WASP or 
WASP-adjacent, and somewhat easier to obtain when you are male and white but non-WASP adj 
acenta€’’that is as far as a durable majority of voters are willing to go. I regret
this, but I cannot see any way not to conclude this:

Felicia Wong: Overview: Post-Neoliberalism at a Crossroads: a€~A new post-neoliberal politics will 
rest on three pillars: a deep shift on race; policy design for the people; and a full-throated 
support of democracya€!. First, wea€! must move from a thin racial liberalism that is race-neutral, 
focusing on market competition and nondiscrimination, to a more far-reaching and historically 
accurate a€oewhole-of-governmenta€n anti-
racism^!. Secondlya€! public institutions and policy designa€! direct investment to shape markets, 
and direct provision to relieve suffering and reinforce democratic norms and valuesa€!. For 
neoliberalism to be fully vanquished, we must develop not just a politics in favor of the new 
economics, but also a politics in favor of politicsa€!. Third and finally, a democratic 
post-neoliberal politics need a much deeper understanding of
democracya€!. We are at grave risk of finding ourselves in a post-neoliberalism that combines a 
version of anti-corporate economic populism with outright white supremacy a€!

LINK: <https://democracvjournal.org/magazine/64/overview-post-neoliberalism-at-a-crossroads/>

Guy-Uriel Charles: Giving the People What They Want: Supplying the Demand for Disinformation: 
a€~There are certainly a, perhaps larger, group of voters who are not in the market for truthful 
political informational. The demand may be asymmetrical (see, e.g., here and here; conservative or 
Republican voters may be more likely to believe misinformation and there is evidence of partisan 
asymmetry with respect to cures to misinformation^!. Voters are
filtering information based upon their partisanship or other identities that are salient to 
thema€!. Modern democracies are not very good about figuring out what to do when voters get exactly 
what they want and what voters want is actually bad for democracy. Tweaking the law and relying 
upon private ordering is less than optimal, if the goal is a resolution of the problem. Rather, the 
focus will need to be on structural political and economic reforms. Rick does a
great job in helping us understand whata€™ s possible. The next step is coming to terms with what 
is necessarya€!

LINK: <https://balkin.blogspot.com/2022/Q4/giving-people-what-they-want-supplying.html>

Blattman views his five causes of war as rare exceptions, rather than as the warp and woof of much 
of human history. He is much more optimistic than I find myself capable of being:


Chris Blattman & Dylan Matthews: Why Wars Start, & How To Prevent Them'. a€~Peace has this 
gravitational pull, from all the costs of war. So war only happens because some other force yanked 
it out of that orbit, which is actually pretty hard to doa€!. Maybe the warlord Charles Taylor 
thinks hea€™ s going to get more diamond profits by keeping the war goinga€!. The dictatorial, 
personalized rulera€! [has] this nationalist ideal of
a unified Russiaa€! personal glorya€! wanting to be the next Catherine the Greata€!. 
a€ceMisperceptionsa€Da€! war happens by mistake. Uncertainty isa€! when we dona€™t know the 
strength of our opponenta€! so it seems like the optimal choice to fight. Commitments I wherea€! we 
can avert our opponent from being strong in the futurea€! [so] invade now to lock in our 
advantages!. Unchecked interestsS! the people who
decideS! expect to gain personallyS!. Intangible incentivesS! v.engeance or status or dominances!. 
Uncertainty SI you donS™t know what cards your opponents holdS!. Commitments!. If youS™re warned of 
your opponents™ s rise in advances! strike nowS!. MisperceptionsS!. We are overconfidentS!. Each 
one of the five interrupts the peaceful pie splitting in a different way. They relax some of the 
simplifying
assumptions and realist principles and show which ones are most important to peaceS!

LINK: <https://www.vox.eom/future-perfect/2022/4/28/23041726/chris-blattman-why-we-fight-war-peace>

Me? I think the anti-Roe majority will hold. People willing to lie in front of congress about their 
attitude toward Roe are people who think they have been chosen by God to overthrow it:

Josh Marshall: Putting Together the Pieces on The Campaign to Stop Roberts'. S~The rapid-fire 
follow-up reporting on John RobertsS™ position on the Mississippi case, just hours after the 
Politico exclusive, made me think at the time that the leaked draft opinion wasnS™t a one off 
thing. It seemed part of a larger breakdown of secrecy or on-going leaks tied to the Mississippi 
abortion case. You donS™t come up with details
about the Chief Justices™ s position and arguments from internal deliberations on one of the 
biggest cases in decades in an hour and a half if youS™re beginning from a cold start. Then this 
morning I found out about this Wall Street Journal opinion page editorial from April 26th in which 
they fairly transparently write about current Court deliberations in the Mississippi case, 
specifically that John Roberts was trying to pull an
unnamed conservative Justice back from fully overturning RoeS!

LINK: 
https://talkingpointsmemo.com/edblog/putting-together-the-pieces-on-the-campaign-to-stop-roberts

A very good take on why the prequels to SoeStar WarsSD were so awful, and how they could have been 
made better:

Robert Jackson Bennett: If Ia€™ d Written the Prequels'. S~ Anakin acting asS! LuciferS! a product 
of the world, he understands the nature of good and evil in this universe, and this is what leads 
him to reject the divine detachment of the Jedi Council. HeS™ s a creature of impulse and desire, 
of strength and brute passion, rather than a moody child. His complaints about the world are very 
real, and his reactions to the JediS™ s
precautions are justified to his perspective, though they spin out of control. This would be 
contrasted with Obi-Wan, who grows steadily more cerebral and removed as the series goes on, 
perceiving the larger moral arc of the Force. The two contrast and compliment each otherS!. This 
figure wouldS! be a scarred thing, a wounded animal trying to veil his injuries behind the decorum 
and rites of an enigmatic religion, wishing to be the
sort                                                                                                
                                                                                              of 
person who would prevent the pains heS™ s suffered from ever being inflicted on another, before 
finally surrendering to his darkest impulses. He feels in his heart he does not belong in this 
world of elites and royalty. And then, like many who have been abused and lived lives of fear, he 
comes to respect the only thing that has dominated his life since he was a childS’’strength, power, 
and painS!

LINK: <https://www.robertjacksonbennett.com/if-id-written-the-prequels>

SUBJECT: Why Do People Think an Inflationary Spiral Is Possible When the Bond Market Does Not 
Expect It?

At bottom, a difficult-to-manage inflationary spiral is an expectational phenomenon: it only 
happens when and because people expect it to happenS!

As of Friday, May 6, the bond market expectsS”if it is correct to read bond-market expectations off 
of the inflation breakevens implicit in the prices of inflation-indexed and non-indexed U.S. 
Treasury securitiesS’’consumer price inflation to average 2.5% between five and ten years from now. 
The five-year forward five-year inflation breakevens’’what inflation would have to run between five 
and ten years from now in order to equalize returns on inflation-
indexed and non-indexed U.S. Treasury securitiesS’’was exactly 2.5% at market closing on Friday, 
May 6,2022:

FRED   — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

0.5

2013          2014          2015          2016          2017          2018          2019          
2020         2021          2022


FRED   — 5-Year Breakeven Inflation Rate

4.0

CD

2013          2014          2015          2016          2017          2018          2019          
2020          2021          2022

<https: //fred .stlouisfed .org/series/T5 YIFR#0> <https: Z/fred .stlouisfed .org/series/T5 YIE#>

Given that CPI inflation has been running higher than PCE deflator inflation, I count that as 
hitting the Federal Reservea€™ s 2% PCE deflator inflation target.

What do the inflation expectations implicit in bond-market prices of inflation-indexed and 
non-indexed Treasury securities tell us about how we are likely to get therea€”to get the economy 
back to a situation in which inflation is running at the Federal Reservea€™ s target. The five-year 
breakeven at the close on Friday, May 6,2022, was 3.22%: The implicit expectation is that inflation 
will, over the next five years, run a cumulative total of 3.6%-points over the
Federal Reservea€™ s target. Such a deviation from target is, if it does not cause the economya€™ s 
inflation anchor to vanish, an exceedingly small price to pay for the rapid recovery from the 
coronavirus-plague and for greasing the resulting desired economic structural transformation.

This situation looks to me like one in which the Federal Reserve should definitely be taking 
victory laps, plural. The Federal Reserve has done what it is supposed to do: enabled our 
sticky-pnce sticky-wage sticky-debt economy to rapidly reattain not just full employment but the 
right version of full employment after a shock, and to do so without disrupting confidence in the 
monetary system and its stability.
So why then do I read that the very sharp Ken Rogoff is saying that a€oethings are way out of 
controla€D?

(Bloomberg) --     ne Federal Reserve will have

to raise interest rates to as much as 5% to


ease the hottest inflation in four decades just
as  the  world  faces  a  “perfect  storm”  of
potential recessions in the U.S., European Union
and China, former International Monetary Fund
chief economist Kenneth Rogoff said.

Ferro and Tom Keene. “There’s just a lot of
uncertainty. I’m not going to say I know

exactly what needs to be done. But it’s clear
4-U^4-              ^..4-           77


and China, former International Monetary Fund
chief economist Kenneth Rogoff said.

Ferro and Tom Keene. “There’s just a lot of
uncertainty.  I’m  not  going  to  say  I  know
exactly what needs to be done. But it’s clear
that things are way out of control.”

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2Q22-05-Q3/rogoff-sees-fed-hiking-rates-up-to-5-as-things-o
ut-of-control?cmpid%3D=socialflow-twitter-economics>

When you have been pushed off of your desired trajectory, to then find yourself on a path in which 
it is expected that you will return to that desired trajectorya€”that would seem to me not to be 
a€oeout of controla€D, but rather to be the veritable definition of what it means to be a€oein 
controla€D.

What Ken Rogoff is saying thus seems to me to make sense only in one case. What is that case? It 
is: if an only to the extent that he is willing to declare that the bond market and its implicit 
expectations are wronga€”that if Federal Reserve policy evolves as expected, inflation over the 
next five years will be significantly          more than 3.2%,and inflation from five to ten 
yearsfrom now will be significantly more than 2.5%.
That could happen: The economy is a surprising place. And our models and forecasts are only by 
courtesy called models and forecasts, rather than what they truly are: a€oepoorly informed 
guessesa€D.

The Federal Reserve might have to change course substantiallya€’’send the U.S. economy into a 
substantial recession with significantly higher than currently expected interest ratesDa€”in order 
to return inflation to its target over the five- to ten-year medium run.

But I find that scenario highly unlikely. For how might Rogoffs forecast come to pass? In order for 
it to come to pass, workers and bosses would have to reach wage bargains that assume inflation well 
above 3.2% for the next five years and well above 2.5% for the five years after that. Moreover, 
those inflationary wage bargains would have to be          set in place in contracts 
andinstitutional arrangements that would make it hard to revise them downwards, should
they turn out to exaggerate what actual inflation will turn out to be.

In order for workers and bosses to take such steps, they would first have to conclude and then have 
to be pretty confident that bond traders with their more sanguine expectations are being 
irrationally Panglossiana€”are inflation doves in spite of the evidence.
Is there any sign that or reason for bond traders to be irrational Panglossian inflation doves? Is 
there any sign that we should or reason for us to think that workers and bosses now believe that 
bond traders are irrational Panglossian inflation doves?

I see none.

In our economy, an outbreak of inflation is a peculiar expectations-driven process. A vicious 
circle is required in which expectations of high inflation drive actions that then validate those 
expectations. But those expectations of high inflation have to come from somewhere. As of now they 
are not in evidence.

More adverse supply shocksa€”a widening of Putina€™ s war on Ukraine, or an economically 
catastrophic Chinese zero-COVID policy reaction to yet more more infectious plague strainsa€’’could 
be in our future. They could push inflation truly out of control. But that these risks exist does 
not justify ignoring the world we are in now and acting as though those risks have already come to 
pass.


exactly what needs to be done. But it’s clear
that things are way out of control.”

<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-05-03/rogoff-sees-fed-hiking-rates-up-to-5-as-things-o
ut-of-control?cmpid%3D=socialflow-twitter-economics>

When you have been pushed off of your desired trajectory, to then find yourself on a path in which 
it is expected that you will return to that desired trajectorya€”that would seem to me not to be 
a€oeout of controla€D, but rather to be the veritable definition of what it means to be a€oein 
controla€U.

What Ken Rogoff is saying thus seems to me to make sense only in one case. What is that case? It 
is: if an only to the extent that he is willing to declare that the bond market and its implicit 
expectations are wronga€”that if Federal Reserve policy evolves as expected, inflation over the 
next five years will be      significantly more than 3.2%, and inflation from five toten years from 
now will be significantly more than       2.5%.
That could happen: The economy is a surprising place. And our models and forecasts are only by 
courtesy called models and forecasts, rather than what they truly are: a€oepoorly informed 
guessesa€D.

The Federal Reserve might have to change course substantiallya€’’send the U.S. economy into a 
substantial recession with significantly higher than currently expected interest ratesDa€”in order 
to return inflation to its target over the five- to ten-year medium run.

But I find that scenario highly unlikely. For how might Rogoffs forecast come to pass? In order for 
it to come to pass, workers and bosses would have to reach wage bargains that assume inflation well 
above 3.2% for the next five years and well above 2.5% for the five years after that. Moreover, 
those inflationary wage bargains would have to   be set in place in contracts and 
institutionalarrangements that would make it hard to revise them downwards, should
they turn out to exaggerate what actual inflation will turn out to be.

In order for workers and bosses to take such steps, they would first have to conclude and then have 
to be pretty confident that bond traders with their more sanguine expectations are being 
irrationally Panglossiana€”are inflation doves in spite of the evidence.
Is there any sign that or reason for bond traders to be irrational Panglossian inflation doves? Is 
there any sign that we should or reason for us to think that workers and bosses now believe that 
bond traders are irrational Panglossian inflation doves?

I see none.

In our economy, an outbreak of inflation is a peculiar expectations-driven process. A vicious 
circle is required in which expectations of high inflation drive actions that then validate those 
expectations. But those expectations of high inflation have to come from somewhere. As of now they 
are not in evidence.

More adverse supply shocksa€”a widening of Putina€™ s war on Ukraine, or an economically 
catastrophic Chinese zero-COVID policy reaction to yet more more infectious plague strainsa€’’could 
be in our future. They could push inflation truly out of control. But that these risks exist does 
not justify ignoring the world we are in now and acting as though those risks have already come to 
pass.

