Subscribe now

SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. BRADFORD DELONG

PREORDER NOW • ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

chttps: //bit .ly/3pP3Krk>

A J 13-19: Suppose we could go back in time to 1870, and tell people then how rich, relative to 
them, humanity would become by 2010. How would they have reacted? They would almost surely have 
thought that the world of 2010 would be a paradise, a utopia. People would have 8.8 times the 
wealth? Surely that would mean enough power to manipulate nature and organize humans that all but 
the most trivial of problems and obstacles hobbling humanity could
be resolved, [r]

But not so. By 2010 it had been 150 years. We did not run to the traila€™ s end and reach utopia. 
We are still on the traila€’’maybe, for we can no longer see clearly to the end of the trail, or 
even to wherever the trail we are on is going to lead.
What has gone wrong?

Well, Hayek may have been a genius, but only the Dr. Jekyll-side of him was a genius. He and his 
followers were extraordinary idiots as well. They also thought the market alone could do the whole 
joba€”or at least all the job that could be donea€”and commanded humanity to believe in the 
workings of a system with a logic of its own that mere humans could never fully understand: a€oeThe 
market giveth, the market taketh away; blessed be the name of the
market.a€D They thought that what salvation was possible for humanity would come not through St. 
Paul of Tarsusa€™ s solo fide but through Hayeka€™ s solo mercato.[8][s]

But humanity objected. The market economy solved the problems that it set itself, but then society 
did not want those solutionsa€”it wanted solutions to other problems, problems that the market 
economy did not set itself, and for which the crowdsourced solutions it offered were inadequate.

It was, perhaps, Hungarian-Jewish-Torontonian moral philosopher Karl Polanyi who best described the 
issue. The market economy recognizes property rights. It sets itself the problem of giving those 
who own property a€”or, rather, the pieces of property that it decides are valuablea€”what they 
think they want. If you have no property, you have no rights. And if the property you have is not 
valuable, the rights you have are very thin.[t]

But people think they have other rightsa€”they think that those who do not own valuable property 
should have the social power to be listened to, and that societies should take their needs and 
desires into account.[9][u] Now the market economy might in fact satisfy their needs and desires. 
But if it did so, it did so only by accident: only if satisfying them happens to conform to a 
maximum-profitability test performed by a market economy that is solving the
problem of getting the owners of valuable pieces of property as much of what the rich want as 
possible.[ 10] [v]

Share

Printed Endnotes:

[8] Friedrich A. von Hayek, a€oeThe Pretence of Knowledge,a€D Nobel Prize Lecture, 1974, 
chttps://www.nobelprize.org/prizes/economic-sciences/1974/hayek/lecture/>

[9] Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformation, New York: Farrar and Rinehart, 1944 
<http://books.google.com/?id=IfeMAAAAIAAJ>

[10] Takashi Negishi, a€oeWelfare Economics and Existence of an Equilibrium for a Competitive 
Economy,a€D Metroeconomica 12, no. 2a€“3 (June 1960): 92a€“97 
chttps://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/IQ.llll/j.l467-999X.1960,tb00275,x>.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Longer Notes:

[r] Remember: as much proportional increase in technological prowess over 1870 to 2010 as was seen 
over -4000 to 1870. And essentially all the potential benefits over the earlier period were eaten 
up by population growth and the relative resource scarcity that it generated. Nearly 6000 years of 
historical progress crammed into a century. What would our predecessors back in 1870 have 
rationally thought would be the result? It is indeed the case that they would


almost surely have thought that the world of today would be a paradise, a utopia.

People in 1870, after all, thought that humanity had outgrown fighting over God. They did still 
fighta€”in one way or another and for one reason or anothera€”over resources. They would have 
thought that in the world of 2010, with 20x the technological resources of 1870, jostling and 
fighting to get even more resources would have a much lower priority relative to turning your skill 
and energy to doing what you ultimately wanted to do with those resources.
Consider Lenin's State and Revolution chttps 
://www.marxists.org/archive/lenin/works/1917/staterev/>. Lenina€™ s core belief is that in a 
capitalist future society of material abundance, scarcity must be artificially and brutally 
created:

The state in the proper sense of the word, that is, a special machine for the suppression of one 
class by another, and, what is more, of the majority by the minority. Naturally, to be successful, 
such an undertaking as the systematic suppression of the exploited majority by the exploiting 
minority calls for the utmost ferocity and savagery in the matter of suppressing, it calls for seas 
of blood, through which mankind is actually wading its way
in slavery, serfdom and wage labor....

During the transition from capitalism to communism suppression is still necessary, but it is now 
the suppression of the exploiting minority by the exploited majority.  It is no longer a state in 
the proper sense of the word; for the suppression of the minority of exploiters by the majority of 
the wage slaves of yesterday is comparatively so easy, simple and natural a task that it will 
entail far less bloodshed than the suppression of the risings

of slaves, serfs or wage-laborers....

And it is compatible with the extension of democracy to such an overwhelming majority of the 
population that the need for a special machine of suppression will begin to disappear.... The 
exploiters are unable to suppress the people without a highly complex machine... but the people can 
suppress the exploiters even with a very simple a€oemachinea€n....

Communism makes the state absolutely unnecessary, for there is nobody to be 
suppresseda€”a€cenobodya€D in the sense of a class.... We are not Utopians, and do not in the least 
deny the possibility and inevitability of excesses on the part of individual persons, or the need 
to stop such excesses.... [But] this will be done... as simply and as readily as any crowd of 
civilized people. interferes to put a stop to a scuffle or to prevent a

woman from being assaulted.... We know that the fundamental social cause of excesses. [of] 
violations] of the rules of social intercourse, is the exploitation of the people, their want and 
their poverty. With the removal of this chief cause, excesses will inevitably begin to "wither 
away". We do not know how quickly and in what succession, but we do know they will wither away. 
With their withering away the state will also wither away.

Compare to Robert A. Heinlein's libertarian utopia of The Moon Is a Harsh Mistress 
chttps://archive.org/details/1965-12_IF>, in which the ungoverned convicts" of the Lunar ice-mining 
settlement deal with crimes by grabbing somebody to serve as a judge, having him hear the case, and 
then putting the guilty party out of the airlock into the vacuum.
The answer at the end of the long 20th century to the questions: Where moon? Where Lambo? Where 
Utopia? was: Not here, and not now.

Let me ask you to note how remarkable this disappointment is. All previous this-world 
utopiasa€”starting from Thomasso Campanella's 1602 La cittA del Sole chttps 
://archive.org/details/thecity ofthesun02816guta€ !> or Francis Bacon's New Atlantis 
<https://archive.org/details/fnewatlantisOObacoa€!> on up through Lenin's State and Revolution 
<https://marxists.org/ebooks/lenin/state-and-revolution.pdfa€ !> had managed to construct, in their 
imagination,
more-than-satisfactory utopias with only a small amount of the technological power to manipulate 
nature and to organize humans in our highly, highly-productive 8 billion-strong division of labor 
that we have today. Considered as an anthology intelligence, humanity is inept, and not sane.

This is, perhaps, the place to tell the story Plutarch tells, of King Pyrrhus and his advisor 
Cineas: Plutarch chttp://classics.mit.edu/Plutarch/pvrrhus.html>:

[Cineas:] 'When all [kingdoms] are in our power what shall we do then?' Said Pyrrhus, smiling, 'We 
will live at our ease, my dear friend, and drink all day, and divert ourselves with pleasant 
conversation.' When Cineas had led Pyrrhus with his argument to this point: 'And what hinders us 
now, sir, if we have a mind to be merry, and entertain one another, since we have at hand without 
trouble all those necessary things, to which through
much blood and great labour, and infinite hazards and mischief done to ourselves and to others, we 
design at last to arrive?' Such reasonings rather troubled Pyrrhus with the thought of the 
happiness he was quitting, than any way altered his purpose, being unable to abandon the hopes of 
what he so much desired.

For an entire anthology-intelligence species to properly set and balance ends and means in order to 
successfully accomplish what its best self truly desires is, of course, much harder considered as a 
coordination problem than for an individual brain controlling a single animal organism to do so. 
Nevertheless, the second key to the history of the 20th century, just behind the key that is the 
understanding of the enormous unprecedented leap forward in our
technological prowess, is the recognition of how unintelligently humanity has chosen and is 
choosing the goals it is devoting its anthology-intelligence focus to pursuing.

[s]Truth be told, I actually think Hayek was about 1/4 genius and 3/4 idiot. Is macroeconomics was 
completely stupid, and enormously at variance with his microeconomic insights as well. That the 
extremely clever market economy could not find a way to respond to a monetary injection (whether 
coming from a gold discovery or a central bank expansion) other than by grossly over-investing in 
excessively roundabout and long-term unsustainable production
processes? That having so over-invested, it had no way to unwedge itself than to shift huge numbers 
of workers from now low-productivity investment-goods production to zero-productivity unemployment? 
Come on! Be serious! His respect for the time-honored wisdom of the of the ages in human social 
organization combined with his contempt for such and for all countervailing-power institutions in 
the economy? Ludicrous. a€~And then there is the dodging-
and-weaving Hayek: complaining to Paul Samuelson about the "malicious distortion" Samuelson 
committed by summarizing Hayek's position as "government modification of market laissez-faire must 
lead inevitably to political serfdom", yet in his 1956 forward to The Road to Serfdom we find:

Six years of [Labour Party] government in England have not produced anything resembling a 
totalitarian state. But those who argue that this has disproved the thesis of The Road to Serfdom 
have really missed... that the most important change which extensive government control produces is 
a psychological change... over... generations.... The change undergone by the character of the 
British people... can hardly be mistaken. The British

experience convinces me... is that the unforeseen but inevitable consequences of socialist planning 
create a state of affairs in which. totalitarian forces will get the upper hand.

Macro, society-economy, rhetorical honesty a€’’against those three faces of the Bad Hayek we have 
the Good information-theoretic Hayek, who is very good indeed: 
https://delong.tvpepad.com/sdi/2014/08/over-at-equitable-growth-vet-another-note-on-mont-pelerin-thi
nking-some-more-about-bob-solows-view.htmla€! You can quibble that Michael Polanyi saw further and 
deeper, and that Polanyi's distinction between "mercenary" and "fiduciary" modes of
human activity is of decisive importance for understanding the proper place of the market in 
society, and you would be right. But Hayek got to the mountaintop to see what was on the other side 
first. >

[t] Karl Polanyi wrote that the Hayekian project, in which humanity is made rich as a byproduct of 
profit-motivated economic agents responding to the price signals sent by the rich was a:

stark utopia. Such an institution could not exist for any length of time without annihilating the 
human and natural substance of society; it would have physically destroyed man and transformed his 
surroundings into a wilderness. Inevitably, society took measures to protect itself, but whatever 
measures it took impaired the self-regulation of the market, disorganized industrial life, and thus 
endangered society in yet another way. It was this
dilemma which forced the development of the market system into a definite groove and finally 
disrupted the social organization based upon it

Think of it: Your community and its associated land-use and sociability patterns ("land"), your 
occupations and its remuneration on a scale appropriate to your status and to your desert resulting 
from your applying yourself ("labor"), and the very stability of and your ability to be paid for 
performing your job at all (a€oefinancea€n)a€”all of these melt into air if they do not satisfy 
some maximum-profitability-use-of-resources test (a€oefictitious
commoditiesa€n) imposed by some rootless cosmopolite thousands of miles away. Furthermore, it is a 
maximum-profitability test that is applied, not a societal-wellbeing test The (competitive, 
externality-free, in-equilbrium) market system definitely and certainly maximizes something. But 
what it maximizes is not any idea of the well-being of society, but rather the wealth-weighted 
satisfaction of the rich.

[u] So society responded: people believe that they have other rights rather than property rights 
(which are valuable only if your particular piece of property is useful for producing things for 
which the rich have a serious jones). And so they strove to organize society to vindicate those 
other Polanyian rights. And so society did so by attacking the market, and by attacking all of 
those it saw as its internal and external enemies that the global market system was
empowering to oppress them.

Polanyi, writing in 1943 and thereabouts as Rotmistrov threw his 5th Guards Tank Army T-34s into 
the abattoir at Prokhorovka in an insanely one-sided loss ratio to keep the Nazi SS tank divisions 
"Adolf Hitler's Bodyguards", "The Empire", and "Death's Head" from breaking through in the one 
operation that might have won the Battle of Kursk for the Nazis, the most striking thing about this 
double movementa€”the market attempts to destroy society in the
interest of creative-destruction and satisfying the desires of the rich, society strikes backa€”was 
the extraordinary size and violence of the cataclysm that, from 1914 to 1945, destroyed human 
progress that had, during the 1870 to 1914 Belle A%opoque, seemed a marvelous and unmerited 
miraculous and stable gift to humanity. "Economic El Dorado", in Keynes's words in 1919. Polanyi:

No explanation can satisfy which does not account for the suddenness of the cataclysm. As if the 
forces of change had been pent up for a century, a torrent of events is pouring down on mankind. A 
social transformation of planetary range is being topped by wars of an unprecedented type in which 
a score of states crashed, and the contours of new empires are emerging out of a sea of blood. But 
this fact of demoniacviolence is merely
superimposed on a swift, silent current of change which swallows up the past often without so much 
as a ripple on the surface! A reasoned analysis of the catastrophe must account both for the 
tempestuous action and the quiet dissolution.

Polanyi wrote at the midpoint of the 1870-2010 Long 20th Century. After 1945 things were put back 
together, and there was another age, a Super-Belle A%opoch, the Thirty Glorious Years of social 
democracy, during which the great and good of humanity, at least in the North Atlantic plus Japan, 
could think that they had finally gotten it right. It was attained not by returning to a more 
purified    and ruthless version of the pseudo-classical semi-liberal Haye
system, not by building the New Man in the New Order of market-free Socialism, and not by 
recognizing that good societies are unified communities for which their charismatic leaders serve 
as the thongs that bind the bundle of sticks together, and so make the Fascist people strong.

It was attained, rather, by compromises cobbled-together. John Maynard Keynes with a shotgun 
blessing the hasty wedding-under-duress of Friedrich A. von Hayek and Karl Polanyi. But that 
social-democratic order did not pass its own sustainability test, and gave way to neoliberalism, 
which repeatedly failed to deliver the goods, and now here we are.

[v] As I wrote back then: I remember back in thea€! spring of 1981,1 think it was. I asked my 
professor, William Thomson, visiting from Rochester, roughly this: "The utilitarian social welfare 
function is I©u = U(l) + U(2) + U(3)a€! The competitive market economy maximizes a market social 
welfare function I©m = I%o(l)U(l) + I%o(2)U(2) + I%o(3)U(3)a€!, where the I%o(i)s are Negishi 
weights that are increasing functions of your lifetime wealth W(i)a€”
indeed, if lifetime utility is log wealth, then I%o(i)=W(i). Market failures drive wedges between 
what the economy achieves and what it could achieve. There are massive, massive differences between 
the I©u that is the true social welfare function and the function I©m that the well-working market 
maximizes. Why isna€™ t the unequal distribution of ex ante expected lifetime incomea€’’inequality 
of opportunitya€’’conceptualized by US economists as the
greatest                                                                                            
                                                                                                    
                of all market failures?" Thomson did not have a good answer.

My other teacher Joe Kalt, however dida€”an answer that old Freddie from Barmen and Charlie from 
Trier would have endorsed. People who talk about the Pareto-optimality of the market rather than 
about the divergence between the market's and the real Societal-Wellbeing Function are in the 
business of justifying that wealtha€’’however acquireda€’’should be the source of social power, and 
they are not in the business of working for the public interest. Most
are in this business because it is relatively lucrative.

Others have a somewhat deeper rationale. Friedrich von Hayek, for example, was convinced to his 
dying day and beyond that no better political-economic system than the market and private property 
could be devised, and that attempts to do so inevitably put us on the road to, well, serfdom. Thus 
justifications of the "optimality" of the market perform the same function in Hayek's Republic as 
the claim that those chosen to be guardians have souls of gold
perform's in Plato's. But Plato never claims that the purveyors of the noble lie that beguiles the 
citizens of his Republic were philosophers.

The idea that the market economy is a societal machine for satisfying the desires not of the 
people, but rather of the people with disposable incomea€”that is an old one, dating back to the 
mid-1700s and to Richard Cantillon's "Essay on the General Nature of Commerce". But it is not one 
that is highlighted in most economics coursesa€”that the market listens to you more-or-less in 
proportion to your disposable wealth. That is instead hidden beneath the
statement that the market considers your wishes according to your willingness-to-paya€”as if it 
were purely a matter of individual will, rather than at least as much a matter of the social power 
your wealth assigns to you.

When I teach Econ 1,1 replace "willingness to pay" with "intensity of desire times wealth." In 
general, in a market economy, if you have property or skills both useful for producing things for 
which the rich have a serious Jones and scarce, he will do OK. Otherwise not so much. Moreover, 
even if you are doing okay now, the creative destruction of the market system, especially in the 
long 20th century in which human technologicalcapabilities are doublingand
thus the economy is being revolutionized every generation creates great instability: if the 
particular value chain in which you are enmeshed shifts, or if your particular bargaining power 
within it changes up, whatever economic position and social power you have may will vanish 
overnight as the fabric of your life fails to pass some maximum-profitability test inflicted by 
some rootless cosmopolite financier thousands of miles away.

THIS IS NOT HOW PEOPLE THINK THEIR SOCIETY SHOULD WORK!!

As Karl Polanyi put it, the market system attempts to create a "stark utopia" by destroying all 
sources of social power and all societal bonds except those mediated by wealth. And 
societya€’’which has very different ideas about who should have social power and who should be 
listened toa€”reacts, by trying to damage the market system and damage those whom it decides are 
the rootless cosmopolites and their allies who are misusing it to thedetriment of the
people, the real, essential, worthy people. This has a long history. When Karl Marx began writing, 
the word he used for the concept he later labelled "bourgeois" was "Jewishness".

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

