Subscribe now

Where We Went Wrong

A sweeping history of society and the economy in the twentieth century
NOVEMBER-DECEMBER 2022

DeLonga€™ s analysis resembles John Kenneth Galbraitha€™ s (shown 1965) critique of the 
a€oeaffluent society .a€D
Photograph by Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century by J. Bradford DeLong (Basic 
Books, $35)

MORE THAN 60 years ago, just past the midpoint of the twentieth century, Warburg professor of 
economics John Kenneth Galbraith assessed the trajectory of Americaa€™ s increasingly a€oeaffluent 
society.a€D His outlook was not a happy one. The nationa€™ s increasingly evident material 
prosperity was not making its citizens any more satisfied. Nor, at least in its existing
form, was it likely to do so. One reason, Galbraith argued, was the glaring imbalance between the 
opulence in consumption of private goods and the poverty, often squalor, of public services like 
schools and parks. Another was that even the bountifully supplied private goods often satisfied no 
genuine need, or even desire; a vast advertising apparatus generated artificial demand for
them, and satisfying this demand failed to provide meaningful or lasting satisfaction.

Now economist J. Bradford DeLong a€™ 82, Ph.D. a€™ 87, looking back on the twentieth century two 
decades after its end, comes to a similar conclusion but on different grounds. Our national 
prosperitya€”still advancing, albeit these days much more slowly than during the a€oeglorious 
yearsa€D in the midst of which Galbraith was writinga€”may be taking us toward some
vision of a material utopia. But for most Americans, the outcome seems empty and unsatisfying. 
Instead of attributing this failure to structural factors like Galbraitha€™ s private-public 
imbalance, however, or the subversive role of advertising, DeLong, professor of economics at 
Berkeley, looks to matters of a€cecontingencya€D and a€cechoicea€d: at key junctures the economy
suffered a€oebad luck,a€D and the actions taken by the responsible policymakers were 
a€oeincompetent.a€n And behind those missteps in policy stood not just failures of economic 
thinking but a voting public that reacted perversely, even if understandably, to the frustrations 
poor economic outcomes had brought them.

DeLonga€™ s ambition in his deeply engaging new book is broader than Galbraitha€™ s was, however. 
While The Affluent Society focused largely on the American economy, DeLonga€™ s look back over the 
twentieth century energetically encompasses political and social trends as well; nor is his scope 
limited to the United States. The result is a work of strikingly expansive
breadth and scope. His treatment of the origins of World War I; of the economically confused 
response to the Great Depression; of the rise of fascism in the interwar period (he dismisses the 
familiar misperception that the early-1920s hyperinflation had much to do with Hitlera€™ s rise to 
power, but attaches too much importance to the reparations imposed after World War I, which
the Germans never paid anyway); of the postwar plight of the economically developing world (which 
all too often wasna€™ t actually developing); and of the contrast between Karl Marxa€™ s utopian 
vision and what DeLong labels a€oereally-existing socialisma€n are all well worth reading on their 
own. Indeed, DeLong is ill-served by his title: Slouching Towards Utopia: An
Economic History of the Twentieth Century. Wholly apart from the puzzling reference to the 1996 
screed by hard-right judicial ideologue Robert Borka€”or was it supposed to be Joan Didiona€™ s 
1968 essays on California, or maybe the last line of Yeatsa€™ s a€oeThe Second 
Cominga€n?a€”labeling the book an economic history fails to convey its sweeping frame.

THE CENTURY that is DeLonga€™ s focus is what he calls the a€celong twentieth century ,a€D running 
from just after the Civil War to the end of the 2000s when a series of events, including the 
biggest financial crisis since the 1930s followed by likewise the most severe business downturn, 
finally rendered the advanced Western economies a€oeunable to resume economic growth
at anything near the average pace that had been the rule since 187O.a€D By his reckoning, these 
were a€oethe most consequential years of all humanityaC™ s centuries.a€D The changes they saw, 
while in the first instance economic, also a€oeshaped and transformed nearly everything 
sociological, political, and cultural £€□

Within this 140-year span, DeLong identifies two eras of a€oeEl Doradoa€D economic growth, each 
facilitated by expanding globalization, and each driven by rapid advances in technology and changes 
in business organization for applying technology to economic ends: from 1870 to World War I, and 
again from World War II to 1970. His periodization therefore precisely matches
that of fellow economist Robert J. Gordon a€™ 62, who in his monumental treatise on The Rise and 
Fall of American Economic Growth (reviewed in a€oeHow America Grew,a€D May-June 2016, page 68) 
hailed 1870-1970 as a a€oespecial centurya€D in this regard (interrupted midway by the disaster of 
the 1930s).

But DeLonga€™ s explanation for the ending of this golden era of economic growth differs from 
Gordona€™ s. Gordon highlighted the role of a cluster of once-for-all-time technological 
advancesa€”the steam engine, railroads, electrification, the internal combustion engine, radio and 
television, powered flighta€”and argued that by 1970 frontier economic powers like the United
States had largely harvested the resulting not-to-be-repeated gains. Pessimistic that future 
technological advances (most obviously, the computer and electronics revolutions) will generate 
productivity gains to match those of the special century, Gordon therefore saw little prospect of a 
return to the rapid growth of those halcyon days.

DeLong instead points to a series of noneconomic (and non-technological) events that slowed growth, 
followed by a perverse turn in economic policy triggered in part by public frustration: In 1973 the 
OPEC cartel tripled the price of oil, and then quadrupled it yet again six years later. Federal 
Reserve chairs Arthur Burns (appointed by Richard Nixon and reappointed by Gerald Ford)


and G. William Miller (appointed by Jimmy Carter) were reluctant to accept the temporary economic 
losses that would have slowed rising prices. For all too many Americans (and citizens of other 
countries too), the combination of high inflation and sluggish growth meant that a€oesocial 
democracy was no longer delivering the rapid progress toward utopia that it had delivered in the

first post-World War II generation.a€D

Frustration over these and other ills in turn spawned what DeLong calls the a€oeneoliberal turna€D 
in public attitudes and economic policy. The new economic policies introduced under this rubric 
a€oedid not end the slowdown in productivity growth but reinforced it.a€D Further, the tax and 
regulatory changes enacted in this new climate channeled most of what economic gains
there were to people already at the top of the income scale. Meanwhile, progressive 
a€ceinclusiona€D of women and African Americans in the economy (and in American society more 
broadly) meant that middle- and lower-income white men saw even smaller gainsa€”and, perversely, 
reacted by providing still greater support for policies like tax cuts for those with far higher
incomes than their own.

DELONG also offers a deeper, less contingent, explanation for the a€oesharp neoliberal turn away 
from the previous ordera€’’social democracy a€”of 1945-73,a€D one that recalls sociologist and Ford 
professor of the social sciences Daniel Bella€™ s argument in his 1976 classic The Cultural 
Contradictions of Capitalism. Bell famously suggested that the very success of a
capitalist economy would eventually undermine a societya€™ s commitment to the values and 
institutions that made capitalism possible in the first place. In DeLonga€™ s view, the 
a€oegreatest causea€D of the neoliberal turn was a€oethe extraordinary pace of rising prosperity 
during the Thirty Glorious Years, which raised the bar that a political-economic order had to 
surpass in
order  to generate broad acceptance.a€D At the same time, a€oethe fading memory of the Great 
Depression led to the fading of the belief, or rather recognition, by the middle class that they, 
as well as the working class, needed social insurance.a€D

And there was a further dimension. Given the combination of slower growth overall and wider 
inequality, from the mid-1970s onward, and now expanded opportunities for women and favored racial 
minorities, what the economy delivered to a€oehard-working white mena€D no longer matched what they 
saw as their just deserts: in their eyes, a€oethe rich got richer, the unworthy
and minority poor got handouts.a€D As Bell would have put it, the politics of entitlement, bred by 
years of economic success that so many people had come to take for granted, squeezed out the 
politics of opportunity and ambition, giving rise to the politics of resentment. Echoing Bella€™ s 
central hypothesis, DeLong concludes that a€oethe market economy solved the problems
that it set itself, but then society did not want those solutionsa€”it wanted solutions to other 
problems, problems that the market economy did not set itself, and for which the crowd-sourced 
solutions it offered were inadequate ,a€D The new era therefore became a€oea time to question the 
bourgeois virtues of hard, regular work and thrift in pursuit of material abundance.a€D


Daniel Bella€™ s insights into capitalisma€™ s contradictions echo in DeLonga€™ s work.
Photograph courtesy of Harvard Public Affairs and Communications

Although DeLong does not offer any explicit program for future action, his account of this 
historical experienced’’like Galbraitha€™ s before hima€”at least implicitly points a way toward 
improving matters. (By contrast, Gordona€™ s emphasis on the never-to-be-repeated technological 
advances of an earlier era left little room for positive action.) DeLonga€™ s unspoken agenda
would surely include rolling back many of the changes made in the U.S. tax code over the past 
half-century, as well as reinvigorating antitrust policy to blunt the dominance, and therefore 
outsize profits, of the mega-firms that now tower over key sectors of the economy. He would also 
surely reverse the recent trend moving away from free trade. Central bankers should certainly
behave like Paul Volcker (appointed by President Carter), whose decisive action finally broke the 
1970s inflation even at considerable economic costa€”not like Arthur Burns. Above all, policymakers 
should get the economics right.

But offering recommendations is not DeLonga€™ s purpose. His stark sense that the world is 
different in the wake of the 2008-10 financial crisis is what allows him to draw a 
Buddenbrooks-like line, ending his rich historical account there. It also precludes drawing firm 
conclusions from the a€celonga€D century that he so thoughtfully examines for the era to follow.

Revisiting The Affluent Society 60-plus years later leaves the reader astonished at how well so 
much of the booka€™ s analysis has stood up. Not only Galbraitha€™ s main themes but many of his 
more specific observations as well seem as pertinent, and important, today as they did then. What 
will future readers of Slouching Towards Utopia conclude? No doubt the historical
vignettesa€’’about the Great Depression, the two World Wars, and the other episodes examineda€”will 
hold up well. If anything, DeLonga€™ s narratives will become more valuable as those events fade 
into the past. Alas, his description of fascism as having at its center a€oea contempt for limits, 
especially those implied by reason-based arguments; a belief that reality could be
altered                                                                                             
                                                                             by the will; and an 
exaltation of the violent assertion of that will as the ultimate argumenta€D will likely strike a 
nerve with many Americans not just today but in years to come.

But what about DeLonga€™ s core explanation of what went wrong in the latter third of his, and our, 
a€oelong centurya€D? I predict that it too will still look right, and important.

Benjamin M. Friedman is the Maier professor of political economy. His books include The Moral 
Consequences of Economic Growth and, most recently, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism (excerpted 
in aCaeThe American Exception,a€\3January-February 2021, page 43). Friedman is a member of the 
magazinea€™ s Board of Incorporators.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

