Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) I think this is a great decision, and is going to lead to great and wonderful things:

Michelle Holder: A Note from Incoming Equitable Growth President & CEO: a€~Ia€™ ve admired the 
Washington Center for Equitable Growth since its
inception in 2013, so I am thrilled to become its next leader. Equitable Growtha€™ s missiona€”to 
accelerate research on how inequality affects economic
growth and stabilitya€”hits home for mea€!. Examining how inequality inhibits growth, and promoting 
effective and actionable policies, is absolutely
critical if we want to improve our economy and society more broadly. As a second-generation 
immigrant, first-generation college graduate, and working
mom, my lived experience lies at the nexus of characteristics associated with marginalization and 
cuts right to the heart of many topics Equitable Growth
studiesa€!. The present moment is charged with opportunities^!. I could not be more excited to lead 
the Washington Center for Equitable Growth through
this next chaptera€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/a-note-from-incoming-equitable-growth-president-and-ceo-michelle-holder
/>

2) Our now-Interim Chief Economist hit this one out of the park, I think:

Kate Bahn et. al.: JEC Hearing: A Second Gilded Age?

LINK: <https://www.youtube .com/watch?v=8uZ-i_4ORpo&t=1565s>

3) And it is Child Tax Credit week. We have very solid projections of all the good it will do from 
studies of partially similar programs in the past, but it would be nice to confirm or
disconfirm our expectations as rapidly as possible:

Liz Hippie: The Child Allowance Will Pay Dividends for the Entire U.S. Economy far into the Future: 
a€~Research into positive, long-term benefits of the
Earned Income Tax Credit and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program is directly translatable 
to the benefits we can expect to see from the new
child allowance. Economic research clearly demonstrates that an investment in families today is an 
investment in their future economic mobility, as well as
in broad-based, stable economic growth. Making the newly enacted child allowance permanent will pay 
dividends for all Americans far into the future.

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/the-child-allowance-will-pav-dividends-for-the-entire-u-s-economy-far-i
nto-the-future/>

4) A very important, bracing, and heartening story, if you have not heard it beforea€”or even if 
you have:

Nina Banks: The Story of Sadie Alexander

LINK: <https://www.youtube .com/watch?v= 1 qf7JTYdYto

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) I tell you, it is very, very nice to have a Council of Economic Advisers that you can rely on 
not to tell misleading lies about the state of the world and the impacts of policies:

Ceci Rouse et al.: ^“Without cars and pandemic-affected services, core inflation rose 0.22 percent 
month-over-month, relative to 0.28 percent in May and

0.31 percent in April <https://t.co/ZQsigWt5OL>. The year-over-year numbers were impacted by base 
effects from last year, although the impact of base
effects is starting to move out of the data. Starting in July, year-over-year changes in CPI will 
be calculated off of a price level that is above the pre­
pandemic level. Controlling for base effects by smoothing across the 16 months since February 2020, 
the rate of CPI inflation was 3.5%. In core inflation,
controlling for base effects the rate of annualized CPI inflation was 3.1%a€!

LINK: <https ://twitter.com/WhiteHouseCEA/status/l 414940736907358209>

2) If you had told me a generation ago that we would let local control of zoning get to this 
dysfunctional a pass, I would not have believed you:

Joseph Gyourko & Jacob Krimmel: The Impact of Local Residential Land Use Restrictions on Land 
Values Across and Within Single Family Housing
Markets: a€™ The amount by which land prices are bid up due to supply side regulationsa€! [is] 
especially burdensome in large coastal marketsa€!. Price
impacts in the big west coast markets now are the largest in the nation. In the San Francisco, Los 
Angeles, and Seattle metropolitan areas, the price of land
everywhere within those three markets having been bid up by amounts that at least equal typical 
household incomea€!. In the San Francisco metropolitan
area  (which includes San Francisco, Alameda, Contra Costa, Marin and San Mateo counties), the 
median a€oezoning taxa€D for a quarter-acre of land was

$409,000a€”more than four times the regiona€™ s median household incomea€!
LINK: <https://www.nber.org/svstem/files/working papers/w28993/w28993.pdf>

3) The possibility that Cuba today is actually poorer in material living-standard terms than it was 
under Battista in the late 1950s is hard to square with its human-development
index scoresa€”if, indeed, those can be trusted:

Marianne Ward and John Devereux (2010): The Road Not Taken: Pre-Revolutionary Cuban Living 
Standards in Comparative Perspective: a€~All
indications are that Cuba was once a prosperous middle-income economy. On the eve of the 
revolution, we find that incomes were fifty to sixty percent of
European levels. They were among the highest in Latin America at about thirty percent of the US. In 
relative terms, however, Cuba was richer earlier on.
The crude income comparisons that are possible suggest that income per capita during the 1920a€™ s 
was in striking distance of Western Europe and the
Southern States of the US. After the revolution, Cuba has slipped down the world income 
distribution. As best we can tell, current levels of income per
capita  are below their pre-revolutionary peaksa€!

LINK: <https ://web .archive .org/web/20121217122436/http: //econweb .umd 
,edu/~davis/eventpapers/CUBA ,pdf>

4) The pace of reform has been slow and subject to many restrictions, disincentives, and taxes 
because the point of reforma€”to the army at leasta€”is for the army to engross all
opportunities to profit by foreign trade, and to keep the rest of the population from benefitting 
so that they remain a pliable and easily exploited servile labor force. Chinese reform
worked because Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang and Xi Zhongxun and company figured out a way to align 
the interests of the bureaucracy and the bureaucrats with the nascent
entrepreneurial class. But the Cuban Army is a separate estate, without any ties with the potential 
Cuban bourgeoisie:

Carmelo Mesa-Lago (2019): Therea€™ s Only One Way Out for Cubaa€™ s Dismal Economy: a€~For the past 
60 years, Cuba has been unable to finance
its imports with its own exports and generate appropriate, sustainable growth without substantial 
aid and subsidies from a foreign nation. This is the
longstanding legacy of Cubaa€™ s socialist economya€!. Between 1960 and 1990, the Soviet Union gave 
Cuba $65 billion (triple the total amount of aid
that  President John Kennedya€™ s Alliance for Progress gave Latin America). At its peak in 2012, 
Venezuelan aid, subsidies and investment amounted to

$14 billion, or close to 12 percent of the gross domestic producta€!. Cubaa€™ s woes are a result 
of the inefficient economic model of centralized
planning, state enterprises and agricultural collectivization its leaders have pursueda€!. In his 
decade in power, President RaA°l Castro tried to face his
brother Fidela€™ s legacv of economic disaster head on bv enacting a series of market-oriented 
economic structural reformsa€!. The pace of reforms has


been slow and subject to many restrictions, disincentives and taxes that have impeded the advance 
of the private economy and desperately needed growth.
It is time to abandon this failed model and shift to a more successful one as in China and 
Vietnama€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/28/opinion/cuba-economy.html>

5) Cuban reform is always on the verge of paying big dividends. Always. Without fail. Every year. 
This from seven years ago is not atypical:

Alexa van Sickle (2014): Viva la RevoluciA3n: Cuban Farmers Re-Gain Control Over Land'. a€~As the 
state loosens its grip on food production, Cuban
farmers and independent co-operatives will need support to help solve the countrya€™ s agriculture 
crisis: Last year, Cuba spent over $L6bn (A£lbn) on
food importsa€! 60% of its domestic food requirement^!. Since 2007, President Raul Castro, noting 
its connection with national security, has made food
security a priority. State farms hold over 70% of Cubaa€™ s agricultural land; about 6.7m hectares. 
In 2007,45% of this land was sitting idle. In 2008
Castro allowed private farmers and co-operatives to lease unused land with decentralised 
decision-making, and loosened regulations on farmers selling
directly to consumers. Since 2010, Cubans with small garden plots, and small farmers, have been 
allowed to sell produce directly to consumers. However,
agriculture in Cuba remains in crisis. A government report issued in July 2013 showed that 
productivity had not increaseda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/mar/ll/cuba-agricultural-
revolution-farmers>

6) A very good reflection on the romance of world communisma€”how the last generation^™ s leaders, 
parties, and movements were obviously, in retrospect, brutally inadequate
and just brutal and destructive, but this time things are different, for sure. It means that there 
is always both an a€oeinternala€n and an external history: the history that is romantic
fantasy about what is happening, and the history that is retrospective reality-checks:

James Kurth: aCcelfMen Were Angelsa€\a€dReflections on the World of Eric Hobsbawm: a€™ Why are the 
catastrophes of Soviet communism during
the 1920sa€“1930s described nota€! where they chronologically belong, but in Part Two dealing with 
the period 1945a€“1970s?a€! Why is the treatment
of the catastrophes of Chinese communism and Third World Marxism during the 1960sa€“ 1970s 
postponed froma€! where they chronologically belong, to
Part Three?a€! Hobsbawma€™ s first chapter on Soviet communisma€! presents an historical 
elaboration on the romantic ideas that the young Hobsbawm
held about Soviet communism at the timea€!. Hobsbawma€! has written a second chapter on the same 
subjecta€! [with] much more of the actual
historya€!. He delays this, however, to Part Twoa€! the period during which the mature Hobsbawm 
gave up his youthful romantic ideasa€!. Hobsbawm
[then]a€! redirected his romanticism to Third World Marxism. Consequently, we see a repetition of 
the pattern of disjuncture. Hobsbawma€™ s first
chapter    on Third World Marxism and Chinese communism does not present the actual historya€! 
[but] an historical elaboration of the romantic ideas
thata€! middle-aged Hobsbawm helda€!. However, Hobsbawma€™ s present identity as a distinguished 
historian must also be expressed. Consequently,
he  has written a second account of Third World Marxism and Chinese communisma€!

LINK: 
<https://www.istor.org/stable/pdf/42896912.pdf?refreqid=excelsior%3A59278a437a45f3830c4bdl988828547d
>

7) As far as I know, there are very few people satisfied with the sluggish recovery from the Great 
Recession. Bernanke certainly is not. Geithner tends to say: a€oeWe did the best
we could, but we were sabotaged by the Republican Party, and the electorate did not reward us for 
making the hard choices. I blame Bernankea€™ s and Yellena€™ s failures at the
Fed not on their being economists, but on their being saddled with a large number of people on the 
FOMC who were not qualified for the job, unwilling to mark their beliefs to
marketa€”and Bernanke and Yellen neither having the confidence and personality to split the 
committee but rather to always seek a€ceconsensusa€D, nor having the bureaucratic
political  skills of Powell to mange the consensus to where they wanted it to go:

Matthew Yglesias: When Experts Go Astray. a€~On the specifics of full employment, what happened 
after the 1970s inflation experience is that
economists promulgated a view that democracy naturally tends toward inflationa€!. Elected officials 
always want to err on the side of less unemployment,
even   if that means more inflation. They say you can worry about the inflation later. But therea€™ 
s a a€oetime consistency problema€D where once
ita€™  s later, you still want to defer addressing inflationa€!. The solution to this, according to 
economists, was to create central banks that are staffed by
experts (i.e., economists), pay higher salaries than normal civil service agencies, and also 
receive unusual levels of insulation from the political processa€”
to  the point where the president criticizing their decisions is considered inappropriatea€!. But 
just as biology lab insiders are reluctant to conclude that
biology labs are running reckless risks, economists are reluctant to conclude that this set of 
special arrangements might have some downsides. I dona€™ t
think ita€™ s a coincidence that Jay Powell is not an economista€”ea€™ s not intellectually, 
emotionally, or professionally invested in the community of
practice that looks at the sluggish recovery from the Great Recession and says a€oeyeah, we did a 
great joba€da€l

LINK: <https://www.slowboring .com/p/experts-astray>

8) When I say that this is Cultural Revolution-level obsequious toad-eating, I am not kidding or 
engaging in hyperbole:

Jonathan Chait: J.D. Vance Apologizes on Fox News for Opposing Trump: a€~In 2016, J.D. Vance, the 
successful author turned venture capitalist, was a
hard-core critic of Donald Trump. The Republican nominee was a€oeunfit,a€n his attacks on 
a€oeimmigrants, Muslims, etc.a€D were
a€cereprehensible,a€D and his policy proposals ranged from a€oeimmoral to absurd.a€D Vance publicly 
endorsed Never Trump Republican Evan
McMullin and expressed a fervent wish: a€oeln four years, I hope people remember that it was those 
of us who empathized with Trumpa€™ s voters who
fought him most aggressively.a€D Now Vance hopes fervently that his aggressive fight against Trump 
is not remembereda€!. a€oeLike a lot of people, I
criticized Trump back in 2016,a€D Vance conceded. a€oeand I ask folks not to judge me based on what 
I said in 2016, because Ia€™ ve been very open
that I did say those critical things and I regret them, and I regret being wrong about the guy.a€D 
Lots of people were calling Trump a lying predatory
huckster back in 2016. Now they all know bettera€”or, at least, the ones who want to run for office 
as Republicans doa€!

LINK: 
<https://nymag.com/intelligencer/2021/07/j-d-vance-apologizes-fox-news-trump-hillbilly-elegy-ohio-se
nate-republican.html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

