Subscribe now

CONDITION: Sick, Sardonic Amusement:

It is unfair, but I still cannot help but keep thinking about and laughing at, in a sick way, Matt 
Yglesiasa€™ s hyperbolic description of how subservience to The FaceBook as a platform impelled by 
the desire to expand rapidly and make lots of money broke http://vox.coma€™ s hopes to disrupt the 
media with first-class and useful explainer journalism:
To get a really big web audience, you need broad distribution from Facebook and Googlea€!. That 
meant bending to the editorial vision of a different companya€!.

Platform dependence made product innovation essentially impossible. It was also editorially 
constraining. I think ita€™ s very under-appreciated by people in the technology industry that most 
of the media trends they deplore are direct consequences of Facebooka€™ s influence over journalism 
in the mid-2010sa€!.
Hard-core identity politics and simplistic socialism performed incredibly well on Facebooka€!.

So you ended up with this whole cohort of discourse structured around a€oels Bernie Sanders perfect 
in every way? Or is it problematic to vote for a white man?a€D as the only possible lens for 
examining American politics and societya€!

Truly we are damned!

I am trying to have some intelligent thoughts about the differences between:

• organizations that have a mission, subject to a cover-your-costs constraint;

• organizations that are about making as much money as they can; and

• organizations that are about building tech-bro castles in the sky, so that founders can sell out 
to later funding rounds, and the whole thing can eventually be sold to a giant that fears a 
possible future competitive threat, and then shut down.
These three types of things act very differently.

But my thoughts are not yet intelligenta€!
Share

FOCUS: Possible? Introduction to a€oeHistory of Economic Growtha€D

Is this how I should start my course next semester?:

Let me talk for 15 minutes, and then leta€™ s see if we can have a discussion here:

I take 1870 to be the hinge of history.

Starting in 1870 it became cleara€”with human technological competence deployed-and-diffused 
worldwide (not just in the southern part of one small island) doubling every generationa€”that 
humanity was on the way to solving the problem of baking, a sufficiently large economic pie for 
everyone to potentially have enough. Up until 1870 there had been no possibility of humanity baking 
such a sufficiently large economic pie. Technological progress was
simply too slow. Human fecunditya€”and the desire to have surviving children, especially sonsa€”was 
just too great.

The slowness pre-1870 of technological advance had two major consequences:

• First, it meant that Malthusian pressures kept humanity desperately poor. Take slow technological 
progress. Add the necessity under patriarchy of having at least one surviving son in order to give 
one durable social power. Reflect that under conditions of slow technology and thus slow population 
growth, one-third of humans will wind up without surviving sons, to have more sons in the hope that 
at least one would survive, and natural resource
scarcity a€’’those put mankind under the Malthusian harrow, in dire poverty.

•  Second, it meant that politics and governance were a poisonous weed. In a world in which there 
cannot be enough, at the foundation politics and governance can be nothing else than an A©lite, 
elbowing competitors out of the way and running a force-and-fraud exploitation game on the rest of 
humanity. This A©lite of thugs-with-spears (and later thugs-with-gunpowder-weapons) and their tame 
accountants, bureaucrats, and propagandists could
have enough. And with their enough they could build and enjoy their high culture. But that those 
who controlled and those who spoke were hard men, who reaped where they did not sow and gathered 
where they did not scatter, made human life fairly dystopian, even after taking account of the 
general poverty.

However, after 1870 it rapidly became clear that things could be very different: a€oeEconomic 
Eldoradoa€D, as John Maynard Keynes put it, was on the way.

In 1870 the last pieces of the institutional complex that supported what Simon Kuznets labelled 
a€oeModern Economic Growtha€Da€’’average real income and productivity levels doubling every 
generation, growing at an average rate of 2%/year or morea€”fell into place. The addition to the 
institutions that were there before pushed humanity across a watershed boundary with the coming of

• the industrial research lab,

• the modern corporation, and

• the globalized market economy

These revolutionized the discovery, development, deployment, and diffusion of human technologies 
useful for manipulating nature and cooperatively organizing ourselves. There was as much global 
technological advance from 1870 to 2010 as there had been from -6000 to 1870. Humanitya€™ s 
deployed-and-diffused technological prowess in 2023 stood at a level at least 25 times its level as 
of 1870. And although there was a population explosiona€”
humanitya€™ s numbers rose from about 1.3 billion in 1870 to 8 billion in 2022a€”that explosion 
soon ebbed with the coming of the demographic transition, the rise of feminism, and the shift from 
high to low fertility. While before 1870 humanitya€™ s ingenuity in technological discovery had 
lost its race with human fecundity, afterwards it decisively won it.

And yet, while things were different after 1870, they were not different enough. Finding the 
solution to that problem of baking a sufficiently large economic pie did not get us very far, 
because the problems of slicing and tasting the piea€”of equitably distributing it, and of 
utilizing our wealth so humans could live, lives in which they felt safe and secure, and were 
healthy and happya€’’continued to completely flummox us.
At this point the flow of my thoughts divides into at least five rivers:

1. I find myself looking backward from 1870 earlier in time to understand how the pre-1870 
impoverished Malthusian human economy workeda€”as a-mode-of-production, -distribution, -domination, 
-communication, and -innovation.

2. I find myself looking backward from 1870 earlier in time to trace how there was no alternative 
hinge. How was it that the Devil of Malthus had so ensorcelled humanity before 1870? How was it 
that its spell had been so powerful from -6000 to 1870?

3. I find myself looking at 1870 to trace how the hinge that 1870 was was the hinge happened. Given 
the pre-1870 power of humanitya€™ s ensorcellment by the Devil of Malthus, how could we then wreak 
the miracle of breaking it? Why did no one think to gather communities of engineering practice to 
supercharge economic growth before 1870? How exactly did the research lab and the corporation in 
the context of the global market economy
empower us to accomplish these tremendous feats? Was the explosion of wealth and productivity of 
1870 causally-thin, in the sense that institutions had to evolve then in a way that was unlikely to 
get the explosion? Or was the growth acceleration of the Second industrial Revolution, the one big 
wave of Robert Gordon, causally-thicka€’’largely baked in the cake, while the causally-thin nexus 
or nexuses came earlier? These are very hard and deep
questions indeed.

4. I find myself looking forward from 1870 later in time to trace how the research lab-, 
corporation-, and global market economy-enabled discovery, development, deployment, and diffusion 
of technologies at an unprecedented, revolutionary, Schumpeterian creative-destruction, pace worked 
itself out, leading sector by leading sector and trailing sector by trailing sector. The David 
Landes-Joseph Schumpeter-Vaclav Smil book

5. I find myself looking forward from 1870 later in time to trace the political-economy 
consequences for human society of this unprecedented advance toward technology revolution-driven 
material cornucopia. Why, given that the solution to the problem of baking came within our grasp, 
did the second-order problems of slicing and tasting continue to elude us?
Plus, we need to always remember that humans do not just do, they think about what they are doing. 
We must cover not only what the economy in the process of economic growth or non-growth was, but 
also what people thought they were doinga€”and what they thought their options and possibilities 
were.

Now it is no secret that I have already set out my take on (5). It is my book: Slouching Towards 
Utopia: The Economic History of the 20th Century <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>.
The other four, howevera€”well, economic historian Eric JA3nes has a line:

Oscar Wilde expected to be met at the Pearly Gates by St Peter bearing an armful of sumptuously 
bound volumes and declaring, a€oeMr Wilde, these are your unwritten worksa€Da€! [The European 
Miracle: Environments, Economies and Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia]

I find myself almost unmanned at the thought of the task of trying to write them.

But we do what we can. I draw inspiration from Will MacAskilla€™ s whose very nice book What We Owe 
the Future is really six 50-page book prospectuses stapled together. I think: I can do thata€”I can 
provide you with lecture notes at that length (plus my Slouching Towards Utopia book) to guide our 
explorations this semester of these topics (1) through (5).

And throughout, I will structure what we do around this table of my guesses as to the shape of the 
human economya€”how many people P, roughly what their average real income in today's dollars 
happens to be y, and then this measure of mine H, which is average real income times the square 
root of population which I will assert is a rough measure of human ideas about "technology": our 
capability to manipulate nature and productively organize ourselves.
And population, average real income, and human ideas P,y, and H have their proportional annual 
growth rates n, g, and h, respectively:


Guesses at Global Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Date

-73000

-68000

Real
Income/
Capita      y

$1,200

$1,200

Popula­
tion P
(millions)

0.01

0.10

Ideas
Total    Income Y stock

(billions) Leve| H

$0.12     0.008

Ideas
Growth
Rate     h

Sub-speciation gateway?

Establishment of homo sapiens sapiens?


-48000

$1,200

0.20

$0.24     0.012   0.002%       Final radiation from Africa?


-30000

-8000

-6000

-4000

-3000

-1500

-1000

-400

150

800

1000

1500

$1,200

$1,200

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

$900

0.57

2.04

5.09

10.5

15

37

50

103

200

240

296

500

$1

$4.6

$9

$14

$33

$45

$93

$180

$216

$266

$450

0.019

0.037

0.043

0.062

0.075

0.136

0.195

0.272

0.297

0.330

0.429

0.003%

0.003%

0.009%

0.018%

0.018%

0.030%

0.030%

0.060%

0.060%

0.014%

0.052%

0.052%

Late Paleolithic era
Neolithic revolution

“Tribal” mode of production

Final start of “urbanization”?
Start of Bronze-Literacy age

Bronze-Literacy mode of production

Start of Iron age

“Ancient” mode of domination (“Asiatic”?)
High Antiquity

Late-Antiquity Pause

Feudal mode of production

Commercial-Gunpowder-Empire mode of domination


Leave a comment

ONE IMAGE: What a Maroon!


Donald J. Trump *

@realDonaldTrump                             1h

When Elon Musk came to the White House asking me
for help on all of his many subsidized projects, whether
it's electric cars that don't drive long enough, driverless
cars that crash, or rocketships to nowhere, without
which subsidies he'd be worthless, and telling me how
he was a big Trump fan and Republican, I could have
said, "drop to your knees and beg," and he would have
done it...


Give a gift subscription

MUST-READ: The Future Is Not Just Here & Unevenly Distributed, It Is Slipping into the Past:

Again, this greatly resonated with me:

Noah Smith: My cyberpunk city, my cyberpunk world: Cyberpunk assembled itself in our minds, a 
vision composed half of a technological and social future we felt was coming, and half of the 
adventures we imagined ourselves havinga€!. And then those adventures became not just possible, but 
inescapable and terrifying. In 2019 I found myself standing on the roof of a skyscraper in Hong 
Kong next to a friend in a gas mask as the
citya€™ s youth and mirror-faced riot police battled each other with tear gas and firebombs in the 
electric forest of the megalopolis below. Those brave, doomed Hong Kong protests were, in fact, 
just one part of a multi-year global uprising in which people around the world fought their 
governments and their local police forces in the streets, coordinating and inspiring each other and 
outfoxing the authorities using a global wireless
communication network linked to pocket supercomputers running pseudonymous social media services. 
The uprising continued even in the face of a sudden global plague that had much of the world hiding 
in their rooms, linked only by video chat, ordering their goods on the web.

In the wake of the plague came war. Drones.. indispensablea€L Where soldiers once sent poetry from 
the front, now they sent high-quality videos, often with a soundtrack from popular musica€!. And 
the war extends its tentacles into the social media space, a shadowy realm where ita€™ s hard to 
tell the difference between the bots, government operatives, and online fandoms spewing out clouds 
of information and disinformationa€”
great-power politics played out in forum flame-wars.

Far from the war, I walk through the streets of a strange cyberpunk city. I step around the 
homeless, destitute people who fill the streets, forsaken by their increasingly distant government. 
Strange people roll past me on one-wheels carrying boomboxes blasting 90s rap, fly drones in the 
park, scoot around in homemade go-karts, or drive miniature fake firetrucks blasting sound effects 
from Godzilla. And laid over this gritty, failing,
beautiful metropolis like a second city: the network of the eccentric barons of techno-capital and 
their hired geniuses, the corporations that own space and create miracle medicines and godlike 
pseudointelligences, all connected by digital threads of memes and money and the occasional 
trans-national cyber-scam.

That girl with the chrome hair and the black leotard and the gizmos implanted under her skin? I 
know that girl, she lives down the street from me.

We felt this future coming; we didna€™ t need prophets to tell us about it. We saw how information 
technology was wiring up the world, how inequality was breaking society into pieces, how 
governments were struggling to deal with it all. The elements of the genre we now know as cyberpunk 
were pasted onto that consensus mental collage. Gibson, Stephenson, Shirow, Oshii, Sterling, 
Cadigan, and all the other cyberpunk creators were
simply offering us alternative little slices of a future we all felt being born around us. And now 
wea€™re herea€!

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Az Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:


• Annie JLowrey: Harassment in economics uoesnafe11" t stay in Bconomicsa^i

•  Chris Anstey: Indiaa€™ s Economic Ascendance May Happen This Time: a€~Chinaa€™ s economy zoomed 
past India back in the early 1990s... following the initial chapters of the high-growth playbook. 
Now, just as China is running into major headwinds, India has the chance to emerge as a new 
dynamo.... But hopes for India to achieve East Asian-style rapid growth have disappointed 
before.... Two key things have changed. First... New Delhi is
putting its money where ita€™ s mouth has been in terms of building infrastructure.... Second, the 
widening rift between the US and China....

• Paul N. Pearson & al.: Authenticating coins of the a€~Roman emperora€™ Sponsian: a€~An apparent 
contradiction in the historical sourcesa€!. On the one hand that the Province of Dacia was lost to 
the empire in the reign of Gallienus, but alsoa€! Aureliana€! evacuated the peoplea€! to a new 
provincea€l south of the Danubea€! [Perhaps] an initial period of isolated secession when supply 
lines were cut off, followed by a negotiated and orderly
withdrawal across the river when the security situation improveda€!

•  Matthew Yglesias: a€~Ia€™ ve posited a different mechanism for this a€” the purpose of 
conservative politics is to trick people into voting against redistribution, so ita€™ s inherently 
a friendly space for scammersa€!

•  Scott Lemieux: Advertisers continue to flee Elona€™ s fascist midlife crisis: a€~Apparently 
buying a website with the sole purpose of featuring more Nazi content is an effective way of 
repelling advertisers, which is kind of a problem when advertising is the overwhelming majority of 
your revenuea€!

•  Anil Dash: a€~All other things aside,, the fact that [Musk] clearly doesna€™ t know how to use 
GitHub or Slack is such outrageously funny boomer energy. Fully in keeping with a€oeprint out your 
codea€D and a€oel am constantly getting duped by obviously fake bullshit onlinea€Ua€!

• Bruno Laeng & al.'. Bright illusions reduce the eye's pupil: a€~The most parsimonious explanation 
for the present findings is that pupillary responses to ambient light reflect the perceived 
brightness or lightness of the scene and not simply the amount of physical light energy entering 
the eye. Thus, the pupillary physiological response reflects the subjective perception of light and 
supports the idea that the brain's visual circuitry is shaped by visual
experience with images and their possible sourcesa€!

• Scary Lawyer Guy: a€~Six years later and reporters (in this case Blake Hounshell bringing that 
signature POLITICO style to the NYT politics desk) pretend they had nothing to do with creating an 
impression among voters that Hillary was corrupt. Nope, totally clean handsa€!
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

But this is likely to be the end of the crypto grift bubble as we have known it, no? There is a 
future of Web3 and some DeFi out there for the TechBros, but this idea of plundering the easily 
gifted by making it easy for them to buy shitcoins with one button press on an exchangea€™ s 
smartphone appa€”that is now a thing of the past? Right? Right?:

Ken Rogoff: Will Crypto Survive?: a€~The epic collapse ofa€! FTX, looks set to go down as one of 
the great financial debacles of all time.... Buta€! rumors of the death of crypto itself have been 
much exaggerated.... Vitalik Buterin... has argued that the real lesson of FTXa€™ s collapse is 
that crypto needs to return to its decentralized roots. Centralized exchanges such as FTX make 
holding and trading cryptocurrencies much more
convenient, but at the expense of opening the door to managerial corruption. It is unlikely that 
the most important player, the US, with its weak and fragmented crypto regulation, will undertake a 
bold strategy anytime soon. FTX may be the biggest scandal in crypto so far; sadly, it is unlikely 
to be the lasta€!

Is this the first presentation in popular literature of magic sorcery-as-technology?

Christopher Marlowe: The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus: a€~Now that the gloomy shadow of the 
earth/Longing to view Orion's drizzling look/Leaps from th' antartic world unto the sky/And dims 
the welkin with her pitchy breath/Faustus, begin thine incantations/And try if devils will obey thy 
hest/ Seeing thou hast pray'd and sacrific'd to them./Within this circle is Jehovah's name/Forward 
and backward
anagrammatiza€™ d/Th' abbreviated names of holy saints/Figures of every adjunct to the heavens/And 
characters of signs and erring stars/By which the spirits are enforc'd to rise:/Then fear not, 
Faustus, but be resolute/And try the uttermost magic can perform .^'/Sint mihi dei Acherontis 
propitii! Valeat numen triplex Jehovoel/Ignei, aerii, aquatani spiritus, salvete! Orientis 
princeps/Belzebub, inferni ardentis monarcha, et
Demogorgon, propitiamus/vos, ut appareat et surgat Mephistophilis, quod tumerarisdper Jehovam, 
Gehennam, et consecratam aquam quam nunc spargojsignumque crucis quod nunc facio, etper vota 
nostra, ipse nunc/surgat nobis dicatus Mephistophilis!d€\

Alice is right here, right? The behavior of both the New Yorker and the American Anthropological 
Association was insane and malevolent, right?

Alice Dreger (2011): Darknessa€™ s Descent on the American Anthropological Association: A 
Cautionary Tale: a€~In his 2000 accounts of the 1968 epidemic (including his New Yorker article and 
book manuscript), Tierney had portrayed the anthropologist Napoleon Chagnon and the late 
geneticist-physician James V. Neel, Sr., as virtually amoral eugenicists bent on conducting 
inhumane and deadly field experiments on a
phenomenally vulnerable population^!. The truth was quite the oppositea€!. Neel had determined that 
the YanomamAJ were alarmingly vulnerable to measles, and so he had personally arranged to bring 
vaccinesa€!. Neel, Chagnon, and the others raced to try to contain the epidemic and get ahead of it 
with the vaccines. The medical supplies began to run out before everyone could be appropriately 
vaccinated, but it was not because of
some  neglect on Neela€™ s or Chagnona€™ s parta€!. Chagnon ought to be remembered not as the 
genocidal maniac of Tierneya€™ s fantasy, but as the key provider of logistics during the frantic 
medical response to the tragic epidemic. I had to wonder when I came upon this story years after 
all this, given the reality as evidenced by so very many documentary sources, how did Tierneya€™ s 
falsehoods get as far as they did? To
answer that, one must really understand how and why certain individualsa€”but especially leaders 
within the American Anthropological Association (AAA)a€’’played a supporting role to Tierneya€™ s 
work. This was a supporting role that ultimately threatened the AAAa€™ s integrity and indeed the 
integrity of American anthropology itselfa€!. This papera€! chiefly seeks to highlight the 
problematic aiding and abetting of Tierney by
scholars who had the power to know better and to do bettera€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

