Subscribe now

CONDITION: Self-Driving Twitter:

The chaos-monkey action is strong with this one: apparently Elon Musk is buying Twitter, expecting 
that it will be able to drive itself:

$53.35  4-2.20% +1.15 5D

After Hours: $53.76 (4-0.77%) +0.41

Closed: Oct 26, 5:22:51 PM UTC-4 • USD • NYSE • Disclaimer

1D 5D 1M 6M YTD 1Y 5Y                                   MAX                            Key events >

54.00

53.00

52.00

51.00

50.00

49.00

Oct 21               Oct 24            Oct 25              Oct 26


Share

CONDITION: The Economy Remains Very, Very Strong:

Third-quarter real GDP growth at a 2.6% annual rate, and core PCE inflation at a 4.5% annual 
ratea€”in the late-Volcker or early-Greenspan years, these would have been seen as perfect numbers 
for an economy near full employment^!
Share

FIRST: Wait! What? What just happened to Facebook?:

Meta Platforms Inc (META) Price % Change

September 2021 Peak


V'                                            LOWS


Jan '20

Jul'20               Jan 21               Jul '21

Jan '22              Jul'22

-46.00%


RITHOLTZ

wealth tnaHaQ6rD6nt

Oct 27 2022,10:16AM EDT. Powered byYC HARTS

The news:

Sofia Pitt: Meta stock falls 23% on earnings miss, analyst downgrades: a€~Cowena€™ s John 
Blackledge also downgraded Meta to market performa€! lowereda€! price target to $135 from $205a€!. 
KeyBanca€™ s Justin Pattersona€! sector weight from overweigha€!. Since the start of the year, 
Metaa€! downa€! 61 %a€!. TikToka€! slowdown in online ad spendinga€! Applea€™ s iOS privacya€!

The perspective:

Barry Ritholtz: Meta-Four: a€~We discussed how ephemeral and short-lived great success can be 
yesterdaya€!. I had no idea it was a metaphor for what would happen a few hours latera€! [to] 
Facebooka€!. FB does not have all that durable of a grip on its user basea€!. [Thus] METAa€™ s moat 
is far shallower and narrower than that of other FAANGM firmsa€I. METAa€! had already fallen 50%a€! 
[by] mid-Marcha€!. Ben Carlson
points out that a€oeFacebooka€™ s market cap has declined by ~$800 billion since thena€! greater 
than the current market cap of every company in the S&P 500 save for Apple, Microsoft, Google & 
Amazona€!.

Musk, he is not someone you want to be competing witha€! disruptive, innovative, and capable of 
thinking way, way outside the boxa€!. Tesla shareholdersa€! [fear a] shiny object distracting 
Elona€!. Facebook shareholdersa€! realizinga€! in addition to TikToka€! they have another social 
media competitor fighting them.

Zucka€™ s sketchy respect for its user data or privacy that was once the firma€™ s greatest source 
of profitsa€!. Facebooka€™ s business model was t-boned by Applea€! [not] fatala€! but nobody walks 
awaya€! when a vehicle that large plows into you. TikTok stealing users, Apple breaking their magic 
data source for advertisers, and nowa€! an unpredictable but brilliant competitora€!

And the rant:

Ed Citron: Mark Zuckerberg Is Going To Kill His Company: a€~In the most charitable interpretation^! 
[Zuckerberga€™ s] company [has] grow[n] from a€oecatch up with what your friends are up to!a€D ta€! 
discordanta€! algorithmsa€! trick[ing] you into doing stuffa€!. Instagram and Facebooka€! use their 
usersa€! your feeda€! sifting through cat litter fora€! nuggetsa€!. You increase active users yet 
decrease revenuea€! by
turning your previously-beloved social networks into social engineering traps. Meta hasa€! taken 
two productsa€! people likeda€! and, in their desperation, tried to wring more money out of them by 
annoying their users into submission^!.

Zuckerberga€™ s metaverse, one of the stupidest things I have ever seen a company pursuea€!. As 
funny as it is that Zuckerberg responded to a€oedona€™t spend as much money on the metaversea€D 
with a€oel will now spend more on the metaverse,a€D anybody with half a brain can see that he is 
burning his company to the grounda€! peak founder-braina€!. $15 billiona€! without it being 
immediately obvious where that money
went or why it went there. We do know where some of it went, though - into Horizon Worlds, a subpar 
virtual reality platform that barely anybody uses or likesa€!. No excusea€! awkward, bad and 
uglya€!. [The] companya€! [has] an abundance of resourcesa€! a€oegreat mindsa€Da€! the ability to 
hire almost any engineera€!.

A mismanaged corporate behemoth run by a clueless goon that has been running on emptya€!. 
Profitable metaversesa€! area€! video games. Had Zuckerberg, say, acquired Second Life, and then 
used billions of dollars to turn it into a rich, customizable world run either in a browser or on a 
computer, that would have made a great deal more sense. Excepta€! Zuckerberga€! [lacks] the 
humility, awareness or experience of the world
hea€™ s creating products for to reliably know what people want, or might want, or will ever 
wanta€!. [A] likelya€! slow declinea€! as people flee these platforms, with investorsa€! calling 
for Zuckerberga€™ s head as he burns $15+ billion a year trying to prove that the world wants to 
chat to Wii avatarsa€!

There is one thing I would want to stress:

There is a HHHUUUGGGEEE difference between a company as a profit-making entity on the one hand, a 
company as a productive entity on the other hand, and a company as an influencer entitya€”as 
something that changes our lives and our societya€”on the third.

To date Elon Muska€™ s enterprises have been unsuccessful as profit-makers, pathfinders as 
producers, and are highly likely to change the world for all of our great good on the thirda€”and, 
yes, I do think he is an unpredictable and highly erratic chaos monkey. But he has not thrown away 
his shots. And people have willingly given him enough ammunition that a number of them have been 
world-benefitting bullseyes.
By contrast, Zuckerberga€™ s enterprises have been unbelievably and extravagantly successful as 
profit-makers, valuable at start but increasingly annoying as producers, and as influencers^^eW., 
some people just want to watch make the world burn.

Perhaps Facebook is almost over as a profit-making entity. That is what Ms. Market fears, as she 
assesses the danger that it may get caught between Tim Cook and Elon Musk and ground into dust, But 
Facebook on its way to irrelevance still could spread a lot of accelerants and throw off a lot of 
sparks with respect to its effects on society.
And do not forget this: Even though, to date, Elon Musk has been very good for the world (and has 
been good for his investors only to the extent that they have been able to sell to others who even 
more completely buy his dreams), there is no guarantee that his Self-Driving Twitter will be an 
equal boon for humanity.

It is odd: I have a strong sense that in the First Age of IT all the profits went to IBM, in the 
Second Age all the profits went to Wintel and thus to Microsoft and Intel, and in the Third Age all 
the profits went to Google, Facebook, Amazon, and Apple, Intel, and lately TSMC. I do not have a 
strong sense about which of these companiesa€™ being therea€”and other companiesa€”did more to 
change who we are and how our society works.
Shouldna€™ 11 have one, this far into the information age?

Leave a comment

One Video: On Claiming That Not Liz Truss But the Bank of England Is the Chaos Monkey Here

Gillian Tett: Jacob Rees-Mogg is talking bollocks:

Haggis UK 6Y]:-.dYi:§ dY]:adY]:0 @Haggis_UK

Gillian Tett(FT) - Jacob Rees-Mogg is talking bollocks. #C4News


7:35 PM r™ Oct 12,2022

14,124Likes3,811Retweets
Give a gift subscription

One Image:

Scott Nystrom

@ScottNystrom1

Replying to @chancery_daily

Deeper meaning found within

Wh

COVIC

A doc
Kamal
COVID

checke


Trending i

Twitter I

Trending w

Trending in

SMETA

13.8 K Tweeti


Promoted Tweet

War in Ukrairu

Latest upda
Ukraine


DEA H

The Chancery... • 8/30/22
because like it or not, nuance
is everywhere, nuance is the

only real truth.

it reflects reality — it's messy,
it's complicated, it's
conflicting, it's unavailable for

reductionist args.

if you want to love (or learn)
th^w, you'd better learn to


3:12 PM • Oct 26, 2022 • Twitter for iPhone

Get 50% off a group subscription

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Stephanomics: Biden's Pro-Union Presidency Isn't Good Enough for Union Members: a€~Reporter 
Katia Dmitrieva provides a dispatch from the traditional union stronghold of Macomb County, 
Michigana€!

• Marcy Wheeler: John Durhama€™ s Investigation Has Disclosed Corruption: His Owna€!

• Feminine Chaos: Your Privilege Is Showing, Coffee Husband Edition: a€~a€oeThis website is sooooo 
healthya€!

•  Martin Peers: On Metaverse Spending, Zuckerberg Doesna€™ t Care What Critics Say: a€~Not only is 
he not cutting back on augmented and virtual reality investments to take account of the economic 
slump, he plans to spend even more money!a€! Nearly $15 billion, well above the $10 billion annual 
figurea€!. Moreover, the losses will a€oegrow significantly a€Da€!

•  Nils Gilman: How to be Interdisciplinary: a€~The core of interdisciplinary work is disciplinary 
expertisea€!. a€cePost-disciplinarya€Da€! leads all too often to mere dilletantisma€!. Effective 
interdisciplinary teams consist of disciplinary experts, but onesa€! -who also have an inclination 
to and knowledge of how collaborate with experts from disciplines other than their ownd€\

• Jeff Stein: Russian Armya€™ s Quiet Fatal Flaw: No Sergeantsa€!

• Derek Thompson: How the U.K. Became One of the Poorest Countries in Western Europe: a€~Britain 
chose finance over industry, austerity over investment, and a closed economy over openness to the 
worlda€!
Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Gillian Tett: Billionaires Obsessed with Bunkersa€D: a€~They feared the world was heading for what 
they termed a€oeThe Eventa€Da€!. They wanted to know which region would be safest to retreat toa€!. 
Increasing numbers of private individualsa€! prepping for disastera€!. No billionaire on their own 
can fix the catastrophic risks of climate change, pandemic or war. We need collaborative action 
between the public and private sectors. So let us hope that
today a€™ s swelling mood of fear will shock us alla€!

Jemima Kelly: The problem with social media is that it is not a real place: a€~For too long digital 
platforms have said they are not responsible for what they publisha€!. I had one especially 
aggravating episode a couple of weeks ago, having agreed to speak at a bitcoin conference. After 
using the verbal filler a€celikea€D too much during one particularly combative segment of my panel, 
I was summarily turned into various memes and video montages that
totally clogged up my notifications for about 36 hours. There was the usual name-calling and 
trolling, but also some nastier than usual tweets and messages calling me the kind of offensive and 
misogynistic things that I cana€™ t repeat here, and one that suggested I should die by suicide. I 
was aware that the people attacking me had a huge financial incentive to invalidate my criticisms, 
so that helped me to not take any of it too seriously. I even found some of
the memes funny. But after a while, the sheer weight of negativity began to fill me with gloom 
about the number of people prepared to be so vile on the internet .a€! If we want to stop the 
internet becoming either a desperately bland or perfectly horrible place, we need to start treating 
it as somewhere we would be happy spending time in real life. That includes imposing moral and 
social consequences for behaving like an idiota€!

Drake Bennett: Can a Site Like Mastodon Solve a Problem Like Twitter?: a€~Whethera€! [it] solves 
the problemsa€! dependsa€!. If the problem is the annoying Wendya€™ s ads in your feed, then yes. 
But if ita€™ s the hostility and rage and oversimplification and bullying and question-begging and 
smugly self-congratulating tone of much of the content, it may nota€!. One of the best examinations 
of the social dynamics of Twitter is an early 2020 blogpost
by Venkatesh Rao entitled a€oeThe Internet of Beefs,a€D In the deadpan tone of an anthropologist, 
Rao describes a sort of feudal society where all interactions are reduced to either displays of 
solidarity or fights. a€oeAnything that is not an expression of pure, unqualified support for 
whatever they are doing or saying is received as a mark of disrespect, and a provocation to 
conflict,a€D he says of Twittera€™ s unwritten social code (and, in his argument, that of
pretty much the entire public internet). The biggest stars on the platforma€”e.g., Musk 
himselfa€”are those who have mastered the art of picking and indefinitely prolonging fights about, 
well, whatever. The beefing isna€™ t some unfortunate effect of online life, Rao argues. 
Increasingly, ita€™ s the pointa€!



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

