Subscribe now

SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. BRADFORD DELONG

PREORDER NOW • ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

AJ2: In between [1870 and 2010], things were marvelous and terrible, but by the standards of all of 
the rest of human history much more marvelous than terrible.[e] The one-hundred and forty years 
1870-2010 of the long twentieth century were, I strongly believe, the most consequential years of 
all humanitya€™ s centuries.[f] And it was the first century in which the most important historical 
thread was what anyone would call the economic one, for it was the
century that saw us end our near-universal dire material poverty, [g]

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Longer Notes:

[e] Here we have my first claim about the history of the long 20th century: that, both compared to 
all past centuries and on an absolute scale, the history of the long 20th century was indeed, as 
Eric Hobsbawm says, the history of an Age of Extremesa€.”but those extremes were much much much 
more marvelous than terrible. The arc of long 20th-century history was, by and large and broadly, 
with many hesitations, backward slippages, and complications, toward
not justice but at least toward hope, hope for someday a truly human world.

[f] Here is my second claim: that the long 20th century was the most consequential century in 
humanitya€™ s history, ever. Why? Because back in 1870 humanity was still desperately poor. Now 
some of us are very richa€”the upper-middle classes of the global north are rich beyond the most 
fabulous dreams of luxury dreamed by previous ages. And most of us are, by the standards of all 
previous centuries, very comfortable and long-lived indeed. And that all
of us are not so is a great scandal.

[g] Here is my third claim: That in the long 20th century, for the very first time in human 
history, the principal axis of history was economica€’’rather than cultural, ideological, 
religious, political, military-imperial, or what have you. Why was the long 20th century the first 
such century in which history was predominantly economic?Because before 1870 the economywas 
changing only slowly, too slowly for people's lives at the end of a century to be that
materially different from how they had been at the beginning. So the economy was thus the 
painted-scene backdrop behind the stage, rather than the action on the stage. (Now do note that you 
can still say that the principal axis of any millennium's history is economic, for over millennia 
things do change.)

But back up: what I have said here simply establishes that the principal axis of the history of the 
long 20th century could have been economica€”that the economy was changing and that enough economic 
damn things were happening one after the other to make it a player in history. But was it a lead 
actor? One of themajor themes of mybook is going to be: Yes, it was the lead actor. I am going to 
try todemonstrate this. But I am aware that that isa very shaky
and debatable point. For example, I have a more-than-half-serious from Robert Kaufman about my 
prioritizing the social being of the modern economy over the social consciousness of modernity:

Where is Delong's discussion, at every one of the book's crucial turning points, of the relation of 
the poetic (and related literary) base to the economic superstructure???? From Aristotle to Smith 
to Ricardo to Marx to K. Polanyi (among the dead), and to Piketty (among the living), the groans in 
response to advance copies of Delong's long-awaited opus are deafening: a€oeHow could Brad have so 
misunderstood the causality running
from the imaginative-aesthetic realm to that of the socio-economic?a€D

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

