Subscribe now

Title

1) Yes, the title is a reference is to what may be the most-cited twentieth-century poem in the 
English language: William Butler Yeats, a€oeThe Second Cominga€D. The Dial Vol.
69                                                                             (1920), p. 466 
chttps ://en .wikisource .org/wiki/Michael_Robartes_and_the_Dancer/The_Second_Coming>.

(Plus, secondarily, it is a reference to Joan Didion, Slouching Towards Bethlehem: Essays, New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1979 <http://books.google.com/?id=hsUgAQAAIAAJ>).

A Few Words About Notes:

2) I have limited the endnotes in this volume to direct quotations, close paraphrases, markers for 
where my thought and knowledge has been predominantly shaped by a single
source, and places where I think a reference for a€oewhat to read next to go more deeplya€D is 
appropriate.

I have done so even though I am well aware that such notes are grossly inadequate.

Nearly every single paragraph needs to be substantially buttressed, for each certainly could 
bea€”and, I hope, will bea€”be fiercely disputed by at least one person of great
intelligence and knowledge. Moreover, where I am swimming with (or against) a current, I have not 
dropped a note to any of the people who make up that current, save where I
think                                                                                     I can 
recommend a best entry point into the literature. And even where I think I am originala€! put it 
this way: Keynes wrote of the madmen in authority who thought they
were hearing voices in the air when actually academic scribblers had insinuated themselves into 
their minds. Machiavelli wrote of how his books were his friends who he spoke to,
and they answereda€”as he spun-up from black marks on white pages sub-Turing instantiations of the 
minds of the authors which he then ran on his wetware. Even where I think
that I am most original, I am almost surely simply repeating something that my internal model of 
some wiser persona€™ s mind has said to me in my internal dialogue.

So there should for justicea€™ s sake be many more notes. But there are stringent limits to how 
effective lengthy footnotes can possibly be. And there are even more stringent
limits to how effective endnotes can be.

So this book also has this supporting- and contradicting-arguments website at 
<https://braddelong.substack.eom/s/slouching-towards-utopia-long-notes>. Come on over, and read
and comment, please.

Situating This Book:

This also seems to be the appropriate place for me to situate this book:

Elevator Pitch:

The long 20th centurya€”the first whose history was primarily economic, with the economy not 
painted scene-backdrop but rather revolutionizing humanity's life every single
generational” taught humanity expensive lessons. The most important of them is this: Only a shotgun 
marriage of Friedrich von Hayek to Karl Polanyi, a marriage blessed by
John  Maynard Keynesa€” a marriage that itself has failed its own sustainability testsa€”has 
humanity been able to even slouch towards the utopia that the explosion of our science
and technological competence ought to have made our birthright. Whether we ever justify the full 
bill run up over the 146 years from 1870 to 2016 will likely depend on whether we
remember that lesson.

Friedrich von Hayeka€”a geniusa€”was the one who most keen-sightedly observed that the market 
economy is tremendously effective at crowdsourcing solutions. The market
economy, plus industrial research labs, modern corporations, and globalization, were keys to the 
cage keeping humanity desperately poor. Hayek drew from this the conclusion:
a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the market .a€L2Humans 
disagreed. As genius Karl Polanyi saw, humans needed more rights than just
property rights. The marketa€™ s treating those whom society saw as equals unequally, or unequals 
equally, brought social explosion after explosion, blocking the road to utopia.

Not a€ceblessed be the name of the marketa€dbut a€cethe market was made for man, not man for the 
marketa€dwas required if humanity was to even slouch towards a utopia
that potential material abundance should have made straightforward. But how? Since 1870 
humansa€”John Maynard Keynes, Benito Mussolini, Vladimir Lenin, and othersa€”

have tried solutions, demanding that the market do less, or different, and other institutions do 
more. Only government, tamed government, focusing and rebalancing things to secure
more Polanyian rights for more citizens have brought the Eldorado of a truly human world into view.

Brad DeLong, Professor of Economics at UC Berkeley and a sometime Deputy Assistant Secretary of the 
US Treasury, has tried throughout his career to straddle the fields of
economics, history, and public education. He has been lucky enough to have been taught by the very 
besta€”both while a student by the best possible teachers and while a
professor by the best possible colleagues at UC Berkeley.

Ten Original Contributions of the Book, in Order of Declining Importance:

1. The long (rather than the short) 20th century 1870-2010.

2. The first century whose history was primarily economic.

3. Forefronting that every generation from 1870-2010, changes in the economy revolutionized pretty 
much all of human society in a way never seen before.

4. Success at a€oeslouching towards utopiaa€D coming only with a temporarily-successful shotgun 
marriage of Friedrich von Hayek to Karl Polanyi, blessed by John
Maynard Keynes.

5. The importance of the modern corporation and industrial research lab as key prerequisites for 
the explosion of our science and technological competence.

6. The struggle between a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the 
marketa€D and a€oethe market was made for man, not man for the
marketa€D.

7. Using the interpretive frame of Karl Polanyi: humans needed more rights than just property 
rights.

8. The conflict between market and government on the one hand and a€cesocietya€O on the other: the 
marketa€™ s (or the governments™ s) treating those whom
society saw as equals unequally, or unequals equally, brought social explosion after explosion, 
blocking the road to utopia

9. All past centuries would believe that utopia ought to be at hand given our potential material 
abundance today.

10. Tracing the end of the 20th century story to the years around 2010 of the Great Recession, of 
a€oecoalitions of the willingSD, and of the failure to restore the pace of
global-north productivity growth

Competitor and Partner Books:

Here are just ten, each with a very brief note as to where our angles of vision differ:

• Eric Hobsbawm, The Age of Extreme sa€”examines the a€ceshorta€D rather than the a€celonga€D 20th 
century, and sees the story as the tragic defeat of socialism
rather than humanity grappling with the potential of abundance made possible by technologya€!

•  Thomas Piketty, Capital in the 21st Centuryd€”6o\h broader, looking back to 1600, and narrower, 
looking only at the political economy of inequalitya€!

• Edward Ross Dickinson, The World in the Long Twentieth Century: An Interpretive Historya€”^ much 
more a€ceecologicala€D and less societal takea€!


Share

• Robert Gordon, The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living since the Civil 
Ward€ ”US only, and focused on technology and production
rather than on political economya€!

• John Lukacs, A Short History of the 20th Century a€ ’’not nearly enough on the economics, but a 
book I envya€!

• Robert Allen, Global Economic History: A Very Short IntroductiondC”goes much further back, and 
gives the political-economy essentials of economic history
relatively short shrifta€!

•  Karl Polanyi, The Great Transformationa€”written only halfway through the long 20th century, but 
got a good deal of the essentials righta€!

•  Paul Johnson, Modern Times: From the Twenties to the Ninetiesa€ ’’covers only the short 20th 
century, and imposes a neoconservative frame that in my view is
grossly inadequate to the taska€!

• Ivan Berend, Economic History of Twentieth Century Europea€ ’’focuses on Europe only, not on the 
world or even the North Atlantica€!

• Giovanni Arrighi, The Long Twentieth Century: Money, Power and the Origins of Our Timesa€”Zooks 
much further back, really a history of the past millennium, and
deploys an obsolete and creaky semi-orthodox Marxist frame that is inadequate to the taska€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

