DeLongTODAY: <http://delongtoday.com>

Google Drive Video: <https://drive.google.com/file/d/1 dA87RowGb AH8NMz-IGXQnuUZaZdgcO5 
Y/view?usp=sharing>

COVID as of 2021-01-14


The COVID Tracking Project $ @C0VID19Tracking • 12h

KJ Our daily update is published. States reported 1.8M tests, 219k cases,

000     The Third Wave:


130,383 people currently hospitalized with COVID-19, and 4,022 deaths.

NATIONWIDE COVIO-19 METRICS. 7-0AY AVERAGE UNES          Apr 1-Jan 13

•  I confess I do not understand the

pattern


: JU

Daily Tests
Jen 13:1,793,568

7-Diy 4^1,945.3879

Deil| CAWS

J* 13:219,090

7-0*7*^ 242.139

Currently Hosprtekzed
Jan 13:130,383

7-D*yA^ 130.828

D*iy Deaths

Jan 13:4,022

7-DayAvg 3.323 9

•   If we could push R down from 3 to
1, we ought to have been able to
keep it below 1

•  The factors that led to fear­
generating stay-at-home and social­
distancing behavior in the spring and
summer do not seem to be operating

•  Winter?


Soace: The CO VID Tracking Project

• &ngie-day record O

•  What are the effects of Christmas?

Likely COVID Situation as of 2021-02-04


Date

2021-02-04

2021-01-28

New
Deaths

21,475

20,794

New
Inferred
Cases

New
Confirmed
Cases

New
Inferred/
New
Confirmed

As of Feb 4, Likely:

•  29 million confirmed cases

•  70 million true cases

• 450 thousand confirmed deaths

• £nnthmiQQnd tn IP P'PYPAQQ


2021-01-21

2021-01-14

2021-01-07

16,871

18,951   3,220,500   1,695,000

19,849   3,118,280   1,641,200

1.9

1.9

VZ VZ KZ VX±V/                            y WZkWWUU

mortality”) deaths

• 30% of the way to “herd
immunity”

2020-12-31    17,248   2,529,850   1,331,500        1.9

2020-12-24    19,032   2,840,708   1,532,700        1.9

Three Roads After Inauguration Day


Date

2021-02-04

2021-01-28

2021-01-21

2021-01-14

2021-01-07

2020-12-31

New
Deaths

21,475

20,794

16,871

18,951

19,849

17.248

New
Inferred
Cases

3,220,500

3,118,280

2.529.850

New
Confirmed
Cases

1,695,000

1,641,200

1.331.500

New
Inferred/
New
Confirmed

1.9

1.9

1.9

A Two-Week Lockdown:

•  If observed nationwide, cases go back down
from 600 to 100 thousand a day—from 3000 to
500 deaths a day

• Wind up with an additional 60 thousand
deaths

•  Disease does 33% of the work, vaccine 67%
of the work in getting us to herd immunity

•  If ignored, cases rise to one million a day—
5000 deaths a day

• Wind with an additional 600 thousand deaths

•  Disease does 75% of the work, vaccine 25%
of the work in getting us to herd immunity


2020-12-24    19,032   2,840,708’   1,532,700        1.9

• I know what I would choose


The COVID Plague Depression

2020-01-14


Bill McBride @calculatedrisk • Jan 11

During and following the 2007 recession, every month I posted a graph
showing the percent jobs lost during the recession compared to previous
post-WWII recessions.

Some people started calling this the "scariest jobs chart ever". Here it is
through December 2020.

Bill McBride:

•  http://calculatedrisk.com

•  Recovery stalled

•  Going to stay stalled for four more
months

•  After that, recovery can resume

•  In the meantime, what we need is
income support

•  $2000 checks not the best, but
perhaps the possible

•  Small business...

•  What shape will it take?

2020-01-14

The Possibility of a Rapid Spontaneous Recovery?


FRED — Real Disposable Personal Income

— Real Personal Consumption Expenditures

18,000

10,000

2018  2019  2020

Hope to avoid the extra year of
dithering

• Then hope to get a rapid recovery to a high-pressure
economy

• Will it happen on its own

• It might—substantial pent-up extra savings

• Totalling $3 trillion—15% of a year’s national
income

• How fast will those savings enter the spending
stream?

•  If fast, the Federal Reserve will then face the
interesting problem of managing recovery and
avoiding  the emergence of any inflationary spiral

•  This is what it is well-trained to do with its
interest-rate management tools

But that is not the way to bet.

o                                                                                                   
                                                2020-01-14

The Way to Bet—or at Least Plan For—Is Different

After Hl-Day, jump % of the
way back to full
employment:

a          Airo UH 11           n nhnmp'


-   111V11 W V Will 11C4W Cl V11U1UV.

•  Light blue—Reagan

•  Dark blue—Obama

•  Reagan:

•  Massive interest rate cuts

•  Massive defense spending increases


Number of Months After Peak Empbjment ^y^rmakiljtein^

•  Tax cuts—but largely a
nothingburger

*20-01*14


“What We Can Do, We Can Afford...

What would it be useful to
have?

• Barefoot nurses...

• Infrastructure years...

• Social services...

•  The lesson of FDR

...Once done, it is there. Nothing can
take it from us.”

“An eminent architect... pushed [to] one side... plans to
rebuild London... ‘Where's the money to come

from?’ ‘The money?’ I said. ‘But surely, Sir John, you
don’t build houses with money? Do you mean that there
won’t be enough bricks and mortar and steel and
cement?’ ‘Oh no’, he replied, ‘of course there will be
plenty                                          of all that’. ‘Do you mean’, I went on, ‘that there
won’t be enough labour? For what will the builders be
doing if they are not building houses?’ ‘Oh no, that’s all


V V v/

• WPA

•  Try a bunch of different things,
and reinforce success...

right’, he agreed.... I hurried to add: ‘Well, if there are

bricks and mortar and steel and concrete and labour and
architects, why not assemble all this good material into
houses?’ But he was, I fear, quite unconvinced. ‘What I
want to know’, he repeated, ‘is where the money is
coming from’...”

<https ://w ww.icloud .com/keynote/Oq 8 g 1 NeEGkcO 1 si J5uFPDiOTw>

What Comes After HIa€”Herd Immunitya€”Day for the Economy?

DeLongTODAY: 2021-01-14

I am Brad DeLong, an economics professor at the University of California at Berkeley and a sometime 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury. This is the weekly DeLongToday briefing. Here I 
hold forth here on the Leigh Bureaua€™ s vimeo platform on my guesses as to what I think you most 
need to know about what our economy is doing to us
right now.

I promised Wes Neff when he agreed to provide the infrastructure for this that I and my briefings 
would be: lively, interesting, curious, thoughtful, and relatively brief. Relatively.

I promised I would provide briefings on a mix of: forecasting, politics, macroeconomic analysis, 
history, and political economy.

Today is mostly a macroeconomic situation briefing. Today I play the role of Captain Obvious. I am 
not going to say anything that I do not regard as totally obvious herea€!
But first...

Right now we are at 400,000 coronavirus deaths. Right now we have 130,000 people hospitalized. 
Right now we have 220,000 daily cases a day confirmed, and between 350,000 and 600,000 true cases 
per day.
I confess I do not understand the pattern of this third wave of the coronavirus plague.

If we could push the virusa€™ s reproduction rate R down from the 3 or more it was in the early 
spring to below one, as we did in April, we ought to have been able to keep it below one. And so we 
should now look like Japan, or Australia.

But it was only when nationwide hospitalizations were above 50,000 that people became scared enough 
to change their behavior enough to actually do enough social distancing to put the virus on a 
downward trajectory. And then, when, hospitalizations got down to 30,000, people relaxed, and 
relaxed too much, and the virus began to spread again.

This behavior pattern really does not make a great deal of sense to me. If you figure that everyone 
knows 100 people well, and each of them knows another 100 people well, then it looks as though 
people become scared enough to take effective action when the typical person heard more than once 
from their close contacts that one of them in turn had a close
contact in the hospital with CO VID. But then why slack off and shift state, back to not worrying 
enough, when that number drops even a bit below 1?

And why did the factors that lead to fear-generating stay-at-home and social-distancing behavior in 
the spring and summer not operate this winter? Is it that in winter, many more of us withdraw into 
built environments that are too much like batcaves? But setting up big fan and getting them going 
is easy, cheap, and reasonably effective. Why are not people
altering their indoor environment?

Plus there is another scary thing: We are not yet sure that we have seen the effects of Christmas 
on coronavirus spread.

Let us take a step back and look at the broad picture of the plague as a whole.

It looks like, as of February 4, we are likely to have hd about 29 million confirmed cases. That, 
perhaps, means something like 70 million true cases. That then puts us perhaps 25% of the way to 
herd immunity from cases alone, if significant infection manages to give you two years or more of 
effective resistance. Also, as of February 4, we are likely to have
had 450,000 confirmed deaths from coronavirus. However, we really should take the a€oeexcess 
mortalitya€D metric, The death toll from coronavirus by that metric will, by February 4, be 
something like 600,000 in total. Many of those in the difference are direct coronavirus deaths that 
were not properly recorded. Some of those in the difference are people
who died because they could not get the treatment they would have gotten in a normal year.

Now there are those who point out, over and over and over again, that the bulk of deaths are coming 
from people above 75. And then then they go on to say that it should require 10 deaths of people 
over 75 to make us as disturbed as, say, one death of a 20-year-old who would otherwise be likely 
to live to 90. Over 75s are not losing that many years of life.
Those years of life are achy. Thus, they say, it is false to claim that we are suffering the 
equivalent of a 911 In every day. Rather, they say, we are only suffering the equivalent of a 911 
or two every week.

To which my reply is: what is your point? That it is not as huge a disaster for society as if we 
were losing 3000 20-year-olds dead each day in a stupid and avoidable military or public health 
catastrophe does not mean that it is not a stupid and avoidable public health catastrophe. A that 
does not mean that the human mortality and morbidity losses do not
outstrip the narrowly economic losses in wealth and porduction by a full order of magnitude.

Thus, as I see it, President-Elect Biden and his team could lead us down three possible roads after 
inauguration day.

First, they could call for another two week lockdown. If observed nationwide, cases then go back 
down from 600,000 to 100,000 a day after two weeks, and from 3000 to 500 deaths a day. Thereafter, 
cases would slowly rise from community transmittion. And mass vaccination kicked in. We would wind 
up in four months or so with an additional 60,000
deaths, direct and indirect, from coronavirus. Then the plague would be over. And the disease would 
have done 33% of the work, while the vaccine would have done 67% of the work, to get us to herd 
immunity.

Or Biden could continue with exhortations for social distancing at their current level and 
effectiveness. He could rely on a massive vaccine rollout as his principal coronavirus policy. In 
that case, true cases are likely to rise to 1 million a day. That is 5000 deaths a day. In that 
case ,we will wind up with an additional 600,000 deaths: a total of 1.1 million or
more. And in that case, the disease would wind up doing 75% of the work and the vaccine only 25% of 
the work in getting us to herd immunity. In that case, we will turn out to have have wasted much of 
the effort and energy of our biologists and biotechnicians in rapidly building the vaccine. In that 
case, we will then look at a New Zealand or Australia or a
Taiwan or a Korea or Japan, or even a China, in which the vaccine does essentially 100% of the 
work. And we will feel like the failures that we are.

Or Biden could call for another lockdown, and half of the states and their governors would ignore 
him. In that case we wind up halfway in between.
Put me down, strongly, on the side of another lockdown.

First, it would it be worthwhile in avoiding 550,000 deaths.

Second, there are also the tail scenarios that I have not yet spoken about. Perhaps the newer, 
faster spreading versions of the virus mean that if we do not get ahead of it with a lockdown, the 
vaccine rollout will be too late. It will wind up having had essentially no impact on the death 
toll. Perhaps we are than talking about health system collapse, and 1 1/2
million total deaths if we stay the course.

Or maybe Bidena€™ s team can think of something really clever.


But, starting from where we are now, clever things are overrated. Clever things will not work 
because the virus is so widespread. Clever things are all about the dance, and the dance is only 
for a country that has a relatively low virus prevalence. Starting from now, we need, once again, 
the hammer.
That, at least, is my view.

I am aware that I am well outside of my wheelhouse here. But I am, once again, not getting good 
guidance from those who are not to be in the wheelhouse. And I think that I am likely enough to be 
correct that this is an important thing to say.

One of the national treasures brought to minor prominence during the pioneering days of the 
Internet was Bill McBride of http://calculatedrisk.com. He did much much more than any 100 typical 
mainstream academic and policy finance and macroeconomists to try to guide us onto a better path 
during the Great Recession of 2007 to 2010. And I am not even
counting the Famas and the Cochranes and the Lucases who actively tried to guide us onto a worse 
path.

Bill McBride now has an updated version of his a€oescariest jobs chart evera€Da€”the chart 
comparing the employment impact of the coronavirus recession to that of previous recessions and 
depressions since World War II.
The initial downturn from the shutdown and panic shock of the spring of 2020 was more than twice as 
great as the Great Recession of 2070-2010. Since then we have bounced back halfway. But now the 
recovery has stalled.

The recovery has stalled because people are still scared enough that whole bunches of employment, 
employment that is going to come back, are unlikely to even be possible to think about until the 
virus is widely disseminated and HI-Daya€”Herd Immunity Daya€”is here. That will take another four 
months.
What that means is that, as far as the recovery is concerned, we are going to be marking time until 
June. After that, recovery can resume.

Until June, what we need is income support targeted to the people whose economic positions have 
crashed as a result of the coronavirus plague. $2000 checks are an inefficient policy to deliver 
such income support. But ithey are a policy that might will attract 10 Republican votes in the 
Senate, and so pass. I know of no better policy that would attract, even
possibly, 10 Republican votes in the Senate.

And until those whimpering about how $2000 checks are a bad idea come up with a better alternative 
that is immediately politically feasible to provide the needed income support to those whose 
economic positions have crashed, I am going to ignore them. I am going to tell them that they are 
not being useful. Yes I am looking at you, friend and teacher
Olivier Blanchard. Yes I am looking at you, friend and teacher Larry Summers.

Therel is also the question of extra support for small business entrepreneurs. Small business. I 
hear often these days from the center-left, is not important. I hear people saying: a€oeone 
restaurant shust down permanently; somebody else starts up a restaurant in the same space; no 
biggie. And even if you go from Six restaurants down to four in a townn as a
result of all this, that should not be an item of substantial public concern .a€D

I disagree. The purpose of the government is to provide social insurance. That means that when 
people get totally shafted by things that are none of their own fault, they deserve 
supporta€’’unless, perhaps, you can accurately claim that the shafting has some powerful ancillary 
benefit in terms of incentivizing an even more productive reallocation of
economic activity toward high value sectors.

This is a proper object of public concern.

People willing and able to start and then run businesses, even the smallest businesses, are very 
useful people to have around. And, in the normal course of things, the rest of us exploit 
small-business owers: most of them work very hard indeed, and most of them do so for incomes that 
are not that large. Treating them like dogs when, because of coronavirus,
out of no fault of their own, their business have crated. Well, that will make them rightly think 
that it is not their government that is ruling in the country. And God knows we do not right now 
need any more energetic and active people believing, correctly, the government does not work for 
them.

Besides: it is a mean thing to do..

There are many and important decisions to be made about how to provide income support over the next 
four months. There are many and important decisions to be made about how, given the existing 
political constraints on action, to get a near-term income-support program passed and implemented. 
My advice to all of you as to how you can help here is to
have the back of Biden and his team: they are in the hot seat, and they need support; they do not 
backseat driving and whingeing right now.

Then, in the not quite immediate term, we have the problem of true recovery.

Figure June 1 for Herd Immunity Day, if we are lucky. Then employment will still be 6.5% below its 
previous peak. Then things still will be worse than at the nadir of the Great Recession. In the 
Great Recession the employment peak came in January 2008 and the trough came 25 months later, in 
February 2010. The Obama response that had been designed
in December 2008 was clearly inadequate by March 2009. Yet there was no second wave of support. 
And, in fact, Obama abandoned any chance of further effective effort at cushioning the downturn and 
speeding recovery in January 2010, when he and a bunch of real geniuses in the White House decided 
what they really wanted to do was get at the head of
austerity parade. So he used his State of the Union address to call for a spending freezea€”and 
threaten to veto any proposals and thena€’’Democratic congress might pass that year that were not 
sufficiently austere.

I have been looking for a decade for who was responsible for this.

I have not found anyone, save for OMB director Peter Orszag, willing to take any blame. Orszag has 
long said that he made a big mistake in judging the macroeconomic situation. Kudos to Peter. Trust 
him. People who at the time did not make it very clear that they were strongly opposed, and have 
not been public about what happened and why since? Not so
trustworthy.

I have heard rrom a number of low-level staffers that the way the Obama White House understood the 
world was that they won political and media victories by winning the approval of David Brooks. Thus 
any policies that would interfere with the wooing of David Brooks were non-starts.

I have heard from a number of low level staffers that the Treasury was simply missing in action: 
That Tim Geithner did not believe that fiscal policy was effective, did not believe that monetary 
policy was effective, did believe that the only thing that was effective was restoring business 
confidence, which could not be done by any means other than
guaranteeing high profits to bankers and executives and letting any bygones be bygones. But these 
people may not be viewing the Geithner Treasury objectively. I really do not know

I also do not know the extent to which and Obama administration pushing very hard for a more rapid 
recovery would have had an effect. Would it have been completely blocked in the Congress by 
Republicans and blue dogs with respect to fiscal policy? Would it have been blocked with respect to 
monetary policy by the combination of a Ben Bernanke
unwilling to move to do the right thing without a consensus on the FOMC, and a bunch of 
Republican-appointee Federal Reserve Bank presidents who were totally unwilling to mark their 
beliefs to market and so recognize what the right thing was? Im any event, it was not tried. There 
were no new policy initiatives to cushion the depression and significantly
speed recovery after March 2009. Thus the dark blue line. And the disaster of the anemic Obama 
recovery.

This time, we hope to avoid the extra near-year of dithering that made the Great Recession trough 
February 2010 rather than May 2009. And we also hope to avoid the fact that, because the government 
did not have its foot on the gas, the piece of recovery was appallingly, distressingly, criminally 
slow after February 2010.
Now there are many right now to point out that, perhaps, this time, the government should keep its 
foot off the gas.

They forecast that a rapid recovery will happen on its own.

And, indeed, it might. There are, after all, very substantial pent-up extra savings in peoplea€™ s 
pockets. They might be spent rapidly in a giant Mardi Gras, once HI-Day arrives. Such a giant Mardi 
Gras could rapidly carry the economy back to full employment. The extra savings American households 
have accumulated since the plague struck now total
more than $3 trillion. That is 15% of a yeara€™ s national income.

If People were to spend a third of those, that would be a five percentage point boost to economic 
growth in the year or so of rapid recovery post June 2021. In that case, the Federal Reserve would 
then face the conceptually interesting problem of managing recovery and avoiding the emergence of 
any inflationary spiral. Dealing with this kind of problem is
what the Federal Reserve is well trained to do, and what its interest rate management tools are 
for.

I think that, if that optimistic scenario develops, we can leave the task of proper stabilization 
policy and macroeconomic management to the Federal Reserve
But that is just one of the possible scenarios.

If we get a more pessimistic outcome, the Federal Reserve cannot help us. So the rational thing to 
do is to plan for the worst, and not only to plan for the worst but to start right now implementing 
plans to deal with the worst. If the optimistic scenario comes true, those plans can be cut short. 
The federal reserve will have the baton and knows how to run that
particular race. If not, we will really wish then that we had started dealing with the situation 
right now, in what will be our future selvesa€™ past.

So what outcome do we want to plan? The outcome we want to plan for sees, soon after HIa€”Herd 
Immunitya€’’Day, the economy will jump 1/3 of the way back to full employment. That will then leave 
us about as far below the previous employment peak as the US economy was in 1982, at the depth of 
the Reagan recession. Curiously and by chance, the
time between the last employment peak and the trough of the Reagan recession was about as long as 
the time between the last employment peak and June 2021. The path employment took to get there, 
however, was very very different indeed.

After the end of the Reagan recession, the Volker deflation, there came the Reagan boom.
They were seven very fat years for the upper class.

They were seven better years for most of the country.

They were a disaster for midwestern manufacturing: The beginning of the transformation of 
Americaa€™ s world class industrial built into the rustbelt, largely, I think, because both George 
Shultz and James Baker were too dumb to listen to Marty Feldsteina€”but that is a fight that I 
think the good guys lost almost 2 generations ago. The Midwest aside, for
most of the country the Reagan recovery was all anyone could ever wish. A striking contrast with 
the Obama recovery.


Then, in the not quite immediate term, we have the problem of true recovery.

Figure June 1 for Herd Immunity Day, if we are lucky. Then employment will still be 6.5% below its 
previous peak. Then things still will be worse than at the nadir of the Great Recession. In the 
Great Recession the employment peak came in January 2008 and the trough came 25 months later, in 
February 2010. The Obama response that had been designed
in December 2008 was clearly inadequate by March 2009. Yet there was no second wave of support. 
And, in fact, Obama abandoned any chance of further effective effort at cushioning the downturn and 
speeding recovery in January 2010, when he and a bunch of real geniuses in the White House decided 
what they really wanted to do was get at the head of
austerity parade. So he used his State of the Union address to call for a spending freezea€”and 
threaten to veto any proposals and thena€’’Democratic congress might pass that year that were not 
sufficiently austere.

I have been looking for a decade for who was responsible for this.

I have not found anyone, save for OMB director Peter Orszag, willing to take any blame. Orszag has 
long said that he made a big mistake in judging the macroeconomic situation. Kudos to Peter. Trust 
him. People who at the time did not make it very clear that they were strongly opposed, and have 
not been public about what happened and why since? Not so
trustworthy.

I have heard rrom a number of low-level staffers that the way the Obama White House understood the 
world was that they won political and media victories by winning the approval of David Brooks. Thus 
any policies that would interfere with the wooing of David Brooks were non-starts.

I have heard from a number of low level staffers that the Treasury was simply missing in action: 
That Tim Geithner did not believe that fiscal policy was effective, did not believe that monetary 
policy was effective, did believe that the only thing that was effective was restoring business 
confidence, which could not be done by any means other than
guaranteeing high profits to bankers and executives and letting any bygones be bygones. But these 
people may not be viewing the Geithner Treasury objectively. I really do not know

I also do not know the extent to which and Obama administration pushing very hard for a more rapid 
recovery would have had an effect. Would it have been completely blocked in the Congress by 
Republicans and blue dogs with respect to fiscal policy? Would it have been blocked with respect to 
monetary policy by the combination of a Ben Bernanke
unwilling to move to do the right thing without a consensus on the FOMC, and a bunch of 
Republican-appointee Federal Reserve Bank presidents who were totally unwilling to mark their 
beliefs to market and so recognize what the right thing was? Im any event, it was not tried. There 
were no new policy initiatives to cushion the depression and significantly
speed recovery after March 2009. Thus the dark blue line. And the disaster of the anemic Obama 
recovery.

This time, we hope to avoid the extra near-year of dithering that made the Great Recession trough 
February 2010 rather than May 2009. And we also hope to avoid the fact that, because the government 
did not have its foot on the gas, the piece of recovery was appallingly, distressingly, criminally 
slow after February 2010.
Now there are many right now to point out that, perhaps, this time, the government should keep its 
foot off the gas.

They forecast that a rapid recovery will happen on its own.

And, indeed, it might. There are, after all, very substantial pent-up extra savings in peoplea€™ s 
pockets. They might be spent rapidly in a giant Mardi Gras, once HI-Day arrives. Such a giant Mardi 
Gras could rapidly carry the economy back to full employment. The extra savings American households 
have accumulated since the plague struck now total
more than $3 trillion. That is 15% of a yeara€™ s national income.

If People were to spend a third of those, that would be a five percentage point boost to economic 
growth in the year or so of rapid recovery post June 2021. In that case, the Federal Reserve would 
then face the conceptually interesting problem of managing recovery and avoiding the emergence of 
any inflationary spiral. Dealing with this kind of problem is
what the Federal Reserve is well trained to do, and what its interest rate management tools are 
for.

I think that, if that optimistic scenario develops, we can leave the task of proper stabilization 
policy and macroeconomic management to the Federal Reserve
But that is just one of the possible scenarios.

If we get a more pessimistic outcome, the Federal Reserve cannot help us. So the rational thing to 
do is to plan for the worst, and not only to plan for the worst but to start right now implementing 
plans to deal with the worst. If the optimistic scenario comes true, those plans can be cut short. 
The federal reserve will have the baton and knows how to run that
particular race. If not, we will really wish then that we had started dealing with the situation 
right now, in what will be our future selvesa€™ past.

So what outcome do we want to plan? The outcome we want to plan for sees, soon after HIa€”Herd 
Immunitya€’’Day, the economy will jump 1/3 of the way back to full employment. That will then leave 
us about as far below the previous employment peak as the US economy was in 1982, at the depth of 
the Reagan recession. Curiously and by chance, the
time between the last employment peak and the trough of the Reagan recession was about as long as 
the time between the last employment peak and June 2021. The path employment took to get there, 
however, was very very different indeed.

After the end of the Reagan recession, the Volker deflation, there came the Reagan boom.
They were seven very fat years for the upper class.

They were seven better years for most of the country.

They were a disaster for midwestern manufacturing: The beginning of the transformation of 
Americaa€™ s world class industrial built into the rustbelt, largely, I think, because both George 
Shultz and James Baker were too dumb to listen to Marty Feldsteina€”but that is a fight that I 
think the good guys lost almost 2 generations ago. The Midwest aside, for
most of the country the Reagan recovery was all anyone could ever wish. A striking contrast with 
the Obama recovery.

So how do we get the Reagan recovery? We got it because Paul Volker at the Federal Reserve 
responded with rapid and enormous interest rate cuts. We got it because Reagana€™ s wanting to heat 
up the Cold war produced massive defense spending increasesa€’’which in the end did nothing at all 
for Americaa€™ s national security, as the new military was
built up to confront an adversary that was at that moment ceasing to exist. And then there were the 
Reagan tax cuts, which were as close to a complete nothingburger as far as boosting investment and 
even boosting production and employment were concerned as, well, the Ryan-McConnell-Trump tax cut 
was. Did nothing except transfer wealth upward and
make America a more unequal and very visibly less-fair place

We cannot cut interest rates. So we will have to rely on expansionary fiscal policy: the federal 
government buying useful things and putting people to work doing useful things, pus providing aid 
to states to keep them from turning into little Herbert Hoovers again. That is what we need to get 
the economy on the light blue recovery track rather than the dark
blue recovery track.

There will, of course be the devotees of austerity.

The answer to their arguments, of course, is the same as the answer was back in 2010a€”the answer 
that the Obama administration did not then give. It is the answer given by John Maynard Keynes 
during World War II. As long as there are unemployed people who want to work, society can do more. 
We can afford it. Whatever we can do, we can afford.
Yes, there are problems with arranging the financial scaffolding so that the financial scaffolding 
supports the actual work being done and is sustainable. But we are clever enough to solve those 
problems. They are not very hard.

Keynes spoke to a BBC radio audience during World War II about his attempt to argue with those who 
said that Britain could not afford to rebuild London to repair the damage from the Nazi bombings 
because a€oewhere would the money come froma€n:

a€oeAn eminent architecta€! pushed [to] one sidea€! plans to rebuild Londona€! a€~Where's the money 
to come from?a€™ a€~The money?a€™ I said. a€~But surely, Sir John, you don't build houses with 
money? Do you mean that there won't be enough bricks and mortar and steel and cement?a€™ a€~Oh 
noa€™, he replied, a€~of course there will be
plenty of all thata€™. a€~Do you meana€™ , I went on, a€~that there won't be enough labour? For 
what will the builders be doing if they are not building houses?a€™ a€~Oh no, that's all righta€™, 
he agreed.a€! I hurried to add: a€~Well, if there are bricks and mortar and steel and concrete and 
labour and architects, why not assemble all this good
material into houses?a€™ But he was, I fear, quite unconvinced. a€~What I want to knowa€™ , he 
repeated, a€~is where the money is coming froma€™ a€!a€D

So the right answer is: what would it be useful to have?
That is what the government should spend money on.

We need to have a lot of barefoot nurses, both to fight coronavirus and to fill in the appalling 
holes in Americaa€~s health system, by which we spend 50% more money then any other country and yet 
are significantly sicker, with a five year or more gap in life expectancy vis-A -vis countries that 
do it right.
We should have infrastructure week. May, we should have infrastructure years.

We should have social services. A Substantial part of the unrest of 2020 came from the fact that we 
have been sending our police to do jobs that they are not well trained to do. If you look around at 
what happens on the streets and in the houses of America, you easily convince yourselves that we 
want many many social workers then we have.

The basic lesson is that of FDR. We want to put people to work doing useful thanks. A Civilian 
Conservation Corps might be nice. A Works Progress Administration might be nice. Roosevelta€™ s 
genius was that he was willing to try a bunch of different things, and then willing to reinforce 
success and ruthlessly cull failure. That is the proper way for
getting the country back to full employment, and getting the country full employment quickly, once 
HI-Day is upon us.

So I urge all of you: Go out there and talk to people, and make this project politically feasible.
Ia€™ m Brad DeLong. This is my DeLong Today briefing.

4002 words


4002 words

