Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• C J. Ciaramella: a€™I see the CCP is observing its annual a€oenot mad, actually laughinga€n day: 
Global Times: China state-affiliated media: a€oeTiananmen Square embodies Chinese peoplea€™ s
confidence in Chinaa€™ s politics. The Chinese publica€™ s understanding of June 4th incident has 
fundamentally changed.We laugh at those posturing a€□commemorative" activities orchestrated by 
outside
forcesa€! <https://twitter.com/ciciaramella/status/1400855501945Q65476>

• Jess McIntosh: a€™ Mike Pence basically said we gotta agree to disagree about whether I should be 
hung by a moba€! <https://twitter.com/jess mc/status/1400775558024286218>

• Wikipedia: Atlanta Exposition Speech <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atlanta Exposition Speech>

• Wikipedia: Cotton States and International Exposift‘on<https://en .wikipedia.org/wiki/Cotton 
States and International Exposition#Exhibits>

• Jonathan Bernstein: Donald Trumpa€™ s Planned Return Isna€™ t Really a Joke’. a€~By several 
reports, the former president is talking about being a€ cere instate da€D to office this year. 
Dona€™ t laugh it
offa€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2021-06-04/donald-trump-s-planned-return-isn-t-reallv-a-
joke>


• Jonathan Bernstein: Donald Trumpd€™ s Planned Return Isna€™ t Really a Joke’. a€~By several 
reports, the former president is talking about being a€ cere instate da€D to office this year. 
Dona€™ t laugh it
offa€ 1 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2021-06-04/donald-trump-s-planned-return-isn-t-really-a-
joke>

•  Charlie Sykes: Trumpa€™ s August Election Reinstatement Theory Is Even Worse than It Looks’. 
a€~Trumpa€™ s embrace of this new, delusional conspiracy shows how the righta€™ s doom loop of 
craziness
worksa€ 1 
<https://www.msnbc.com/opinion/trump-s-august-election-reinstatement-theory-even-worse-it-looks-nl26
9716>

•  Don Scansen: Why is Apple Ml Processor Passing on the Chiplets?’. a€™ Calling the Ml processor 
die an SoC is certainly no understatement^!. The captive market inside Apple for silicon designs is 
very
specifica€!.. Intel and AMD are a different story. They are both designing for the entire spectrum 
of computersa€! a wide swath of possible users. More design flexibility increases the potential to 
capture more of
the marketa€!. The chiplet approach makes sense here, and we already see AMD and Intel both headed 
in that directiona€! <https://www.eetasia.com/whv-is-apple-ml-processor-passing-on-the-chiplets/>

Paragraphs

A plea for a much smarter rejiggering of the underlying foundations of the market economy for the 
age of the attention economy, when many profits are made by hacking the brains of customers in 
various ways:

Rana Faroohar: Politicians Should Set Common Rules For Digital Markets’. a€~Liberal democracies 
everywhere are playing regulatory whack-a-mole with platform monopolies, trying to enforce
new privacy, tax, and antitrust rules. All the while, the value of intangible assets such as 
technology, software and patents is expanding as the power of labour decreases. Covida€“19 has only 
sped up
this trenda€!. We need to rebalance the market system itself, so that players on both sides of any 
given transaction have equal access to information, a shared understanding of what is being bought
and sold and a common set of rules. This is true for buyers and sellers on Amazon, drivers and 
riders on Uber, and advertisers and the sites they wish to reach via Googlea€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/7e2ab5db-35d5-409b-a6c7-4573e98a2dcf>

And yet it remains extraordinarily easy for tech near monopolies to simply dry up and blow away 
over the course of a decade or so. It was not in Microsofta€™ s interest for either Skype or 
Explorer to lose its position. And
their dominant market positions should have allowed them to pour orders of magnitude more resources 
into research and development than their competitors. And yet somehowa€!:

Timothy L. Oa€™Brien: How Microsoft Let Skype Lose Out to Zoom’. a€~a€oeLeta€™ s face it, the 
internet was designed for the PC. The internet is not designed for the

iPhone,a€D Microsofta€™ s former chief executive officer, Steve Ballmer, told the Associated Press 
in 2009. Browsers that played better on the web and smart phones, such as Google Chrome, stole
market share from Microsoft. Other browsers that loaded faster, were more secure, made life easier 
for developers or had better privacy controls also eventually shredded Explorer. A product that, in
2001, controlled about 95% of the global browser market has less than 1% today. (Edge has about 
3.4%.) In 2011, when Microsoft acquired Skype for $8.5 billion, Zoom had just launched and Skype
already had 100 million usersa€!. By the time the coronavirus showed upa€!. Zoom was easier to use, 
especially for non-techies, and far less riddled with bugs and glitches. Dozens of people could
appear                                                                                       on a 
Zoom screen, not so with Skype. And it was easy to invite people to chat because new Zoom users 
needed only an email address to joina€!. Now that Zoom is a leader, it will have to
avoid Microsofta€™ s mistakesa€!. Ita€™ s a tech company, after all, in an industry where youa€™re 
only as good as your last update. Just ask Skypea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/opinion/articles/2021-06-04/how-microsoft-let-skype-lose-out-to-zoom>

I need more global south voices for my 20th century economic history book and for my fall course. 
Here is one. The problem is that Shaihu Umar does not seem to be available online anywhere:

Aaron Bady: Shaihu Umar. a€™ 1934 novella by Nigeriaa€™ s first Prime Minister, a truly interesting 
counterpoint to Achebe. This book is about 70 pages long, and ita€™ s framed as Shaihu
Umara€™ s story of who he is and where he came from. 40 pages in, and hea€™ s still only four years 
old. Correction: hea€™ s four years old until two years pass on p35. This novel is like a
picaresque    in which the protagonist, for the first half, is too young to have agency or 
awareness; he gets orphaned and lost and enslaved and fostered and sold and adopted, so it can do a 
tour of
a€oefamilya€n forms, but hea€™ s more like an object than a subject. Eventually he reads the Koran 
and grows up and becomes a teacher, in the course of about two pages. But the novel is
absolutely  HAUNTED by slavery, and how to reconcile it with Islam. Ita€™ s a measure of my 
inadequacy as reader of this novel that I was expecting the climactic turn to be some kind of
abolitionist resolution, but it never really was. The picture the novel draws of Hausaland is 
horrifying, essentially consonant with British colonial propaganda on the Islamic slave trade. But 
the novel
seems incredibly fatalistic about it. At on point, the protagonist muses that people really will do 
terrible things for money. Otherwise, the moral seems to be a€oeyes the world is a Hobbesian war of 
all
against all, but if you read the Koran really well then youa€™ 11 probably prosper, maybeaCD. Our 
author was 22 when he wrote it. The real climax: Umar has been living in Egypt and has a dream
about his mom, so he goes to Tripoli (en route to Hausaland), where his Mom has just arrived, 
having been misled by the guys who were supposed to take her to Egypt and took her to Tripoli 
instead.
She promptly dies, however, so ita€™ s not QUITE the heartwarming mothera€™ s day story it might 
seem. But not before shea€™ s like a€oeand this just goes to show, always trust Goda€D. There
is an interesting bit where the protagonist overhears three slave traders arguing about a slave 
theya€™re all claiming; they resolve the argument by cutting him into three pieces. It feels like a
grotesque inversion of the Solomona€™ s baby story? (Indicating un-wisdom)a€!

LINK: <https://mobile.twitter.com/zunguzungu/status/1391514640312528898>

THIS SEEMS 100% RIGHT! And it is very frightening. Ita€™ s the full Josef Stalin. In the words of 
his former secretary, he was very insistent that: a€oel consider it completely unimportant who in 
the party will vote, or
how; but what is extraordinarily important is thisa€”who will count the votes, and howa€d:

Jeet Heer: The Coup Next Time’. a€~Trump is a sinister buffoon and his attempts at subverting 
democracy are farcical but also threateningly persistent. His failure to pull off a coup was due to 
no lack
of trying. Rather, he was foiled by the reluctance of the permanent bureaucracy a€! to carry out 
absurd and sometimes illegal demands, along with the a similar crucial reluctance among state level
Republican elected officialsa€!. Buta€! Republicans who stood up to him are being marginalizeda€!. 
This continued Trumpification of the GOP opens the way for the most likely path for a repeat of
2020   that ends with a successful coupa€!. the Democrats win an electoral college victory and the 
popular vote but the Republicans have control of the House, the Senate, and state legislatures in
crucial swing statesa€! [and] override of the votea€!

LINK: <https://jeetheer.substack.eom/p/the-coup-next-time>

Those who say that the lab-weak hypothesis is probable or likely or even a substantial probability 
are bad actors seeking to herd you like cattlea€”the kind of people who said that Iraq had a 
rapidly progressing and active
nuclear weapons program back in 2002. Regard them with grave suspicion. They are not your friends:

Michael Hiltzik: Why the COVID Lab-Leak Hypothesis Is Quackery'. a€~the virological community 
believes that ita€™ s vastly more likely that COVIDa€“19 spilled over from an animal host to
humansa€!. a€oeWe cannot prove that SARS-CoVa€“2 [the COVIDa€“19 virus] has a natural origin and we 
cannot prove that its emergence was not the result of a lab leak,a€D the lead author of
the Naturepaper, Kristian Andersen of the Scripps Research Institute in La Jolla, told me by 
emaila€!. "Both scenarios are possible, they are not equally likely,a€D Andersen said. 
a€oePrecedence,
data, and other evidence strongly favor natural emergence as a highly likely scientific theory for 
the emergence of SARS-CoVa€“2, while the lab leak remains a speculative incomplete hypothesis
with  no credible evidence.a€Ua€! What remains of the lab-leak theory is half-truths, 
misrepresentations, and tendentious conjecturea€!. A May 23 article in the Wall Street Journal 
reporting that three
researchers at the Wuhan Institute of Virologya€! became sick enough in the fall of 2019 to seek 
hospital treatmenta€!. No evidence linking the patientsa€™ illness to COVIDa€“19 research at the
Wuhan laba€! a€oesymptoms consistent with both COVIDa€“19 and common seasonal illness.a€D Well, 
yesa€!. Virologists point out, moreover, that it would be unlikely for COVID to affect only
three people seriously enough to warrant hospital care without infecting hundreds of others in the 
lab or their households. The other victims might have had milder symptoms, but an outbreak of that
magnitude would have been difficult to keep under wrapsa€!. As for the letter in Science, some of 
its 18 signatories have taken pains to emphasize that they are not endorsing the lab-leak theory;
some    are highly skeptical of the hypothesisa€!. Ralph S. Baric of the University of North 
Carolina, told the New Yorker, a€oeThe genetic sequence for SARS-CoVa€“2 really points to a natural­
origin event from wildlife.a€D Their goal in signing the letter, they said, was not to point 
fingers at the Wuhan lab, but to urge WHO to devote more effort to determining the origin, whatever 
it might
be, before expressing a categorical opiniona€!

LINK: <https://www.latimes.com/business/story/2Q21-06-03/lab-leak-covid-origin>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


Wuhan laba€! a€oesymptoms consistent with both COVIDa€“19 and common seasonal illness.a€C Well, 
yesa€!. Virologists point out, moreover, that it would be unlikely for COVID to affect only
three people seriously enough to warrant hospital care without infecting hundreds of others in the 
lab or their households. The other victims might have had milder symptoms, but an outbreak of that
magnitude would have been difficult to keep under wrapsa€!. As for the letter in Science, some of 
its 18 signatories have taken pains to emphasize that they are not endorsing the lab-leak theory;
some   are highly skeptical of the hypothesisa€!. Ralph S. Baric of the University of North 
Carolina, told the New Yorker, a€oeThe genetic sequence for SARS-CoVa€“2 really points to a 
natural­

origin event from wildlife .a€D Their goal in signing the letter, they said, was not to point 
fingers at the Wuhan lab, but to urge WHO to devote more effort to determining the origin, whatever 
it might
be, before expressing a categorical opiniona€!

LINK: <https://www.latimes.com/business/story/2021-06-Q3/lab-leak-covid-origin>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

