Subscribe now

FIRST: A Note on "Industrial Policya€da€;

Stephen S. Cohen & J. Bradford DeLong

September, 2022

The not-quite-surprise passage of the CHIPS Act and the surprise passage of the IRA have brought 
the idea that the United States should consciously pursue a€oeindustrial policy a€D back to the 
front burner of politics, and of political economy.

In some ways, however, a€oeindustrial policya€D is a poisonous term in the discourse of U.S. 
politics. In the 1980s Democratic economic-policy stalwart Charles Schultze engaged in a 
full-throated campaign against the idea that the U.S. could run a successful a€oeindustrial 
policya€na€”a€oepicking winnersa€D in the rhetorical dismissive. Follower nations like
Japan attempting to catch up to the U.S. that had succeeded in insulating economic bureaucracies 
from interest-group rent-seeking might be able to, he argued. But the United States would, to the 
extent that it embarked on industrial policy, further entrench dissipative rent-seeking interests. 
Allowing a€oeindustrial policya€D into the rhetorical room would provide
them with yet another set of plausible excuses that the legislators they influence could use for 
channeling resources in directions that had neither a valid social-welfare nor a valid 
economic-growth rationale for government protection and assistance.

So let us not call it a€oeindustrial policya€D. Let us call it a€cepragmatisma€D instead. For it is 
a fact that, from Hamilton through Eisenhower and a bit longer, the American governments™ s 
attitude toward the use of public power and public funds for economic development was highly, 
highly pragmatics’’and successful.

Looking back at the economic historv of the United States, there is a nattern bv which apain and 
a^ain the U.S. economv has been redesigned. The shifts of the economv toward new growth directions 
have sometimes been the emergent outcomes of innumerable individual actions miided bv local nrice 
signals. Rut at other times, and nerhans at more times, thev have


not. New directions have, instead, been the results of purposeful decisions, taken by government 
backed by powerful and often broad political forces, guided by their vision of how the economy 
ought to change. And once the public sector and its allies have launched a new economic space, it 
has then been expanded and transformed in unimaginable ways by
entrepreneurial activity and energy surging into those new directions.

Yes, there was lots of entrepreneurship. Yes, there was an Invisible Hand. But the Invisible Hand 
was repeatedly lifted at the elbow by the Government then placed down in a new position. Again and 
again, it was government that directed and enabled the new entrepreneurial surge giving growth a 
new direction.
Consider:

Alexander Hamilton: Britaina€™ s mercantilist policies had imposed an agrarian-specialization on 
the North American Colonies, for which Americaa€™ s unlimited land and limited population density 
made it well-suited. Led by Hamilton, the founding fathers set out to substitute their own vision. 
They pushed policies to promote commerce, banking, and industry.
Central to their view was the necessity of protecting Americaa€™ s infant industries from more 
competitive English producers. The playing field had to be not slightly leveled, but steeply 
tipped. So way up went the tariff. And when the Federalists were replaced by Jefferson's and 
Madison's small-government Democratic-Republicans, they quickly decided that their
small-government, agriculture-first principles had been an out-of-power luxury. The policies to 
shield and promote industry stayed in place, as did the tariff, and were augmented by several 
decades of policies to enable and subsidize canal and later railroad building. They did pick some 
big winners: a way to assemble guns, from standardized parts using relatively
unskilled    labor because America lacked skilled gunsmiths, an innovation that shaped far more 
than Americaa€™ s gun industry as it became the basis for the powerful innovative approach to 
manufacturing called The American System.

The American System: The American System as it developed throughout the nineteenth century was more 
than just interchangeable parts. Government-subsidized railroad expansion opened vast regions to 
profitable farming and settlement, and accelerated the development of feeder industries such as 
steel and complementary industries such as telegraph. The
government did not tax and spend to do this. It didna€™t have to. Instead, the government gave 
railway companies huge checkerboards of valuable land, the best land along the railroad tracks, and 
more land than there was in all of England. Government spending as calculated by national income 
accountants was a small share of GDP in the nineteenth century. But
any government that builds infrastructure and allocates land title on the scale of the 
nineteenth-century U.S. government is Big Government incarnate indeed.

And the government did not auction the remaining land to the highest bidders. The Homestead Act 
entailed the land rights precisely to prevent giant landholdings and preserve a social structure of 
independent landowning farmers rather than agricultural labor on vast plantations. The Morrill Act 
provided the funding basis for the overwhelming bulk of American
higher education. Both were pro-labor policies: industrial policies to give individuals and 
families access to first the farm-settlement frontier then the knowledge frontier.

The New Deal Order: Franklin Delano Roosevelta€™ s New Deal was the ultimate in pragmatism. It is 
only a bare exaggeration to say that if you had a plausible story and could get into Roosevelta€™ s 
office, he would give you an agency to try your idea out. What seemed not to work was dropped. What 
did seem to work was reinforced and grown. The other
redesignsa€’’except, perhaps, the important course correction of the Progressive years helmed by 
FDR'S cousin, Teddya€”aimed at an obvious new economic space that needed government to do something 
to open it up. Government set things up. Government generally did not command or do it itself. The 
New Deal, emergency action, was the redesign in which the
federal  government commanded and legislated the most: bureaucracies and regulatory authorities: 
for banking and finance, social security, securities law, labor, the TVA, the WPA, etc., not to 
mention the National Recovery Administration^ ” a move toward industry-led corporatism that was 
shot down by the Supreme Court And it hugely and quickly expanded other
initiatives, such as government mortgage insurance.

Little of the New Deal was focused, as previous redesigns had been, on growing the economic pie. 
And though the New Deal was not itself ideological but rather the ultimate in pragmatic policy 
experimentation, it became the definition of the ideology that was post-World War II American 
liberalism: a social safety net, support for labor, mortgage insurance, high
marginal tax rates, the regulation of finance, and big, active government. It became the model of 
what government could do and should do.

Eisenhower: After World War II, President Eisenhower shaped the economy, first, by preserving the 
New Deal over the wishes of a large part of his Republican majority that wanted to dismantle it; 
second, by huge housing and highway programs that promoted a nation of homeowners and enabled the 
massive suburbanization that drove the economy and reconfigured
the physical and the social landscape; third, by financing before and much more after the Sputnik 
Moment the large-scale development of world leading research universities, and sending millions of 
young Americans to them; and, fourth, by directly supporting via the gigantic Cold-War defense 
budget the development of American dominance in new technologies,
such as commercial jet aviation and especially computinga€’’extending back into semiconductors and 
forward into software and up through advanced communications (satellites, fiber optics, lasers and 
what became the Internet). This was a big-time exercise in direction, in hands-on winner picking, 
and it was a very big winner for the US.

But it was not a major exception in American history, nor was this big scale effort at economic 
redesign particularly controversial. It was concrete economics: what you see is what you will get; 
it was not abstract or ideological. Support was broad and deep; opposition, slender and weaka€!

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• The Economist: Why Businesses Are Furiously Hiring: a€~Recruiters recalled how jobseekers used to 
come to thema€”a a€oeconstant pipelinea€Da€!. The combination of a looming recession, high churn 
and the shifts in the supply of workers is exceptionally complex to managea€!. Firms, like people, 
have limited bandwidtha€”and that bandwidth is
being expended on navigating work-from-home policiesa€!

•  Schumpeter: Is Nvidia Underestimating the Chip Crunch?: a€~In the tail end of the covid-19 
pandemic in late 202la€! almost no onea€”from car companies to cryptocurrency miner sa€’’could get 
their hands on chips, [and so] semiconductor manufacturers, or fabs, went on a spending spree...

•  Bartleby: Why the Bullshit-Jobs Thesis May Be, Well, Bullshit: a€~When [Graebera€™ s] book came 
out, this columnist was unimpresseda€! the thesis was a partial reworking of the insights of C. 
Northcote Parkinson, who argued that bureaucracy has an innate tendency to expand and make work for 
itselfa€!. Alienation depends on how the workers
are treated by those in chargea€!. a€cePeople dona€™ t leave bad jobs, they leave bad 
managersa€Da€!

•  Paul Campos: What Is the Most Important Thing in the World?: a€~I just want to note an extremely 
basic but not sufficiently appreciated point: throughout all of the many thousands of years of 
recorded human history, the most salient difference between social elites and everybody else almost 
everywhere was that the former werena€™ t living on the
verge of starvation, while everyone else wasa€!.. This has really changed only over the course of 
the past four generations or so in the developed world, and over the past half century everywhere 
elsea€!

• Brian Tannehill: a€~Good Morning. Sitting around, nursing coffee and flu-like symptoms from my 
Omicron booster, trying to make sense of what's coming out of the Kharkiv Oblast. Lots of rumors, 
no clear picture. But, I'll talk about what we're seeing and hearinga€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

