
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: From Paul Krugmana€™s Newsletter:

A 2017 paper by the political scientist Lee Drutman mapped out the distribution
of U.S. voters on these axes; it’s unlikely to have changed much since. (And the
distribution of British voters seems similar.) His picture looked like this:

THE 2016 ELECTORATE


There are no libertarians. Voter study Group

Social conservative

Social liberal


Truss in the empty quarter. Author’s imagination

Leave a comment

Must-Read: As I Continue to Try to Understand East Asia:

A fascinating paper that I need to work much harder to fully digest:

Edmund J. Malesky: Enhancing the Literature on Authoritarian Regimes through Detailed Comparisons 
of China and Vietnam'. a€~In exploring the role of factions, personalism, and legislative behavior 
in the two states, the three contributions in this issue dispense with the simplistic notion of a 
China or Vietnam a€ceModela€D of political economy, but
instead explain the politics behind how leaders are chosen and how legislative decisions are made 
and implemented. All three are explicitly comparative, documenting clear differences between the 
states and showing how these matter for explaining puzzles in critical political outcomes. As I 
argue in this essay, the insights of these three papers are important
for more than just broadening area studies expertise, but for the burgeoning literature on 
authoritarian regimes, which has tended to black-box countries, insufficiently accounting for 
subtle institutional differences and variation in the policy preferences of elite actors. In this 
essay, I explore the unique contributions of each article to larger debates in
comparative politics. I conclude by arguing for a unified theory that can help us better understand 
why these systems have been so successful in good times and resilient in hard timesa€!

LINK: chttps://sites .duke .e du/malesky/files/2020/11/20201104_ChinaVietnam_ejm3 .pdf>
Give a gift subscription

Other Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!
Very Briefly Noted:

•  It is not just Al-art; it is Al-words too: Fadeke Adegbuyi: An AI Might Have Written This: 
a€~Writers are using apps like Sudo write and Subtxt to craft essays, short stories, and screenplay 
sa€!

•  It looks as though Chinaa€™ s middle-income trap is knocking on the door: Robin Wigglesworth: 
Chinaa€™ s low-growth era: a€~Is 3 per cent the new normal?a€!

• A report from the globetrotter: Noah Smith: Amsterdam: some impressions: a€~Travel-blogging from 
the perfect liberal citya€!n yway, my stay in Amsterdam was too short, and I hope to be back 
sometime. In the meantime, I just arrived in Taipei, after cutting out the Singapore leg of my 
journey (Sorry, Singapore friends! 2 days was just too short, so I went straight to
Taipei, and planned a longer Singapore trip for early next year!). So expect another 
travel-blogging post in a week or soa€!

•  Again and again, it is the absence of deployed driverless systems in limited environments that 
flummoxes me. People are expensive!: Tae Kim: Intel's Mobileye Autonomous Driving IPO Is Shaping Up 
to Disappointa€!

•  Yes. British is more dysfunctional than American politics. Any further questions?: Robert 
Shrimsley: Jeremy Hunt is now in charge: a€~Some Tory MPs may conclude it is better to pretend that 
the chancellor is really PM and see how far it takes thema€!. The appeal to some of her MPs [is] of 
not requiring them to do anything yeta€!. Quite brilliantly, the Conservatives
have somehow contrived to have Rishi Sunaka€™ s policies and Liz Trussa€™ presentation skillsa€!

• The first rule of being a rising power is not to challenge the Hegeman prematurely. As long as 
the system allows ones rise to continue. Emulate America from 1846 to 1943, not Athens in the 430s 
poking Sparta's core ally Corinth with a stick. The Xi rAOgime did not realize this: Jordan 
Schneider: Export Controls, Xi's S&T Dreams, and "Technological Vassaldoma€D:
a€~Forcing China to rely on foreign production for the latest and greatest chips plays exactly into 
Xia€™ s fear of a€cetechnological vassaldoma€Da€!

•  Again, first rule of being a rising power is not to challenge the Hegeman prematurely. As long 
as the system allows ones rise to continue. Emulate America from 1846 to 1943, not Athens in the 
430s poking Sparta's core ally Corinth with a stick. The Xi rAOgime did not realize this: FT 
Editorial Board: Xi Jinpinga€™ s control of fortress China is a watershed moment:
a€~New rules and mass movements are in prospect as Beijing builds a a€cefortress Chinaa€D able to 
withstand what it sees as the efforts of the US-led west to hobble its progress.... Beijing is 
justified in viewing recent US actions as adversarial. If, however, Beijinga€™ s response is to 
hunker downa€! throw a security straitjacketa€! it risks smothering the

entrepreneurial spirit that has driven the countrya€™ s remarkable economic transformation...

•  Will the closing of the Musk Twitter purchase affect Tesla? My view was that Tesla had difficult 
problems now that it has competition, and that the focused attention of a charismatic 
charlatan-impresario was no longer a net benefit; thus the distraction of the chaos monkey seems to 
the goodaC’for Tesla as a productive organization, at least: Al Root: Tesla Stock Sale Is
Coming: a€~We Know Who, Why, and When, but Not How Much. Ita€™ s looking increasingly likely that 
Tesla investors will have to deal with their CEO Elon Musk buying social media platform Twitter. In 
the long run, the issue for Tesla investors is management distraction. In the short run, the 
Twitter purchase means another large Tesla stock sale is cominga€”and
soon. Just how much, however, isna€™ t clear...

Give a gift subscription

AJs:

Never forget that the first-term George W. Bush administration was more of a chaos monkey in its 
policies than the Trump administration was:

Scott Lemieux: The Big Lie 1.0: a€~A telling anecdote about the selling of the Iraq War: Garrett 
Graff: a€oeSundaya€! [Senator Pat Leahy] was out walking with his wife in his McLean neighborhood 
when "two fit joggers trailed behind us. They stopped and asked what I thought of the intelligence 
briefings I'd been getting." Leahy went back to the intel
officers at the Capitol SCIF and requested "File Eight," and it contradicted what the Bush 
administration was saying publicly about the WMDs.a€! I asked @senatorleahy about this incident 
when I interviewed him at @bearpondbooks earlier this month, if he knew the joggers ever, and he 
said, "You don't understands”1 didn't *want* to know who they
were."a€! After it became clear that Iraq had no a€oeWeapons of Mass DestructionsDa€! the Bush 
administration and its apologists shifted to blaming Seethe intelligences^ for the mistake. ButS! 
most of the case for was either a grossly distorted picture of the available evidence or just 
flat-out made up...

My view: a ceasefire would be a mistake unless accompanied by immediate Ukraine EU accession and 20 
NATO a€oetraining battalionsa€L2permanently stationed near the ceasefire line:

Lawrence Freedman: Getting to Negotiations: S~The regular calls for negotiations! tend to be more 
directed at Kyiv or Washington than Moscow, as if they are the main stumbling blocks. Yet it is 
Vladimir Putin that is demanding that this war leads to a fundamental changeS! [who] does not 
preclude talks, but only so long as Russia is allowed to hold on

to occupied territory, and even territory from which it has had to retreat.... Putin has so far 
refused to scale down his demands to meet his diminished power. His past duplicity undermines any 
confidence.... We need to think in terms of... separating the fundamental territorial issue... from 
all the other and consequential issues that will have to be addressed in a
proper peace process.... The first stage may well require mediation and devices such as 
international observers and even peacekeepers but it will need to be kept as simple as possible if 
it is to be linked to a cease-fire...

Yes, the odds are that the inflation news will look good next year. Whether that means that people 
will not see an inflation problem is unclear: gas prices are still likely to be high, and rents are 
still likely to have risen substantially:

Matthew Klein: Wages, Prices, and Taming U.S. Inflation: a€~For the most part... deflationary 
forces have yet to reach consumers. Durable goods prices have stopped rising, but before the 
pandemic they generally fell about 1% a year.  Ita€™ s therefore reasonable to suspect that the 
unusuala€”but temporarya€’’price increases in goods will eventually be

followed by unusually largea€”but temporarya€’’price declines. We may also benefit from normalizing 
inflation rates for various services that had fallen in price during the pandemic only to shoot up 
during the reopening.  These developments, should they occur, would make inflation appear slower 
than the underlying trend determined by domestic

conditions. Just as it would have been wrong to conclude that the 11.1% yearly CPI inflation rate 
in the first half of 2022 was an accurate reflection of domestic conditions, it might also be wrong 
to view a sharp slowdown in inflation as a sign that spending and production have gotten back into 
balance.  What will inflation look like once the one-off price

spikes and one-off price declines finish working their way through the data? This is not a simple 
question to answer. But we can be reasonably confident that prices cana€™ t grow too much faster 
(or slower) than incomes for very longa€”and the largest source of consumersa€™ income, by far, is 
worker pay...

The d€cewestd€dhas always been divided between free-traders on the one hand and 
mercantilist-defense types on the other. But no matter what the attitude of the a€cewesta€H 
developing countries need to ask the question: can we successfully run a developmental state? If 
the answer is no, then they should cling to full trade, no matter what the d€cewestd€L2is doing as 
it balances
current wealth off against that defense which is more important than opulence. Egypt, Paraguay, 
Mali, and Indonesia need to sell their exports and import capital goods and engineering skills. If 
free trade is the most effective path to that, they should do ita€”even though it is an 
d€ceideologyd€m-

Branko Milanovic: Leta€™ s go back to mercantilism and trade blocs!: a€~The West was a€oein 
chargea€D of the dominant economic ideology. That ideology pervaded all international 
organizations. If the West is now going for a€oefriend-shoringa€n, how is the IMF to explain to 
Egypt, Paraguay, Mali, and Indonesia that they should continue with open
trade? If globalization is (rightly) credited with raising incomes in Asia and with the greatest 
reduction in global poverty ever, are we now to reverse policies on global poverty and to argue 
that regional trade blocs should become the economic basis from which to proceed? Who is going to 
tell this to the IMF, the World Bank and the WTO? If the West

abandons olnhaliyatinn this is fnllv understandable from the. mercantilist nersnertive nf national 
arandenr Colbert would annrove. Rut one. should not delude himself/herself in helievina that the 
rest of the world ran iust he. flinned on the. dron of the. hat and would not notice the enormitv 
of the. ideological chancre, that this imnlies And would not wonder if the


rr                                  o                      rr

initial impulse that advocated economic openness might not have been based on geopolitical concerns 
that are now found wanting. One simply cannot maintain the universal validity of an ideology that 
one does not follow...

The need for the pivot to mobile was because your phone is always with you, while your 
computera€”even your laptopa€”is not. Your VR headset is not going to be always with you. If the 
phone is to be distrupted, it will be not by your VR headset but by your AR Raybans, and that it 
still decades away:

The Economist: How much trouble is Mark Zuckerberg in?: a€~As Facebook fades, Meta hopes for 
success in another dimensiona€!. Mr Zuckerberg is hardly the only one who sees potential in vr. In 
the first half of next year Apple is expected to release its debut headset, and Sony will launch 
its latest gaming-focused goggles for its PlayStation console. If
headsets do become the new pcs, as Mr Zuckerberg has predicted, Meta will have a considerable 
first-mover advantage. The Quest 2 accounted for 88% of global vr headset sales in the first half 
of this year.... The Quest Pro is the most advanced set of vr glasses around. Metaa€™ s hiring 
binge means it has much of the top vr talent. The question is timing.

Metaa€™ s unusual structure gives Mr Zuckerberg total controla€!. Executives compare the companya€™ 
s predicament now to ten years ago, when it was managing the transition of its social network to 
mobile. Shifting a billion Facebook users from desktop to phone was no mean feat, made harder by 
the fact that Mr Zuckerberg was late to spot the
importance of mobile. That experience may have influenced his approach to the metaverse. Metaa€™ s 
new vr technology, he said on October 11th, was for those a€oewhoa€™ d rather be early than 
fashionably latea€D. The risk, as investors grow impatient, is that this time Meta has made its 
move too soon...

Good advice on whether you should let a€cemetaversea€n live rent-free in your brain or not:

Max Read: A timeline of Facebook's journey into the metaverse: a€~Last yeara€! we wrotea€! 
a€oenormal readers do not need to know, care, or form opinions about a€~the metaversea€™ [a€!] Read 
Max recommends readers avoid discourse concerning a€~the metaversea€™ and devote the brain power 
they might have spent thinking about the

a€~the metaversea€™ to reading a good book.a€D Read Max subscribers who took this indispensable 
(and, at $5/month or $50/year, inexpensive) advice no doubt forged closer relationships to family 
members, created unforgettable memories, etc. using the time and brain-power that non-subscribers 
to Read Max used to think about the metaverse. We stand
by this rating. But we also note that a€oeHorizon Worlds,a€D the virtual-reality world-building 
platform and hangout space owned by Meta Platforms, f/k/a Facebook, is nearing its one-year 
anniversary of being open the public, and we increasingly believe ita€™ s worth using some portion 
of your psychic energy to consume certain journalistic
descriptions                                                                                        
                                                                          of the metaverse, because 
they are very funny to reada€!

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

