Subscribe now

First:

Structural change is much more likely to be win-win and much more likely to take place rapidly when 
it takes place in a time of short supply as opposed to a time of short demand:

Harry Dempsey & Dave Lee: Robots Replace Humans as Labour Shortages Bite: a€™ Automation gathers 
pace as logistics groups struggle to find workers to deal with surge in next-day
deliveriesa€!. The monotony of some jobs makes recruiting and retaining workers harder, a growing 
problem across a range of sectorsa€!. In US and European warehouses, the boom in online
shopping   during the pandemic has accelerated the switch to automated systems and robots, which 
can cope more quickly and efficiently with increasingly complex orders as demand for next-day
delivery rises and bottlenecks in the supply chain cause disruptions. Globally, warehouses are 
expected to invest $36bn in automation this year, up 20 per cent on 2020. Combined investment this
year  and last has jumped $1.6bn against pre-pandemic forecasts, according to research group 
Interact Analysis. a€oeln the 1980s, the main reason for investing in automation was to reduce 
labour
costs. Now for almost half the clients, their primary reason is labour availability. I talk to 
people every day and this is their biggest concern,a€D said Dwight Klappich, vice-president of 
research at
Gartner, the advisory group. In a sign of the pressures, he said one logistics provider made 26,000 
hires to get the 13,000 warehouse staff they needed because so many new recruits drop out after the
first few daysa€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/34b831a5-f6d9-4438-924d-b2999a714663>

Share

ONE AUDIO:

Tracy Alloway & Joe Wiesenthal: Understanding Evergrande, the Chinese Real Estate Conglomerate 
<https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/odd-lots/idl056200096?i=1000535983185>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Marcus Tullius Cicero: On Octavian: a€~Laudanum aduluscentum, ornandum, tollenduma€!

•  Will Oremus: Facebook Keeps Researching Its Own Harmsa€”& Burying the Findings: a€~A series of 
leaked internal reports shows Facebook knows far more than it lets on. Thata€™ s by designa€!

<https://www.washingtonpost.com/technologv/2021/09/16/facebook-files-internal-research-harms/>

•  George Bernard Shaw: Caesar and Cleopatra: a€~Pardon him, Theodotus: he is a barbarian, and 
thinks that the customs of his tribe and island are the laws of naturea€!

<https://www.gutenberg.org/files/3329/3329-h/3329-h.htm>

• Ian Leslie: Best Books on Disagreeing: a€~The Enigma of Reason: A New Theory of Human 
Understanding by Dan Sperber & Hugo Merciera€!. Knowing Mandela: A Personal Portrait by John 
Carlina€!. The
Five Percent: Finding Solutions to Seemingly Impossible Conflicts by Peter Colemana€!. Mere 
Civility: Disagreement and the Limits of Toleration by Teresa Bejana€!. Learning Lessons From Waco: 
When
Parties Bring Their Gods to the Negotiation Table by Jayne Dochertya€! 
<https://fivebooks.com/best-books/disagreeing-ian-leslie/>

•  Paul Romer: Dice, Walls & Boosters: a€~the default presumption should be that statistically 
significant evidence of waning against infection also implies waning against more serious outcomes. 
This
presumption could be overturned by tight estimates that show no waning of protection against these 
more serious outcomes, but not by low-powered tests that generate big uncertainty intervalsa€!

•  Ming Zhao: Evergrandea€™ s Backstory: a€™ The world demands answers. From Fortune 500 to 1.95 
Trillion in debt: How did ChinaaC™ s #2 real estate giant get to this point? How much cash does it

actually have? Will there be a bailout? Whoa€™ s gonna get f-cked? Here goes. Story timea€!

Ming Zhao @FabiusMercurius

dYi 'dY^Evergrande's BackstorydYj'dYj3 dY(EZ The world demands answers. From Fortune 500 to 1.95 
Trillion in debt: How did China's #2 real estate giant get to this point? How much cash does it

*actually* have? Will there be a bailout? Who's gonna get f*cked? Here goes. Story time. dY‘t

China Evergrande 2.54 -0.09 (-3.42%)

5 15 30 1H 5H 1D 1W 1M                                   Technical Chart »

China Evergrande Group ♦ 2.54 -0.09 (-3.42%)


1 Day 1 Week 1 Month 3 Months 6 Months 1 Year 5 years Max

1:25 PM r™ Sep 18,2021

6,644Likes2,314Re tweets

• Girolamo Pandolfi da Casio ditto Carlo Dossi Erba: Evergrande'. a€™ Why most analysis is dead in 
water and how best to understand and navigate whata€™ s happening? Both denialists and alarmists are
getting it wrong. Leta€™ s start by understanding this: what is happening is the result of a 
CCP-initiated policy change to curb leveragea€!

Girolamo Pandolfi da Casio ditto Carlo Dossi Erba @lNArteCarloDoss

Evergrande: why most analysis is dead in water and how best to understand and navigate whata€™ s 
happening? Both denialists and alarmists are getting it wrong. Leta€™ s start by understanding 
this: what is
happening is the result of a CCP-initiated policy change to curb leverage. 1/N

7:14 PM r™ Sep 17,2021

16,376Likes4,734Retweets

Paragraphs:

Daniel Seligson & Anne E. C. McCants: Polygamy, the Commodification of Women, & Underdevelopment'. 
a€~A suite of social conventionsa€”such as age gaps at marriage, bride price, sequestration, and 
discrimination
and violence against womena€”are overrepresented in polygamous societies as compared to monogamous 
societies. This dichotomy can be explained on the grounds that polygamy produces a chronic scarcity 
of

marriageable females. We argue that this suite, which we call gamos and which we quantify by two 
different methods, has demonstrably significant consequences for social, institutional, and 
economic developmental
LINK: 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/social-science-historv/article/polvgamv-the-commodification
-of-women-and-underdevelopment/46B0CC134576212650F64E167C8451DE>

Jesse Rothstein: Why Cal (Not Harvard) Is Americaa€™ s Top College'. a€~Forbesa€™ #1 ranking 
underscores that private universities are often engines of wealth inequalitya€!. The editors of 
Forbes magazine
announced last week a new college rankings methodology that places more emphasis on access and 
outcomes for low-income students and others. The result? Public universities did much better than 
in traditional rankings.
UC Berkeley rose to the top spot, the first time this honor has gone to a public school. Seven 
public universities landed in the top 25, while Harvard fell to seventh place. The notion that 
colleges and universities should be
evaluated based on a broader standard of access and economic mobility is a crucial one that policy 
makers, governmental leaders and higher education institutions themselves must embrace, and fund, 
if we are to stop
income inequality from ossifying into permanent hierarchya€!. a€ceEven if, like Harvard, they 
(elite privates) promise to pay full freight for the low-income applicants they accept,a€D the 
Forbes editors write, a€oedo they
take enough disadvantaged students to make that promise meaningful? UC Berkeley does a much better 
job at this than does Harvard. At Berkeley, 27% of undergraduates receive federal Pell Grants, 
aimed at helping low-
and moderate-income students pay for college. At Harvard, by contrast, the share of Pell students 
is just 12%.a€Da€! Extensive evidence demonstrates that high quality higher education leads to 
enormous earnings increases
and also delivers spillovers for more than just the students involved: Each young adult who is sent 
to college makes his or her neighbors and co-workers more productive as well. Unfortunately, we 
have not added capacity at
public colleges and universities nearly quickly enough to keep up with demanda€l

LINK: <https://www.sfexaminer.com/opinion/why-cal-not-harvard-is-americas-top-college/>

Natasha Lode: The November story. a€~Russell Westergard, the Deputy [U.S.] Consular Chief in 
Wuhana€!. writesa€!. a€oeBy mid-October 2019, the dedicated team at the U.S. Consulate General in 
Wuhan knew that the
city had been struck by what was thought to be an unusually vicious flu season. The disease 
worsened in November. When city officials began to close public schools in mid-December to control 
the spread of the disease, the
team passed the word to Embassy Beijing and continued monitoring. The possibility of a new viral 
outbreak was always on the consulatea€™ s radar. Still, the working assumption in every scenario 
had always been that, as

in nacf        liV'/a T-I1 M1       no oxiuna      if         m rural araac fircf anrl         
cnraaJ mmrvr         nanfaro anmcc Phma n^=l                nufoaf rvf nanJamm man^z murnalicfc 
Vinxr^                 fn


sorry portrait of Chinese behaviour. Of a country that has consistently withheld knowledge and data 
on covida€“19 and its origins. Whether the virus came from a laboratory, a field worker, or a food 
chain, China broke
agreements with the world that it will promptly disclose an outbreak of a dangerous new pathogen. 
One important question for the world is whether virologists themselves should also be bound by 
these rules to inform
others. Or whether foreign governments should be bound to report on countries they suspect to have 
outbreaks. For what it is worth, I think the virologistsa€’’indeed everyonea€’’needs to be more 
open about what they
knew and when. A lot of people have died. Their families deserve answersa€!

LINK:

The November story

This week I want to set sail into choppy and difficult waters. I want to try to assemble some of 
what we know about the origins of covid-19 into some sort of order. On this matter, there are many 
journalists who have written
with perseverance and brilliance. So this isna€™ t an easy subject to write about, and there are no 
easy answers to be had. But, evea€l

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 19 comments A- Natasha Loder


Overmatter

The November story

This week I want to set sail into choppy and difficult waters. I want to try to assemble some of 
what we know about the origins of covid-19 into some sort of order. On this matter, there are many 
journalists who have written
with perseverance and brilfiance. So this isna€™ t an easy subject to write about, and there are no 
easy answers to be had. But, evea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 19 comments A- Natasha Loder

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

