Subscribe now

Trying to write something about CHIPS, IRA, and American industrial policy. But so far the only 
thing that has jelled has been the history-oriented preliminary throat-clearing:

Back in the 1840s Friedrich Engels was really annoyed by the writings of the economists that 
crossed his desk. They wrote about land, labor, and capital. But there was something more important 
as well:

A factor which the economist does not think abouta€l. What has the economist to do with 
inventiveness? Have not all inventions fallen into his lap without any effort on his part? Has one 
of them cost
him anything? Why then should he bother about them in the calculation of production costs? Land, 
capital and labour are for him the conditions of wealth, and he requires nothing else. Science is no
concern of his. What does it matter to him that he has received its gifts through Berthollet, Davy, 
Liebig, Watt, Cartwright, etc.a€“gifts which have benefited him and his production immeasurably?a€!
A single achievement of science like James Watta€™ s steam-engine has brought in more for the world 
in the first fifty years of its existence than the world has spent on the promotion of science since
the beginning of timea€l 1

Engels recognized that the market economic order of private property, exchange, and the pursuit of 
profit that the members of the business class had ringmastered, the increasing scale of the 
internal within-corporation divisions
of labor that they ran, and their direction of profits to the industrial research labs in which, 
increasingly, the science and engineering were being done were all essential. At the end of the 
1840s he, along with his BFF Karl Marx,
were to marvel at how the business class a€oeplayed a most revolutionary parta€! created more 
massive and more colossal productive forces than have all preceding generations togethera€l what 
earlier century had even a
presentiment that such productive forces slumbered in the lap of social labour?a€D 2

But all the potential prosperity the market could generate rested on science and engineering. And 
thus the economist got it wrong: a€oeHe does not know how to calculate such things; the advances of 
science go beyond his
figures.a€D In Engelsa€™ s view, we needed to replace the market economy and the analyses of its 
tame propagandist economists with a€oea rational ordera€l [going] beyond the division of interests 
as it is found with the
economist, [where] the mental element certainly belongs among the elements of production and will 
find its place in economicsa€la€D

Those who took Engels too seriously and tried to replace the market economy with an all-thumbs 
command economy created what were the greatest economic disasters of the twentieth century with 
their systems of really-
existing socialism. But Engelsa€™ s pointa€”that the market is going to get it wrong because it 
cannot price, it does not see, the value of the non-rival ideas of science and of the communication 
networks of communities of
engineering practicea€”is 100% right. And scotch-taping together some system of restricted 
appropriability via intellectual property a€cerightsa€D and public funding of basic research is 
highly, highly, unlikely to be a
sufficient  fix for the problem.

And so we have, here in America, since Alexander Hamilton, largely successfully, had industrial 
policy to try to fill in the gap, to properly value and hence promote the spillovers and positive 
externalities from the research, the
development, and the knowledge-exchange of the communities of engineering practice in a way that 
the invisible hand of the market, to which such things are themselves invisible, cannot. As Steve 
Cohen and I wrote in our
Concrete Economics: The Hamilton Approach to Economic Policy.

In successful economies, economic policy has been pragmatic, not ideological. It has been concrete, 
not abstracta€l policies to shift its economy onto a new growth directiona€! collective choicesa€!
nota€! the emergent outcomes of innumerable individual choices aimed at achieving other goalsa€! 
not been the unguided results of mindless evolutiona€l [rather] intelligent designsa€! 3

And this has not been a process disconnected from the market:

Yes, there was an a€oeinvisible hand,a€D and enormous entrepreneurial innovation and energy. But 
the invisible hand was repeatedly lifted at the elbow by government, and re-placed in a new
positional. Government signaled the direction, cleared the way, set up the path, anda€”when 
neededa€’’provided the means. And then the entrepreneurs rushed in, innovated, took risks, 
profited, and
expanded that new direction in ways that had not and could not have been foreseena€l. Underneath 
the rhetorica€! [was] a critical though often unspoken interdependence of entrepreneurship and
governmental. The choice of new direction was based on a general perception of where Americaa€™ s 
economy ought to be going and what would be needed to move the economy in that direction.
There  was, always, an unsightly tangle of interests and compromises. But eyes stayed on concrete 
realitya€!

Or so it was until the Neoliberal Turn of the 1980s.


concrete economics: i ne nammon /xpproacn io economic roticy.

In successful economies, economic policy has been pragmatic, not ideological. It has been concrete, 
not abstracta€l policies to shift its economy onto a new growth directiona€! collective choicesa€!
nota€! the emergent outcomes of innumerable individual choices aimed at achieving other goalsa€! 
not been the unguided results of mindless evolutiona€l [rather] intelligent designsa€! 3

And this has not been a process disconnected from the market:

Yes, there was an a€oeinvisible hand,a€D and enormous entrepreneurial innovation and energy. But 
the invisible hand was repeatedly lifted at the elbow by government, and re-placed in a new
positional. Government signaled the direction, cleared the way, set up the path, anda€”when 
neededa€’’provided the means. And then the entrepreneurs rushed in, innovated, took risks, 
profited, and
expanded that new direction in ways that had not and could not have been foreseena€l. Underneath 
the rhetorica€! [was] a critical though often unspoken interdependence of entrepreneurship and
governmental. The choice of new direction was based on a general perception of where Americaa€™ s 
economy ought to be going and what would be needed to move the economy in that direction.
There  was, always, an unsightly tangle of interests and compromises. But eyes stayed on concrete 
realitya€!

Or so it was until the Neoliberal Turn of the 1980s.

On the right, the 1980s saw Ronald Reagana€™ s declaration that government could not be the 
solution but was the problema€”that the solution was large tax cuts for the rich, so that the 
successful, the entrepreneurial, and the
innovative could focus on creating good jobs rather than spending their time focused on their 
tax-avoidance strategies. On the center, we had the very sharp Charles Schultze and many others 
drawing a substantive and moral
equivalence between Reaganite overpromises on supply-side tax cuts and worries that Americaa€™ s 
economic structure was shifting away from sectors with large positive research, development, and 
engineering-community
externalities and into sectors with many fewer such, and even into sectors of negative-sum 
dissipation. For, Schultze wrote back in 1983:

America is not de-industrializing. Japan does not owe its industrial success to its industrial 
policy. Government is not able to devise a a€ ce winning a€D industrial structure. Finally, it is 
not possible in
the American political system to pick and choose among individual firms and regions in the 
substantive, efficiency-driven way envisaged by advocates of industrial policya€! 4

That an excessively large chunk of income in America flows to dissipative activitiesa€”health-care 
administration, financial churninga€”is not something I have heard anyone deny in recent years. 
That the Japanese experience
gives us a€oeno reason to believea€! [the governments™ s] influence, on balance, improved the 
choices in any major waya€l. [It was] a huge saving rate, aggressive business leaders, and a 
backlog of modern technology
waiting to be exploiteda€la€D that did it rings very hollow today, given the inability of emerging 
markets in general to converge to Dover-Circle-Plus levels of productivity, and the success of not 
just Japan but its emulators
Korea, Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, coastal mainland China, Indonesia, and now 
Vietnam. But perhaps the most ahistorical claim in Schultze (1983) was a€oewe actually know 
precious little about
identifying, before the fact, a a€~ winnings™ industrial structures IS□.

Alexander Hamilton set out to redesign the agrarian economy that BritainS™ s mercantilist policies 
had imposed on the North American colonies, and for which Americas™ s unlimited land and limited 
population density so
well suited it: he knew that the winning industrial structure had manufacturing and banking in 
prominent places, rather than having the United States be a gigantic New Zealand. After Hamilton, 
Jefferson, Madison, and their
successors quickly decided that their small-government, agriculture-first principles had been an 
out-of-power luxury, and the SoeAmerican systemSD of industry-promotion, protective manufacturing 
tariffs, and
infrastructures’’especially canal and railroad building. PreS “Civil War America, safe from foreign 
military threat, channeled Department of War money to fund the development of promising high-tech 
industries at the
Springfield      Arsenal and elsewhere. And Robert E. LeeS™ s first major post-West Point army job 
was not commanding soldiers on some border but rather making the Mississippi River behave in the 
area around St. Louis.

Railroad expansion, state land-grant colleges, homesteads to prevent the growth of latifundia and 
latifundistasS”the post-Civil War governments™ s infrastructure constructions and land allocations 
were big government
incarnate. Regulation of natural (and unnatural) monopolies. Amending the constitution and shifting 
from a tariff- to an income tax-based government. And we are not even up to World War I.

And if you had tried to argue to either FDR or to Eisenhower of the Interstate Highway System and 
the post-Sputnik moment that we did not know what a SoeS~ winnings™ industrial structures □ was, 
they would have
laughed.

No. The only truly live argument in SchultzeS™ s Industrial Policy: A Dissent is the last: Sceit is 
not possible in the American political system to pick and choose among individual firms and regions 
in the substantive,
efficiency-driven way envisaged by advocates of industrial policy SISD This is the point of Mancur 
OlsonS™ s The Rise and Decline of Nations', that the very success of the United States in the years 
up to the 1980s had
created    a large degree of institutional sclerosis and a great vulnerability to rent-seeking by 
those willing to invest in political influence.5 The U.S. government, as a result, lacked what 
Peter Evans calls Soeembedded
autonomy SU, and the larger its scope for action the more the government will distort economic 
activity toward things preferred by the politically powerful, even if policies fly the false flag 
of promoting high positive­
externality activities 6.

Perhaps. Perhaps the gas tank powering the engine of American ExceptionalismS”of exceptional 
technology-led economic growth and developments’’was filled at filling station FDR and then 
topped-off at filling station
DDE, but there are no more filling stations. Perhaps now the Silicon Valley infotech hub; the 
Boston, San Francisco, San Diego, and Research Triangle BioTech hubs; plus the widely distributed 
CleanTech efforts are simply

running on fumes. Perhaps CHIPS and IRA and follow-on efforts will be unsuccessful. As Laura Tyson 
and Lenny MendonA§a very politely put it: a€oeGetting an industrial policy right is never easy, and 
getting a place-based
one right will prove even more challenginga€!a€D7. If so, then the 21st century will definitely not 
be an American century in any sense.

But perhaps not. It is in our hands.
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

