Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Evelyn Sakakida Rawski: The Last Emperors: A Social History of Qing Imperial 
Zn5n7Mfion5<https://archive.org/details/lastemperorssoc00raws/page/6/mode/2up>

•  Daron Acemoglu: Why Nation-Building Failed in Afghanistan'. a€~The tragedy playing out this 
month has been 20 years in the making. From the outset, America and its allies embraceda€“and never 
reconsidereda€“a top-down state-building strategy that was always destined to faila€! LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-syndicate.org/commentarv/afghanistan-top-down-state-building-
failed-again-by-daron-acemoglu-2021-08>

•  Martin Sandbu: The West has Paid the Price for Neglecting the Afghan Economy. a€~Per capita 
incomes flatlined over the past decade and corruption is endemica€!. Total amount of bribes paid by 
Afghans to state officials at $2.25bna€!. The corruption of the Afghan state is to be blamed on its 
financial and security guarantors: the US-led coalitiona€!

<https://www.ft.com/content/4f9b452f-d80a-4a37 -bec5-bb73674aeadb>

•  Luke Nathan Phillips: What Is an Example of a a€~Good Patriota€™ ?: a€~Loving your country 
because of its past and loving it because of its potential are two different, legitimate ways of 
loving Americaa€! 
<https://www.deseret.eom/opinion/2021/8/18/22628911/opinion-are-there-different-ways-to-be-a-good-pa
triot-braver-angels-america>

• Jeet Heer: Madison Cawthorna€™ s Threat'. a€™ Congressman says he dreads taking up arms against 
fellow citizens buta€!



The Time of Monsters
Madison Cawthorn's Threat

Speaking at an event on Sunday, North Carolina congressman Madison Cawthorn decried a€oeriggeda€D 
elections and intimated that a€cebloodsheda€D would ensue unless Republicans felt elections were 
secure. a€oeBecause, you know, if our election systems continue to be rigged and continue to be 
stolen, then ita€™ s going to leaa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- 4 comments A- Jeet Heer

Paragraphs:

Alan Cole: The Mountain Lions: These Nine Cities Boomed in the COVID Era: a€~The 2017 tax lawa€! 
limiting tax breaks for owning expensive housinga€! the COVIDa€“19 pandemic changed peoplesa€™ 
lifestyles and thereby shifted their housing preferences. These seemingly unrelated events both 
made housing in the most expensive metropolitan areas less attractive relative to housing
elsewhere. That created an opening for a second group of cities that provided attractive amenities 
at more reasonable pricesa€!. Boise, Spokane, Austin, Phoenix, Tucson, Colorado Springsa€! Salt 
Lake City, Ogden, and Provoa€! had a variety of advantages: reasonable prices, a growing high-tech 
economy, good weather or natural beauty, and relatively lower state and local taxesa€! strong
appreciation in property values .a€!

LINK: <https://fullstackeconomics.com/the-rise-of-the-mountain-lion-economies/>

Stefan Nicola: VW & Daimler Going Electric Overwhelms German Auto Suppliers'. a€~Germanya€™ s $94 
billion car-parts industry is struggling with the once-in-a-generation shifta€!. After spending 
decades perfecting the production of crankshafts, diesel injectors and other components not needed 
for electric motors, the industry is now scrambling to adapt as its traditional products become
obsolete sooner than expected. From global players like Robert Bosch and Continental to the 
hundreds of small- and medium-size companies, parts makers are key to Europea€™ s biggest economy. 
Roughly 75% of the value-add of a car made in Germany comes from this supply network, which employs 
more than 300,000 people. Many of those jobs are dependent on how swiftly the sector can
change. Doing so will be a bit like merging onto a crowded autobahn at high speeda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2021-08-26/vw-and-daimler-going-electric-overwhelms-germ
an-auto-suppliers>

Eric Posner: COVID & the Conservative Economic Crack-up: a€~Two prominent economists, both former 
Trump administration officialsa€! veered into incoherence: A recent commentary in the Wall Street 
Journal exposes the dark hole into which conservative economic thinking has sunka€!. Casey B. 
Mulligan and Tomas J. Philipsona€! used the COVIDa€‘T9 pandemic to make the case for
abandoning what they see as the conventional wisdom among economists: a€oethat the purpose of 
government policy is to correct market failuresa€Da€!. The a€oegovernment-bad-market-gooda€n 
argument had a good run back in the 1980s. But it was dealt a body blow by the 2008 financial 
crisis, when a€cegooda€D government, led by the US Federal Reserve, rescued financial markets
from self-destruction caused by the deregulation promoted by free-market advocates. Another blow 
has come with the pandemica€!. Trumpa€™ s major achievement was using government to create the 
conditions for rapid vaccine development; his major failure was not going further and undermining 
efforts by state and local governments to control the pandemic. Mulligan and Philipsona€!
take the worst market failure in decades as an opportunity for arguing that markets solve the 
problems created by government. Redefining a massive government intervention as a€oegetting out of 
the way of businessa€D seems at best an effort to rationalize their former bossa€™ s political 
opportunism^!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/decline-of-conservative-free-market-economics-by-eric-
posner-2021-08>

Jeet Heer: The Establishmenta€™ s Afghanistan Mythss: a€~Richard N. Haass is president of the 
Council on Foreign Relations and thus as emblematic a representative of the American national 
security establishment as one could want. On Friday, he commented about the ongoing turmoil in 
Afghanistan, a€oeThe alternative to withdrawal from Afghanistan was not a€~endless occupational™
but open-ended presence. Occupation is imposed, presence invited. Unless you think we are occupying 
Japan, Germany, & South Korea. And yes, withdrawal was the problem.a€Da€! In advancing this 
consensus, ghouls who should have been discredited for their advocacy have been dug up and given 
prominent platforms: not just John Bolton and Paul Wolfowitz but even that ultimate undying
security state vampire, Henry Kissinger. The basic argument goes something like this: Until Joe 
Biden came along, Afghanistan was a manageable problem. It was on path to becoming a Japan, Germany 
or South Korea, a country that would have a permanent American military presence under stable 
conditions with little or no loss of military lifea€!. This establishment mytha€! is clearly
designed   to scapegoat Joe Biden for problems that are not caused by the withdrawal but are in 
fact inherent in bipartisan policy going back two decades in four administrations. To gauge how 
fantastical the establishment party line is, it is worth reading a€oeThe Afghanistan Papers,a€D a 
blockbuster Washington Post report by journalist Craig Whitlock that ran in 2019 (which will soon be
available   in expanded form as a book set to be released next week). Unfortunately, a€oeThe 
Afghanistan Papersa€D were largely ignored by the rest of the media and by the political elite. Yet 
it stands as the best and most clear-cut account of the failed American wara€!. The debacle isa€! 
the fault ofa€! an entire national security establishment. In creating the myth that a€oewithdrawal 
was the
problema€Da€!

LINK:



The Time of Monsters

The Establishment's Afghanistan Myths

Richard N. Haass is president of the Council on Foreign Relations and thus as emblematic a 
representative of the American national security establishment as one could want. On Friday, he 
commented about the ongoing turmoil in Afghanistan, a€oeThe alternative to withdrawal from 
Afghanistan was not a€~endless occa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 9 likes A- 1 comment A- Jeet Heer

Noah Smith: Why Has the Gig Economy Been a Disappointment?: a€~Maybe because traditional companies 
still have a good reason to exista€!. Ubera€! prices have gone way way upa€! wait timesa€! have 
also risena€!. Cory Doctorow has a long article about the situation, and while ita€™ s too polemic, 
it does make some good pointsa€!. Uber is still losing moneya€!. The company is also
cash-flow negative. It releases an a€oeadjusted EBITDAa€D metric that looks better but really just 
excludes a lot of expenses that shouldna€™ t be excluded (like stock-based compensation). This 
cana€™ t continue, of course. But what will stanch the bleeding? The idea that self-driving car 
breakthroughs will save the company was always wronga€L One hope was always that investor
subsidies would allow Uber to drive competitors like Lyft out of the market, and then jack up 
pricesa€! Uber got a lot of people to start using the service by subsidizing rides, but that 
didna€™ t hook people into becoming dependent on ride-hailinga€!. Uber and Lyft will survivea€! 
[as] boutique services for the well-heeleda€!

LINK:

Noahpinion

Why has the gig economy been a disappointment?

Startup investment tends to go in waves; therea€™ s usually one or two a€oebig thingsa€D that a lot 
of people are rushing to put money in. Right now ita€™ s crypto, a little while ago it was A.I. But 
back in the misty dawn of time a€” i.e., about five years ago a€” it wasa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 47 likes A- 66 comments A- Noah Smith

Leave a comment


Noahpinion

Why has the gig economy been a disappointment?

Startup investment tends to go in waves; therea€™ s usually one or two a€oebig thingsa€D that a lot 
of people are rushing to put money in. Right now ita€™ s crypto, a little while ago it was A.I. But 
back in the misty dawn of time a€” i.e., about five years ago a€” it wasa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 47 likes A- 66 comments A- Noah Smith
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

