Subscribe now

FIRST: There Are Now 250-Basis Points of Long-Term Monetary Tightening That Have Not Yet Hit the 
Economy

As of now, nobody knowsa€’’especially not the Federal Reservea€’’whether the very substantial 
monetary tightening that the Federal Reserve has induced over the past nine months is too little, 
too much, or just right:

FRED — Market Yield on U.S. Treasury Securities at 10-Year Constant Maturity, Quoted on an 
Investment Basis, Inflation-Indexed

2.0

<D
V

k.

<D

FRED — Personal Consumption Expenditures Excluding Food and Energy (Chain-Type Price Index)

10.0


-2.5

-5.0

-7.5

Jan 2018         Jul 2018         Jan 2019         Jul 2019         Jan 2020         Jul 2020       
  Jan 2021         Jul 2021         Jan 2022      Jul 2022

The one thing that is clear is that we do not have a bond-market expectations problem:

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

2.8

2.6

2.4

2.2

2.0

1.8

1.6

1.4

1.2

1.0

0.8

2018-01         2018-07          2019-01         2019-07          2020-01          2020-07          
2021-01         2021-07          2022-01          2022-07

There are thus two and only two credible positions right now:

•  The Fed needs to pause, and see what its policy moves over the past nine months have 
donea€’’which means waiting until after the turn of the year to move again.

•  We remain just one supply shock away from a de-anchoring of inflation expectations, and so the 
Fed needs to keep talking very tough.

My view is that the bond market will tell us when it is time for additional tightening: the Fed 
should pause unless and until the 5-year/5-year-forward inflation breakeven crosses 2.5% heading 
upwards.

(Yes, there are problems in a fully rational-expectations world of conditioning policy on market 
variables that are primarily expectations of what that policy will be. But is there any reason to 
think that we are in such a world?)
Share

One Image:


Name of Tendency

John Maynard Keynes

Years Relevant (Roughly)

1900-Present

A Few Major Thinkers

Himself

Richard Kahn, Joan Robinson, Piero

Keynesianism Is...

nothin I would concern myself
with.

a philosophical programme

What's The Deal

He wrote the dang books

Moved JMK from the Treatise on

What's Been Kept

Depends who you ask.

Inspired Sraffa to flip off Wittgenstein,
thereby instigating the Philosophical
Investigations; Sraffa in postkeynesian


Cambndge Circus        19301931

Old Keynesians          1936-1960

Sraffa, (Hon. Frank Ramsey)

Nicholas Kaldor, Evsey Domar, Roy
Harrod, Axel Leijonhufvud, Ken Galbraith

yoked to an economic model.

when the government
intervenes to get the economy
moving again when there's a
recession.

Money to the General Theory

Tried to develop determinate,
policy-usable models out of the
intuitions  of the GT

Wanted to keep the policy

economics

Large-scale macroeconometrlc models
for policymaking (Fair Model, Klein*
Goldberger, probably others), "Pump-
priming"

Most of this got cleaned up and


Bastard Keynesians (or,
"The Neoclassical

Paul Samuelson, Kenneth Arrow, Bob

the invention of the field of

prescriptions of Keynes' work, but rebooted to become the New
wanted the analysis to be grounded Keynesian literature, but non Koch
in neoclassical models of labor Department econ 101 is pretty much


Synthesis")            19401980

The "Keynesian Regime of

Accumulation"          1945-1975 (era), still written about

Keynes (As Seen By '68ers)  1968 Present

"We're All Keynesians

Now’                 19701974

Post-Keynesians        1975-Present

Solow, John Hicks, Alvin Hansen

Geography Departments,
"Keynesianism* used weirdly
Interchangeably                           with "The Fordist Mode
of Production," Social Structures of
Accumulation literature

Italian Autonomism, Eurocommunism,
Western Marxism, Some Frankfurt
Schoolers, Giorgio Agamben, Paul
Mattick,  Bob Brenner, most left-wing
humanities graduate students at some
point

Milton Friedman, Richard Nixon,
Probably some rando your dad knows
from work,

Alfred Eichner, Jan Kregel, Hyman
Minsky, Marc Lavoie, Anna Carabelli,
Susan Strange, Victoria Chick, Paul

Davidson (sadly), Geoff Harcourt

macroeconomics.

when there is a detente
between capital and labor
predicated                     on labor getting paid
enough to not complain.

a ploy by the Bourgeoisie to buy
off the working classes long
enough to prevent the onrush of
revolution, which means we
must                address our analyses to
the Lumpenproletanat.

when the government spends
money.

a more or less complete guide
to thinking about the economy,
as long as you keep up with the

times.

markets ♦production

Frame for periodizing an era of
postwar economic development.
Pretty similar to the “trente
glorieuses," but in an American
context where it's about cars and
suburbs

Folks needed a reason why
communism didn’t come to
western                     europe after May 1968
that was less conspiratorial than a
bunch of rantir^ about the CIA
operatives in Italy

Kind of the apex point of
degredation of the term
” Keynesian’

Trying to keep the legacy of Keynes'
actual work - most especially
methodologically • from being lost

in all the various Keynesianisms. Hi!

this.

You know, I'm not really sure, been too
long since I've read David Harvey

As far as I can tell, this is still going
strong

I think that this is still what the right
wing thinks that Keynesianism is, but
it's hard to tell.


Neo-Keynesians         1977-1995

Some Italian folks (Bellofiore, Pasinetti,
Graziani), Some Brazilian folks (most of
the Sraffian Supermuitiplier discourse),
Scattered Individuals, 80s 90s Kaleckians

a reasonably workable theory of
the short run that needs
Marx/Ricardo/Sraffa to be
explanatory                  about long-period
dynamics.

1 have never really gotten a straight
answer out of anyone about what
this term actually means. My
understanding is that it is a kind of
weird placeholder for marx-keynes
syntheses that incorporate the
effects     of short run dynamics on
the                    long run

I'm pretty sure this is still a live
research programme? At least Ricardo
Bellofiore is still doing It!


New Keynesians         1980 Present

Paul Krugman, Greg Mankiw, Larry
Summers, Janet Yellen, George Akerlof,
David Romer, Paul Romer, Christina
Romer, Olivier Blanchard, Michael
Woodford, Ricardo Reis, Joseph Stiglitz

a theory of the interest rate that
dates back to a strange,
unreadable book that we have
successfully implemented a
mathematical version of.

This is basically every center to
center-left economist of the last
forty years.

Still going, but lord willing and the
creek don't rise, we will shake off the
Taylor Rule, the Phillips Curve, and all
the rest.


Modern Monetary Theory   1994-Present

Stephanie Kelton, Randy Wray, Mat
Forstater, Scott Fulwiler, Nathan Tankus,
Rohan Grey

the basis for explaining a money-
using capitalist economy.

Demand-side approach to public
finance and macroeconomic policy
taken to a logical extreme,
combined with some
incontrovertible   facts about
monetary                operations and some
tendentious history.

Have you heard any reasonable people
worried about the deficit recently?

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Must-Read: The Return of Italian Fascism

The most interesting mention of my book I saw yesterday:

Aaron Brown: Fascism from Italy to Hibbing and Back Again: a€~Antonellia€™ s description of early 
Fascism centered on how the movement made Italians feel, not how it solved problemsa€l. In the 
1920sa€! Italiansa€l were barely surviving. Thata€™ s why hungry peoplea€’’hungry enough to eat a 
cata€”turned to Mussolinia€™ s Fascism, an incendiary force that pitted powerless groups against 
one anothera€!. The notion of
strong men providing order and protection against the outside world lingers within the deep tissue 
of society, like chicken pox. Whenever there is tumult, it comes back stronger than beforea€l. 
Ina€l Slouching Toward Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>a€! DeLong argues thata€! the technological advances 
of this period were unparalleleda€! put[ting] enormous pressure on old systemsa€l.

We may not be eating cats or breathing coal-choked air, but economic and environmental fears grip 
us, and we lay our heads on pillows of anxiety each night. Perhaps this is why a poor Italian born 
in the 19th century might become a fascist in 1922, and why that worldview holds just as much sway 
today. The perception of scarce resources, whether true or not, suggests that some chosen category 
of a€oewinnersa€D must defeat and
destroy a€celosersa€D in order to survive. When people see power as the means and the ends, then 
the logical outcome is fascism. Its sad conclusion is that there isna€™t enough for everyone; that 
some must die and that their fate is deserveda€l

In a fast-changing world, far-right politics become a bastion for the change-weary. We see this 
around the globe right nowa€”in Brazil, India, Hungary and among the increasingly fanatical views 
of former President Trumpa€™ s most zealous supportersa€!. The Democratic Party cana€™t solve all 
our problems. But neither party can advance democratic solutions if one party refuses to 
participate in democracy. What began as political
gamesmanship has evolved into something far more dangerous, replete with warning signs of 
grassroots authoritarianisma€l

Leave a comment

Also Noted:

•  Brink Lindsay: What Is the Permanent Problem?: a€~The namea€l isa€! a line from an essay by the 
economist John Maynard Keynesa€l. a€oeThe economic problem is nota€”if we look into the 
futurea€”the permanent problem of the human race^\

•  John Anthers: The Unease You Feel Is the Fed Pushing Into a Recession: a€~There are increasing 
signs that inflation is abating, but the Fed seems determined to keep hiking despite the cost to 
the economy and jobsa€l

•  Izabella Kaminska: The Blind Spot: Spot Markets Live: a€~A select group of financial pros, 
journalists and commenters have been gathering every Monday at 11am in a discreet location on the 
web to discuss what's really going ona€l

• Martin Peers: The Metaverse Money Pit: How Metaa€™ s $70 Billion Bet Compares to Techa€™ s 
Biggest Gambles

•  Adam Posen: How the Bank of England should respond to UK fiscal policy crashing the pound: 
a€~The Bank of England had few good optionsa€! a fundamental macroeconomic conflict between the 
Truss government's so-called growth program of large-scale spending and the Bank's need to reduce 
trend inflationa€l. A collapsing currency isa€! a major problema€l. The Bank had to make a 
choicea€l

•  Robin Wigglesworth: Behold, the scariest chart in financial markets: a€~The seismic shift in the 
US Treasury market is tightening financial conditions for everyone on the planet. If we continue 
along this path, something is inevitably going to breaka€!

a Tnhv Nanalp- The reason the RnF is hnvina Inna ailts’ an I DT hlnw-un- a^'Pensinn nlan nlnmhina 
nrnhlems farced the Ranka^™ s handa^!


•  Brad Setser: a€~The UK looks to be experiencing a form of the kind of crisis that Nouriel 
Roubini and I posited that the United States could face back in our (in)famous 2005 papera€!

•  David Roberts: Learning curves will lead to extremely cheap clean energy: a€~Save over a 
trillion dollars relative to baseline. We've gotten the sign wrong: the transition to clean energy 
is not a cost, it's a benefita€!

•  Bret Swanson: The $101,000,000 iPhone: a€~iPhone 14a€! includes one terabyte of digital 
storagea€! Add in the A16 processor, the 5G modem, including new millimeter wave capabilities of up 
to 500 megabits per second, an amazing graphics processor, and four cameras totaling 84 megapixels, 
and youa€™ ve got a device that would have cost at least $101 million to build in 1991 a€!

• Steve Schmidt: Media corruption at the a€oepaper of recorda€D: a€~Donald John Trump from 
Queensa€! has a a€oepsychiatrista€na€! Maggie Haberman. She is the lead Trump reporter for The New 
York Times, and has become, like him, a singular totem of corruptiona€!
Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

