Noah Smith: The minimum wage pushback: a€~Most of the discussion about the minimum wage centers on 
the potential costs of the policy a€’’especially whether it will cause
unemployment. This seems like a huge mistake. In general, every policy has costs and benefits, and 
to ignore the benefits introduces bias to the discussion. The whole point of
minimum   wage is to reduce poverty. Many papers find that it does do this. For example, a 2019 
paper by Arindrajit Dube finds that doubling the minimum wage would result in
somewhere between a 2.2% and a 4.5% drop in poverty. Thata€™ s not a knockout blow, but it would be 
substantial, since the overall poverty rate is around 12%a€!. By refusing to
even  talk about the poverty reduction aspect of minimum wage, wea€™re doing the debate a 
disservice. Note the huge difference from the discussion on trade. Advocates of free
trade will admit that a minority of Americans will lose out from the policy. But they argue that 
because the benefits of free trade outweigh the cost overall, we should implement
free trade and a€oecompensate the losersa€Da€i. The strongest argument against the federal minimum 
wage is that ita€™ s a one-size-fits-all policy that fails to take regional
variations into accounta€!. This argument is correct!a€! So it makes sense to worry about places 
for which costs and wages are both low, and so $15 is pretty higha€!. Allow areas
with  low costs and low wages to start out at a bit lower than $15 and advance to $15 as their 
median wages grow over timea€!. The Democratsa€™ proposal already contains
something along these linesa€”it would index future minimum growth to local median wages. And the 
proposal already includes a long phase-ina€”the minimum wage

wouldna€™ t reach $15 til 2025a€!. What does the evidence really say? Ita€™ s fine to talk about 
monopsony power and all, but ultimately the case that the minimum wage is a
pretty-safe policy rests on the weight of empirical evidence. And that evidence has been powerful 
enough to change economistsa€™ minds over a fairly short space of timea€!
Remember that in 2013, 34% of top economists surveyed by the University of Chicago agreed that a $9 
federal minimum wage would a€oemake it noticeably harder for low-skilled
workers to find employmenta€D. Just two years, later, in 2015, the same survey found that only 26% 
of economists agreed that a $15 federal minimum wage would mean that
a€oethe employment rate for low-wage US workers will be substantially lower than it would be under 
the status quo.a€Da€! Neumark and Shirleya€™ s median

a€cepreferreda€D estimate is a€“0.116. Dubea€™ s graph above notes that the median estimate for 
a€oeany groupa€D is a€“0.17. In other words, the studies Dube reviews tend
to find some subgroup of workersa€’’teenage dropouts, or whatevera€”who experience pretty 
significant job losses from minimum wage hikesa€!. A high minimum wage is very
bad for certain small groups of workers, while not very harmful for low-wage workers overall. Which 
brings us back to costs and benefitsa€!

LINK: https://noahpinion.substack.com/pZthe-minimum-wage-pushback

Matthew Yglesias: The a€ceinduced demanda€ce case against YIMBYism is wrong: a€~[It] fails on four 
scores: It is empirically false, at least most of the time. Accepting its logic
would counsel against all efforts to improve quality of life. If it were true, it still wouldna€™ t 
follow that new construction is bad. It misconstrues what the YIMB Y proposal is in
the first place. As I say, I dona€™ t really believe that people believing in the induced demand 
argument explains any of the proximate barriers to housing reform. But it does come
up a lot online, so Ia€™ d like to have a resource for explaining to people whata€™ s wrong with 
ita€!. Empirically, more supply lowers pricesa€! Kate Penningtona€™ s recent
study of San Francisco is very precise: a€oel find that rents fall by 2% for parcels within 100m of 
new construction. Rentersa€™ risk of being displaced to a lower-income
neighborhood falls by 17%. Both effects decay linearly to zero within 1.5km.a€Da€! Olivaa€! 
actually finds induced demanda€! the Inner Harbor project in Baltimore which
transformed    a largely derelict stretch of waterfronta€!. This is all good empirical work. But 
note that I dona€™ t think anyone has ever argued that building an aquarium will reduce
housing cost burdens. The Inner Harbor is (by design) a tourist attraction^!. If you build a nice 
place to visit in the middle of a city, then the immediately adjacent homes become
more desirablea€!. New infill housing appears to empirically neutralize the induced demand by 
simultaneously inducing supply. But conceptually therea€™ s a question herea€”is
it bad to make neighborhoods better places to live?a€! Consider the following argumenta€!. New 
amenities will make the neighborhood a more attractive place to live. Because the
neighborhood is now more attractive, prices will rise. Rising prices will displace some existing 
residents. Therefore we shouldna€™t allow new buildings to be constructeda€!. An
infinite cycle of bad urban policy. Defund police will lead to more murders? Well, thata€™ s good 
for housing affordabilitya€!. This is all wrong, wrong, wrong. We simply cannot
accept a€oemake sure the neighborhood sucksa€D as our affordable housing strategy a€! LINK: 
https://www.slowboring.eom/p/induced-demand


