Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)This is (part of) the argument that Stephen S. Cohen and I were trying to make in our Concrete 
Economics: The Hamilton Approach to Economic Policy

<https://www.google.com/search?tbm=bks&hl=en&q=SvC6wAEACAAJ>. Our conception of how our economic 
policy was in the pasta€”when successful, pragmatic and
utilitariana€”has been largely lost during the ideological age of the past generation:

Nic Johnson, Robert Manduca, & Chris Hong: The American Anti-Austerity Tradition’. a€~The victory 
of neoliberalism beginning in the 1980s hasa€!
totally vitiated our historical imaginations, it can be hard to picture the American past as 
anything other than a laissez faire frontier society.a€!

Recognizfing] our unfamiliar history can give policymakers the confidence they need to move forward 
on the public investments necessaryaC!. Three early
20th century perspectives on the U.S. economya€!. Underconsumption theory. When workers cana€™ t 
afford to buy everything they produce, it creates
imbalances in the economy that are papered over by unsustainable extensions of credit. Channel 
finance. When financial markets fail to support productive
investment, they encourage bubbles, hurt workers, and slow growth. Secular stagnation. When the 
state fails to boost investment, mature capitalism suffers
from   a congenital insufficiency of aggregate demand. Mass unemployment creates social and 
political antagonisms that are a danger to democracy. Each of
these perspectives over time coalesced into a set of policy prescriptions, some of which were 
implemented then and all of which offer important lessons for
policymakers today. Leta€™ s briefly examine each in turna€!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/the-american-anti-austerity-tradition/>

2) The recovery continues, so far with no signs that it is being in any sense unduly hobbled by 
policies that make working class life in any sense a€~too easya€™:

Equitable Growth: a€™ Regular continued claims, also referred to as insured unemployment, fell to 
3.7 million the week ending May 8. Adding all
Unemployment Insurance programsa€’’including PUA, PEUC, and Extended Benefitsa€”a total of 16.9 
million workers claimed benefits the week ending
May                                                                        1. For the week ending 
May 15,487,436 workers filed for regular unemployment benefits. While far below their April 2020 
levels, regular initial
claims continue to be above what they were prior to the pandemic. States reported that another 
103,571 workers filed for initial PUA, which extended UI to
some workers who are not eligible for regular benefits. In total, 591,007 workers filed initial PUA 
or regular unemployment benefits last week. Regular
continued claims, also referred to as insured unemployment, fell to 3.7 million the week ending May 
8a€!. Earlier this week EG Grantee Adriana Kugler
was on MPR News with Indi Dutta-Gupta to discuss how UI has helped workers and the U.S. economy 
amid the pandemic, as well as the parts of the
system in need of reforma€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/equitablegrowth/status/1395357275238412290>

3) The idea that benefits are in some sense making working-class life a€oetoo easya€U, and that as 
a result the recovery is being unduly hobbled, is one of the strangest ideas to
seize the imagination of conservatives. I blame it on the complete loss of control and authority by 
conservative economistsa€”they have spent much too much time asking their
political masters a€oewhat do you want us to say?a€D and much too little telling them a€oethis is 
wrong; this policy is unlikely to worka€D:

Chris Farrell, Lindsay Guentzel & Alex Cheng: Unemployment Benefits Saw Unprecedented Expansion 
During the Pandemic. Is the System Working?:
a€~Changes to the unemployment insurance system have become controversial after disappointing job 
gains as the economy begins to reopen. Employers
have struggled to find workers, and critics blame generous unemployment benefits for the lack of 
potential hires. Guest host Chris Farrell asked two
unemployment policy experts: How well has the unemployment insurance system worked during the 
pandemic, and what reforms would make the system
better?  Indivar Dutta-Gupta, the co-executive director of the Center on Poverty and Inequality at 
Georgetown University, told Farrell that research suggests
the recent changes to the system had only positive effects on stability for workers and the 
economy. a€oeNot one study could really find any discernible
negative effect,a€D Dutta-Gupta said. Adriana Kugler, a professor at the McCourt School of Public 
Policy at Georgetown University, said critics of the
benefit increases should remember that the dollar amounts in question are relatively modest. Even 
including boosts from the Federal Pandemic
Unemployment Compensation program, the average American family of four would receive only $26,400 
from a year of unemployment benefits. a€oeThat
doesna€™t exactly make you rich,a€D Kugler saida€!

LINK: <https://www.mprnews 
.org/episode/2021/05/17/unemployment-benefits-saw-unprecedented-expansion-during-the-pandemic-is-the
-svstem-
working>

4) Somehow, every Treasury Secretary seems at some point to say something completely true and 
anodynea€”and then the press seizes on it and runs with it as if it were some sort
of gaffe, and financial markets react. This past week was Janet Yellena€™ s turn in the barrel:

Brad DeLong: Interview: Inflation Concerns in the US Following [Remarks by] Secretary [of the] 
Treasury Janet Yellen

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/interview-inflation-concerns-in-the-0b5>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)Three-quarters of a century ago Trumana€™ s Secretary of State Dean Acheson observed that even 
though Republicansa€™ economic policies were focused on boosting
inequality, they were also effective means to increasing wealtha€”that the Republican policy was 
the party of those who saw themselves as Masters of the Universe, who had a
great deal to gain from economic growth and creative destruction. But now it seems to be the party 
of those interested not in growing the economic pie but rather in cementing
hierarchiesa€”of native-born vis-a-vis immigrants, and of rich vis-a-vis poor:

Matthew Yglesias: a€~Cut immigration to raise wages, then cut benefits when a€~labor shortagea€™ 
leads to wage hikesa€n sounds like a recipe for
stagnation and misery to me, but I guess it helps weld a coalition of provincial capitalists and 
welfare-dependent old peoplea€!

LINK: <https://twitter. com/mattyglesias/status/1395360596116348929>

2) About every three years or so, somebody decides to attack Paul Krugman for being a€oeshrilla€n 
and unfair to the Republican Party. And every time, a year later they are busy
pretending that they never wrote their attack. They should instead, have listened to Joe 
Weisenthal: a€~Krugmana€™ s writing on the economy over the years has been like 20x
better  than the typical economic pundit. Even today, with all that wea€™ ve learned about how 
monetary and fiscal policy work, most people who talk in public are embarrassingly
ignorant. Hea€™ s definitely gotten some things wrong, IMO, and let partisanship cloud his judgment 
at times. But everyone who publishes frequently has gotten things wrong.
Meanwhile, the people obsessed with dunking on him, to a T, have horrible track recordsa€!a€D. Now 
it is Sebastian Mallabya€™ s turn to be embarrassed. Especially unfortunate
is Mallabya€™ s characterization of Matt Gaetz as a reasonable, reality-based Republican:

Sebastian Mallaby (2020): Review: Paul Krugmana€™ s a€~Arguing With Zombiesa€™: a€~Cool It, 
Krugman: The self-sabotaging rage of the New
York Times columnista€!. Week after week, he shakes his fist righteouslya€!. Krugman writes that 
the Republican Party is a€oecompletely dominated by
climate deniers.a€D But the Pew Research Center reports that 19 percent of conservative 
Republicans, and fully 43 percent of moderate and liberal
Republicans, regard climate change as a major threata€!. Krugmana€™ a€! accuses the party, with 
reason, of catering to racial animositya€’’only to then
go    too fara€!. 53 percent of white Republicans say that Americaa€™ s efforts to extend equal 
rights to black people have been about sufficient, and an
additional 15 percent say that these efforts have not gone far enougha€!.. 42 percent of 
Republicans say that some corporations dona€™ t pay their fair
share.  And despite Krugmana€™ s assertion that a€oeRepublicans almost universally advocate low 
taxes on the wealthy,a€D 37 percent of Republicans
believe that some of the wealthy should pay morea€!. Krugman is suffering from an especially public 
case of whata€™ s come to be known as Trump


Derangement syndrome. Appalled Dy tne Republican rartyafe'1” s most bigoted leadersafe; ne nas 
allowed nimseit to believe tnat nearly all Republicans are

corrupt and evila€!. Most people cannot be pigeonholed as purely good or purely evil. Their motives 
are mixed, confused, and mutable. Sometimes
conservatives will be venal, but other times they will respond to evidence; like Representative 
Gaetz, they do not want to argue with thermometersa€!.
Merely demonizing adversaries is the sort of thing that Trump doesa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.theatlantic.eom/magazine/archive/2020/01/review-paul-krugman-arguing-with-zombies/60305
2/>

3) Yes, BitCoin and other cryptocurrencies are combinations of grifts and bubbles. No, it is not 
certain that they will pop. As Paul Krugman points out, consider gold:

Paul Krugman: Technobabble, Libertarian Derp & Bitcoin'. a€~A number of readers have asked me to 
weigh in on Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies,
whose fluctuations have dominated a lot of market news. Would I please comment on what ita€™ s all 
about, and whata€™ s going on? Well, I can tell you
what ita€™ s about. Whata€™ s going on is harder to explaina€!. Twelve years is an eon in 
information technology timea€!. By the time a technology gets
as old as cryptocurrency, we expect it either to have become part of the fabric of everyday life or 
to have been given up as a nonstarter. If normal, law-
abiding people dona€™ t use cryptocurrency, ita€™ s not for lack of effort on the part of crypto 
boostersa€!. Yet investors continue to pay huge sums for
digital tokens. The values of major cryptocurrencies fluctuate wildlya€!. Their collective value 
has, however, at times exceeded $2 trilliona€!. Why are
people willing to pay large sums for assets that dona€™t seem to do anything?a€!. One fact that 
gives even crypto skeptics like me pause is the durability
of  gold as a highly valued asseta€!. Governments are well aware that cryptocurrencies are being 
used by bad actors, and may well crack down in a way
they never did on gold trading. Also, the proliferation of cryptocurrencies may prevent any one of 
them from achieving the semi-sacred status gold holds in
some peoplea€™ s mindsa€!

LINK: <https ://www.nytimes .com/2021/05/20/opinion/cryptocurrency-bitcoin .html>

4) How large an effect will this have? It really depends on how enthusiastically the bureaucracy 
cooperates in the policy-development process, and that is still up for grabs:

Lorraine Woellert: Biden Order on Climate Financial Risk Reaches Deep into the Economy. a€~Extreme 
weather poses risks to supply chains, food and
water, housing and energya€!. President Joe Biden will direct agencies to mitigate the financial 
risk of climate change to homeowners, consumers, federal
workers, businesses and the government itself in a sweeping executive order signed Thursdaya€!. 
National Economic Council Director Brian Deesea€!.
a€oeOur modern financial system was built on the assumption that the climate was stable,a€D Deese 
told reporters. a€oelta€™ s clear we no longer live in
such  a world.a€C The order directs regulators, budget writers and purchasing agencies to rethink 
how they do the taxpayersa€™ business. While it
focuses                                                                     on financial risk, the 
measures will reach well beyond Wall Street. Its provisions have the potential to affect a myriad 
of public and private
companies, as well as average Americans who own homes, pay into retirement funds, or buy 
insurancea€!

LINK: <https ://www.politico .com/news/2021/05/20/biden-climate-financial-risk-490045>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

5) I am very unhappy that we do not yet have a handle on exactly what the coming of robotization is 
going to do to the demand for different skill and experience levels of labor. We
should know this by now. We dona€™ t. We need to know this if we are going to plan:

Karen Eggleston, Yong Suk Lee, & Toshiaki Iizuka: Robots & Labour in the Service Sector: 
a€~Firm-level studies are important for understanding how
robots augment some types of labour while substituting for others, yet evidence outside 
manufacturing is scarce. This column reports on one of the first
studies                                                                    of service sector 
robots, which suggests that robot adoption has increased some employment opportunities, provided 
greater flexibility, and helped
to mitigate turnover problems among long-term care workers. The wave of technologies that inspires 
fear in many countries may be a remedy for the social
and economic challenges posed by population ageing in othersa€!

LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/robots-and-labour-service-sector>

6) A very nice explication of current FedThink by Steve Matthews. I think Matthews is right here. 
And I think the Fed is right here:

Steve Matthews: Fed Officials Have Six Reasons to Bet Inflation Spike Will Pass: a€~Acceleration in 
U.S. price growth this year will have a€oeonly
transitory effects on underlying inflation,a€D Fed Vice Chair Richard Clarida said Wednesday. 
Governor Lael Brainard said the day before that officials
should  be a€oepatient though the transitory surge.a€D Powell has made the same argumenta€!. 
Measures of expected inflation suggest price gainsa€!
[after]  the next year or soa€! [will] drop back to more normal levelsa€!.. Powell saida€! a€oelt 
seems unlikely, frankly, that we would see inflation moving
up  in a persistent way that would actually move inflation expectations up while there was still 
significant slack in the labor marketa€Da€!. The sticky-price
index rose a modest 2.4% over 12 months through Aprila€!. A number of structural factors have led 
to global disinflation over the past three decadesa€!.
Outside of passing on commodities prices, most U.S. firms remain reluctant to raise prices on other 
goodsa€!. Business survey shows limited price
increases  over next 5a€“10 yearsa€!. a€ceBase effects will contributed! to core inflation in April 
and May,a€D Powell saida€! a€oeand theya€™ 11
disappeara€Da€!

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-05-13/fed-leaders-are-confident-inflation-is-transitor
y-here-s-why>

7) An excellent video of the gender discrimination problem in economics:
Soumaya Keynes: Why Are There So Few Women In Economics?
LINK: <https://www.youtube .com/watch?v=Heiu7RPVggw>

8) Finally, someone grasps the nettle and calculates the numbers to obtain reasonable guesses of 
the worldwide scope of the 2020-2022 coronavirus plague. It is a nightmare: a
disease that is not quite deadly enough to focus everyonea€™ s efforts on how to guard against and 
cure it, but deadly enough to do enormous damage to humanity:

The Economist: There Have Been 7Ma€“ 13M Excess Deaths Worldwide During the Pandemic: a€~The 
official numbers represent, at best, a bit less than
half the true toll, and at worst only about a quarter of ita€!. Our figures give a death rate for 
the mostly rich countries which belong to the OECD of 1.17
times the official number. The estimated death rate for sub-Saharan Africa is 14 times the official 
number. And the first-and-second-wave structure seen in
Europe and the United States is much less visible in the modela€™ s figures for the world as a 
whole. Overall, the pandemic is increasingly concentrated in
developing economies and continuing to growa€!. Demography matters a lot: more younger people 
typically means lower death rates. So, we inferred, do
less obvious factors such as systems of government and the degree of media freedom. To take a 
specific example, excess deaths in Russia are 5.1 times
greater than official covid deathsa€!. We estimate that, by May 10th, there was a 95% probability 
that the pandemic had brought about between 2.4m and

7.1m excess deaths in Asia (official covida€“19 deaths: 0.6m), 1.5ma€“1.8m deaths in Latin America 
and the Caribbean (v 0.6m), 0a€“2.1m deaths in
Africa (v 0.1m), 1.5ma€“1.6m deaths in Europe (v 1.0m) and 0.6ma€“0.7m deaths in America and Canada 
(v 0.6m)a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/briefing/2021/05/15/there-have-been-7m-13m-excess-deaths-worldwide-during
-the-pandemic>
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:
Subscribe now

Thereat™ s a free email list. Thereat™ s a naid-subscrintion list with tat the moment, onlv a fewl 
extras too l


