Subscribe now

What we know now: (1) Substantial evasion of immunity from prior infection, which should carry with 
it at least some evasion of immunity from vaccination:

Juliet R.C. Pulliam & al.: Increased Risk of SARS-CoVa€ “2 Reinfection Associated with Emergence of 
the Omicron Variant in South Africa: a€~Analysis of routine surveillance data from South Africa 
suggests that, in contrast to the Beta and Delta, the Omicron variant of SARS-CoVa€“2 demonstrates 
substantial population-level evidence for evasion of immunity from prior infectiona€!

<https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.11.11.21266068v2.full.pdf>

(2) Omicron appears to be more infectious than early variants, even aside from its evasion of 
immunity;

Eric Topol: a€™ Omicrona€™ s doubling time in Gauteng exceeds the prior variants of concern, but 
the question as to whether in can displace Delta as the dominant variant there and globally looms 
<https://t.co/cMPX6RvuRR>

Eric Topol @EricTopol

Omicron's doubling time in Gauteng exceeds the prior variants of concern, but the question as to 
whether in can displace Delta as the dominant variant there and globally looms 
thelancet.com/journals/lancea€! @TheLancet


2 o

o o

> o

S Q.

Eg I

-3 f

80-

70-

60-

40-

30-

20-

10-

0-

-  First wave

-  Second wave

-  Third wave

-  Fourth wave

Days

Doubling time*

Fourth wave (omicron)sl-2 days
Thi rd wave (del ta )=1 S days
Second wave (beta)«17 days
First             wave (D614 G)= 1-3 days

Figure: SARS-CoV-2 cases in first, second, third, and fourth waves, Gauteng Province of South 
Africa

2:04 PM y™ Dec 3. 2021

474Likesl61Retweets
Share

(3) We can hope that it is less deadly, but hope is not a plan:

Clive Cookson, Oliver Barnes, & John Burn-Murdoch: The Race to Decipher Omicron: Will It Take Days, 
Weeks or Months?: a€~Labs around the world are scrambling to answer three fundamental questions: Is 
Omicron more transmissible than previous variants? Can it evade the immunity conferred by previous 
Sars-Cova€“2 infection or vaccination? And does it cause more severe disease? Peter Openshaw, a 
professor of medicine
at Imperial College London, says preliminary evidence suggests the answers to the first two 
questions are, a€oeYes, but no one knows to what extenta€D. Though Omicron seems to transmit faster 
than previous variants in South Africa, it is less clear that it can outcompete Delta across the 
world. Soumya Swaminathan, the WHOa€™ s chief scientist, says it is a€~premature to draw any 
conclusions about the efficacy of vaccines against
Omicrona€™ As for symptoms, a€oetherea€™ s just not enough information about how severe Omicron 
isa€U, he adds. a€oeMy assumption is that for now we treat it as if it is about as severe as 
Deltaa€Da€l

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/e742a4bf-3e72-4551-bf72-df73cb35436f>

Andrew Meldrum: The AP Interview: Scientist Says Omicron Was a Group Find: a€~JOHANNESBURG (AP) a€” 
The Botswana scientist who may well have discovered the omicron variant of the coronavirus says he 
has been on a a€oerollercoaster of emotions,a€D with the pride of accomplishment followed by dismay 
over the travel bans immediately slapped on southern African countries. a€oels that how you reward 
science? By
blacklisting countries?a€D Dr. Sikhulile Moyo, a virologist at the Botswana Harvard AIDS Institute 
Partnership, said in an interview Thursday night with The Associated Press. a€oeThe virus does not 
know passports, it does not know borders ,a€D he added. a€oeWe should not do geopolitics about the 
virusa€!. We should be collaborating and understanding^Da€!

LINK: 
<https://apnews.com/article/coronavirus-pandemic-science-health-africa-botswana-f380ea458f0cle021955
882a7145810a>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

3 December 2021 Risk assessment for SARS-CoV-2 variant: Omicron VOC-21NOV-01 (B.1.1.529)            
  UK Health Security Agency


Indicator

Transmissibility

Red, amber or
green status*

Amber

Confidence Assessment and rationale
level

Low At least as transmissible as currently circulating variants

ie Ironemif+inn ranirlk/ ord ci                   ilk/ Inrrnocnd francmiecihiliK/ rnmnorod fn       
                  io


UKIWKKII IIUIIICIIIO

Infection severity
Naturally
acquired

immunity

Vaccine-derived
immunity

Red          Low

Low

| | 11     | |    UI Vil IVI I HUH lU^/IVIIJT Vil IVJ UUUVVUUI VIII J • II IVI V/ViS^V/Vi UI Vil 
1^1 I IIUUI kSIHUJ VrVT I I I V4 I V* Vi IV U^U^IlVi ISP

biologically plausible with the presence of furin cleavage site and nucleocapsid changes
associated in vitro with advantages for replication, as well as extensive changes to the RBD.
Structural modelling suggests that the mutations present may increase human ACE2 binding
affinity  to a much greater extent than that seen for any other variant.

Phylogeny suggests a recent emergence. Data from South Africa suggests that Omicron has a
pronounced growth advantage there. However, this may be due to transmissibility or immune
escape related, or both.

Insufficient data

Mutations suggestive of reduced protection from natural immunity and limited supporting
epidemiological evidence

Based on experience with other variants, laboratory data on individual mutations, and structural

modelling, the mutations present are very likely to reduce antibody binding and include changes
in all 4 neutralising antibody binding sites in the RBD and also in antigenic sites in the S NTD. T
cell epitope data is awaited. Analysis from South Africa suggests a reduction in protection from
previous infection, including from recent Delta infection. There is no convalescent sera
neutralisation                                                                   data and no 
relative risk of reinfection analyses as yet.

Mutations suggestive of reduced protection from vaccine derived immunity, no supporting
evidence

The mutations present are likely to reduce antibody binding and include changes in all 4 RBD
neutralising antibody binding sites. T cell epitope data is awaited. There is no vaccinee sera
neutralisation data and no epidemiological data on vaccine effectiveness.


Therapeutics    Red

Low

Mutations suggestive of reduced effectiveness of a treatment in UK clinical use

The mutations present are likely to reduce the binding of most available therapeutic monoclonal
antibodies, based on structural modelling. On the same basis, they are unlikely to affect current
small molecule antivirals. However, there is no laboratory or clinical data to support these
predictions at present.

* Refer to scale and confidence grading slide.


* Refer to scale and confidence grading slide.

small molecule antivirals. However, there is no laboratory or clinical data to support these

predictions at present.

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

