Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

First: a€oeYou Shall Not Replace Us!a€U in Historical Perspective

Apropos of history rhyming, another possible analogy that sparks thought, in my head at least, is 
that between the domestic politics of the late French TroisiA'me RAOpublique in the 1930s and the 
United States today. This is properly the bailiwick of the highly estimable John Ganz, whose 
a€~Stack, IMHO, you should certainly subscribe to (and pay for):

Unpopular Front

the junk shop of history
By John Ganz

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

But today I want to take up some of the slack. Let us raise the curtain on the French Chamber of 
Deputies, soon after the inauguration of LA©on Blum as Prime Minister. We give the mic to Francea€™ 
s right-wing future Nazi collaborators, as reported by William L. Shirer:

William L. Shirer (1969): The Collapse of the Third Republic: An Inquiry into the Fall of France, 
1940 (New York: Simon & Schuster): a€~At the opening session of the new Chamber a rightist deputy, 
Xavier-Vallat, taunted the Premier for his Jewishness:
XAVIER-VALLAT: Your arrival in office, Mr. President, is incontestably a historic date. For the 
first time this ancient Gallic-Roman country will be governeda€”


HERRIOT (the Speaker): Be careful what you say, M. Vallat!

XAVIER-VALLAT:a€”by a Jew. I have to say aloud what everyone is thinking silently a€’’that to 
govern this peasant nation which is France it is better to have someone whose origins, no matter 
how modest, spring from the womb of our soil rather than have a subtle Talmudista€!

And he warned that the country would now be run by a€oea small Jewish coterie,a€D Blum for a moment 
was beside himself with rage but before he could respond Herriot censored Xavier-Vallat and 
declared the incident closed. For the reactionary press, however, it was just a beginning.
In Ld€™ Action FranA§aise, Maurras and Daudet had a field day. a€oeFrance under the Jewa€D was the 
title of Maurrasa€™ first editorial the day after Blum took office. a€oeWe now have a Jewish 
government ,a€D he warned his readers.

Daudet excelled him in inventing insulting titles for the new Premier: a€oeBlum, the gentle yid,a€D 
aCcethe radiophonie Hebrew,a€D who presided over the a€oeCretin-Talmud cabinet.a€D France, said 
Daudet, had returned to the times of
the traitor Alfred Dreyfus. The domination of a rabbinical Jew, LA©on Blum, a total stranger to our 
manners, customs, and ways of understanding and feeling, multiplies the peril of war by ten 
times...

Previously the Right had assaulted Blum for his pacifism. Now it cried out that because of his 
hatred of Fascism he would lead the country into war against Italy and Germany. Ld€™ Action 
FranA§aise harped on the fear. a€oelt is as a Jew that Blum must be seen, conceived, understood, 
fought and brought down,a€D wrote Maurras. a€oeThis last verb may seem a little strong. I
hasten to say I do not mean that Blum must be beaten down physicallya€’’until that day when his 
policies lead us into the war which he dreams of waging against our Italian friends. That day we 
must not fail to do so.a€D

Gleefully Maurras quoted some lines that AndrA© Gide, whose literary fame in the thirties had 
become enormous and who in 1936 was just abandoning a naive faith in Communism, had written in 
1914: that Blum was aCcetoo Jewisha€D for his own good.

It comes [Gide had written] from the fact that Blum considers the Jewish race superior, as called 
upon to dominate after having been long dominated, and that it is his duty to work for its triumph 
with all his force. Doubtlessly he foresees the possible advent of the racea€!. He seems to think 
that the time will come which will be the time of the Jewsa€!

Quickly on June 5, the day after Blum took office, Gide hastened to explain that what he really 
meant to say in 1914 was that the Jews had a passion for justice and the truth and it was that 
which a€ceanimateda€D Blum. He was extremely happy, he added, at the triumph of the Popular Front 
in general and of Blum in particular. Under such leadership, he was sure, France would
resume its role as a a€oepioneer of civilization .a€D

The Right complained that Blum had stacked his government with Jews. Henri BA©raud in the 
anti-Semitic and Fascist-oriented weekly Gringoire named thirty-two Jews who, he said, had been 
given prominent posts in the ministries, including one by the name of Dreyfus. Even Pertinax 
(AndrA© GA©raud), the influential press commentator on foreign affairs, would complain
later that Blum had unnecessarily courted anti-Semitism a€oeby surrounding himself in the 
PremieraC™ s office by ten, if not more, Jews.a€D Actually only two Jews held prominent posts in 
that office: AndrA© Blumel, a former law-partner of Blum, and Jules Moch, a young naval engineer. 
Blum himself was the only Jew among the ministersa€!

LINK: <https ://archive .org/details/collapseofthird00will/mode/2up>

Nowadays, the very tight identity between hated Jews (hated as a religiously-despised other) and 
a€oerootless cosmopolitesa€n (hateda€! as eroders of the hierarchical ethnic-centered community) is 
a lot less tight than it used to be. It used to be very tight indeed: Karl Marx, in his early 
writings, used a€oeJewishnessa€n in the place in his argument where he later chose 
a€oebourgeoisa€n. But the
underlying pressures are similar.

History rhyming: America today as a mirrored version of the French Late Third Republica€! The 
French Third Republic faced a very sharp existential threat from its external enemy Nazi Germany 
and its internal enemies Philippe Petain and Pierre Lavall and their faction, which it did not 
survive. America faces no equivalent combination amounting to an existential threata€”yet.
Thank you for reading Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality. This post is public so feel free to share it.

Share

One Audio:

Tom Keene & al.: Surveillance: Inflation Control With Rogojf: a€~Ken Rogoff, Harvard University 
Economics Professor, says now is the time to act on inflation. David Kostin, Goldman Sachs Chief 
U.S. Strategist, explains the factors behind the firma€™ s call for the S&P 500 index to hit 5,100 
by the end of 2022. Dana Peterson, Conference Board Economist, expects services activity to return 
to pre­
pandemic levels next year. Alan Ruskin, Deutsche Bank Chief International Strategist, says now 
there is even more reason to have a much higher terminal rate. Dr. Bhakti Hansoti, Johns Hopkins 
Associate Professor of Emergency Medicine, says vaccine uptake is improving as omicron spreadsa€!

LINK: <https ://www.bloomberg 
.com/news/audio/2021-12-15/surveillance-inflation-control-with-rogoff-podcast>

One Picture:

City Housing Affordability (Mid-2021)

• Other cities

• Major Chinese citites

• Select major global cites


</l
o

Beijing

Shenzhen

0             10            20            30            40            50

PriceTo Income Ratio

Source: Exante Data,

Numbeo

Plan Maestro @PlanMaestro

20. Housing Affordability (@ExanteData)

City Housing Affordability (Mid-2021)

12


Chengdu

Wuhan

• Other cities

• Major Chinese citites

• Select majorglobal cities


New York

0

London'

Tokyo

SingaporMeoscow

Hangzhou

Guangzhou

/ ^Shanghai Beijing

e           • Shenzhen

iSeeoouui lTa'pei

0         10         20         30


5:14 PM r™ Dec 19,2021

rriut iu iriLurne rtauu

Source: Exante Data,

Numbeo

17Likes2Re tweets

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted

David Leonhardt: Risks to Older adults: a€~Good morning. Ready to give up on Covid? Spare a moment 
to think about older peoplea€! 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nytimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit_nn_2Q21122
3&instance_id=48549&nl=the-
morning&productCode=NN&regLid=64675225&segment_id=77758&te=l&uri=nyt%3A%2F%2Fnewsletter%2F3edfa459-3
91f-50b8-869a-b4al2d0a866c&user id=8a3fce2ae25b5435f449ab64b4e3e880>

Robert McCauley: Why Bitcoin Is Worse than a Madoff-Style Ponzi Scheme: a€~A Ponzi scheme is a 
zero-sum enterprise. But bitcoin is a negative-sum phenomenon that you cana€™t even pursue a claim 
againsta€l <https://www.ft.com/content/83al4261-598d-4601-87fc-5dde528b33d0>

Anne O. Krueger: How Erdonomics Sank Turkey: a€~=Following years of mismanagement by an 
authoritarian president, Turkeya€™ s economy is reeling. Without new leadership or a course 
correction that includes a tighter monetary policy, Turkish householdsa€™ economic prospects will 
continue to darken, and the impact on the countrya€™ s stability will become impossible for others 
to
ignorea€! 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/turkey-economic-crisis-erdonomics-by-anne-o-krueger-20
21-12>

Tim De Chant: 2021 Was the Year the World Finally Turned on Facebook: a€~Can a name change save the 
companya€™ s tarnished reputation?a€! 
<https://arstechnica.com/features/2021/12/facebook-and-the-terrible-horrible-no-good-verv-bad-vear/>


Wikipedia: Gretchen Rubin <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gretchen Rubin> 
<https://gretchenrubin.com/books/> <https://gretchenrubin.com/blog/>

Justin Baragona: _a€™ a€oeFox Newsa€™ s The Five is not sitting around the table todaya€”as all 
five panelists are filming remotely due to Omicron. Jesse Watters: a€DSo I think wea€™ 11 have to 
acknowledge here we are in boxes. We dona€™ t want to be in boxes. We hate being in boxes. We 
resisted being in boxes" <https://t.co/lSNvOSuwER>a€!

Fox News' The Five is not sitting around the table today — as all five panelists are filming 
remotely due to Omicron. Jesse Watters: "So I think wea€™ 11 have to acknowledge here we are in 
boxes. We dona€™ t want to be in boxes. We hate being in boxes. We resisted being in boxes."

10:09 PM r™ Dec 22,2021

950Likesl 6 IRe tweets

• Brad DeLong: HOISTED FROM THE ARCHIVES: Chaucer on a€ceChevauchA©ea€\3 a€~From 2003a€! One side 
effect of having the text of 10,000 books from Project Gutenberg newly-downloaded onto your laptop 
is that you can read the introduction to Chaucera€™ s Canterbury Tales while proctoring your 
undergraduate exam. But I just ran across a passage that puts a shiver in my
spine, a passage about the KNIGHTa€™ S son, the SQUIREa€!



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

HOISTED FROM THE ARCHIVES: Chaucer on "ChevauchAOe"

A Shiver in My Spine: ChevauchA©e One side effect of having the text of 10,000 books from Project 
Gutenberg newly-downloaded onto your laptop is that you can read the introduction to Chaucer's 
Canterbury Tales while proctoring your undergraduate exama€!

Read more

a year ago A- Brad DeLong

Paragraphs:

Matt Levine: The Purdue Bankruptcy Didna€™ t Work: a€~Opioid addiction is of course a huge societal 
problem in the U.S. There are also the huge legal and economic problems of figuring out who is 
financially responsible for the costs of that epidemic and who is entitled to financial 
compensation, and then making the responsible people pay and channeling the money fairly to the 
people entitled to it.
That is a big responsibility with enormous social consequences, and in the U.S. that sort of 
responsibility generally gets put on a bankruptcy court. These big social decisions about fairness 
and responsibility are made by a bankruptcy judge, who has a ton of power and flexibility to try to 
craft the best possible solution. But not unlimited power, and perhaps not enough powera€!

LINK: <https ://www.bloomberg .com/opinion/articles/2021-12-23/the-purdue-bankruptcy-didn-t-work>

Joe Gagnon & Madi Sarsenbayev: The Dollar Has Only a Modest Effect on Trade Prices Outside the 
United States: a€~For countries that supply most of global trade, including many small and 
medium-sized economies, the dollar has at most a modest impact on their export prices, and the 
export channel of monetary transmission continues to operate. These results support the traditional 
view that
countries can have effective independent monetary policies and that the United States does not 
uniquely set monetary conditions for the worlda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/dollar-has-only-modest-effect-trade-price
s-outside-united>

Steve Randy Waldman: Mass Representative Democracy: a€~Among the kids, participatory direct 
democracy is often taken as the ideal to which democratic polities ought to aspire. But at least in 
theory, the case for representative democracy is strong. Political decisions really matter. They 
should be made well. But they are hard. Whatever interests and values you hold dear, it takes a lot 
of work to inform
and educate yourselfa€!. The genius, in theory, of representative democracy is that voters hire 
specialists to do the information work for them. In a representative democracy, it is not really 
your job as an ordinary citizen to have a strong view about the details that actually get 
legislateda€!. [But] modern representative democracy is simply a system whose predictable result is 
governance by competing
coalitions of insiders, who develop deep relationships and thick connections to one another, while 
the electorate they notionally serve becomes an inchoate, threatening demon that must be flattered 
and appeaseda€!. Direct democracy enfranchises the citizenry to decide upon matters of whose 
details and ramifications they are rationally ignorant, with predictably imperfect resultsa€!. But 
what ifa€! we self­
affiliated into groups of common interest of no more than, say, 1000 souls, for whom personal, 
physical a€oetown meetingsa€D could be regularly arranged?a€! Instead of a few hundred 
Congresspeople, wea€™ d have 250,000 representatives whose full-time job it would be to stay and 
live among and interact with their constituents, and participate in the online legislature^!. The 
hard part of being a
representative is representing. The problem we should devote ourselves to is the challenge of 
making one persona€™ s voice become a capable stand-in for many othersa€™ necessarily absenta€!

LINK: <https://www.interfluidity .com/v2/9069 .html>

Peter Andre, Ingar Haaland, Chris Roth, & Johannes Wohlfart: Inflation Narratives: a€~Inflation has 
recently surged in both the US and the EU. This column uses responses from surveys of a 
representative sample of the US population as well as academic economists and US firm managers to 
show that households and managers are more likely than experts to think that the current surge in 
inflation will
be persistent. Since the narratives individuals use to explain movements in inflation appear 
central to whether inflation expectations remain anchored, communication strategies by policymakers 
could put emphasis on specific narratives that highlight that inflationary pressures are unlikely 
to persista€!

LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/inflation-narratives>

Tim Oa€™ReiIIy: Why Ita€™ s Too Early to Get Excited About Web3: a€~a€ceWeb3a€D as we think of it 
today was introduced in 2014 by Gavin Wood, one of the cocreators of Ethereum. Wooda€™ s compact 
definition of Web3, as he put it in a recent Wired interview, is simple: aCceLess trust, more 
truth.a€Da€! The Ethereum communitya€™ s early writings on the topic offer measured assessments of
the trade-offs and challenges ahead for Web3, but most popular accounts today are suffused with 
hype and the glamor of financial speculation^!. Yes, exchanges like Coinbase are making a lot of 
money, but unlike traditional financial exchanges, whata€™ s being traded isna€™t general-purpose 
money but a speculative asset class that may be wildly overvalued. Nor has blockchain replaced 
trust in the

way that Gavin Wood hopeda€!. The failure to think through and build interfaces to existing legal 
and commercial mechanisms is in stark contrast to previous generations of the web, which quickly 
became a digital shadow of everything in the physical worlda€!
LINK: <https://www.oreilly.com/radar/whv-its-too-earlv-to-get-excited-about-web3/>

Matthew C. Klein: The a€ceBanker to the Worlda€UMs Back: a€~Foreigners have been lending in droves 
to the Federal Reserve, buying oodles of Treasury debt, and parking tons of deposits and repos into 
the U.S. banking systema€! to finance purchases of corporate bonds, stocks, and direct investment 
abroad, as well as to finance the yawning U.S. trade deficit in manufactured goods. In effect, 
foreign
savers have been behaving like risk-averse bank depositors who support risky cross-border lending 
and equity investing by Americans, while also covering the U.S. import bill essentially for freea€!

LINK:


THE


The

Overshoot

The "Banker to the World" is Back

Americans have sold almost $1 trillion of low-yielding safe assets to foreigners in 2021 to finance 
purchases of corporate bonds, stocks, and direct investment abroad, as well as to finance the 
yawning U.S, trade deficit in manufactured goods. In effecta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- Matthew C. Klein

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER Content Below:

Here we have not the full book, not the full galley, but the introduction-conclusion-elevator-pitch 
package for my Slouching Towards Utopia book, which, alas!, is not yet (but it soon will be) 
pre-orderable on Amazon, or anywhere else:

"Slouching Towards Utopia": Intro-Conclusion Package :: 2021-12-21
624KB a"™ PDF File

Download

Just enough to whet someone's whistlea€”or, if they are acting like George Orwell claimed to have 
acted when he was a book reviewer, write a review...
Download

I do confess I am not at all sure how to market this. I am arrogant enough to believe that it is 
certainly as good and as worthwhile as Guns, Germs, & Steel; or Capital in the 21st Century. But 
things have to go exactly right to get an audience even 1/100 as large as theirs, and I have no 
idea how to trigger thata€!
So peoplesa€™ takes on the current publishing marketa€”and viralitya€”are going to be of great 
interest to me over the now-nine months until publication. I have decided that posting a sentence a 
day on twitter:

"Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century". Forthcoming from Basic Books 
on September 6,2022. 31st Sentence: "A 2.1 percent per year growth rate is a doubling every 33 
years." Trying to remind the non-quantitative just what consistent... 121-slouching
5:24 PM a~™ Dec 24,2021

is a thing to do. What other things should I be doing to maximize my chances?


The

Overshoot

The "Banker to the World" is Back

Americans have sold almost $1 trillion of low-yielding safe assets to foreigners in 2021 to finance 
purchases of corporate bonds, stocks, and direct investment abroad, as well as to finance the 
yawning U.S, trade deficit in manufactured goods. In effecta€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- Matthew C. Klein
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER Content Below:

Here we have not the full book, not the full galley, but the introduction-conclusion-elevator-pitch 
package for my Slouching Towards Utopia book, which, alas!, is not yet (but it soon will be) 
pre-orderable on Amazon, or anywhere else:

"Slouching Towards Utopia": Intro-Conclusion Package :: 2021-12-21
624KB a"™ PDF File

Download

Just enough to whet someone's whistlea€”or, if they are acting like George Orwell claimed to have 
acted when he was a book reviewer, write a review...
Download

I do confess I am not at all sure how to market this. I am arrogant enough to believe that it is 
certainly as good and as worthwhile as Guns, Germs, & Steel; or Capital in the 21st Century. But 
things have to go exactly right to get an audience even 1/100 as large as theirs, and I have no 
idea how to trigger thata€!
So peoplesa€™ takes on the current publishing marketa€”and viralitya€”are going to be of great 
interest to me over the now-nine months until publication. I have decided that posting a sentence a 
day on twitter:

"Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century". Forthcoming from Basic Books 
on September 6,2022. 31st Sentence: "A 2.1 percent per year growth rate is a doubling every 33 
years." Trying to remind the non-quantitative just what consistent... 121-slouching
5:24 PM a~™ Dec 24,2021

is a thing to do. What other things should I be doing to maximize my chances?

