Subscribe now

FIRST: Another, Somewhat Different Elevator Pitch for a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D

Coffee with the incredibly learned and witty Bob Reich, who say sa€’’about my book 
<https://www.amazon.com/Economic-History-Twentieth-Century/dp/0465019595/>:

Brilliant, important. A tour de force, DeLong grabs political-economic history and wrestles it to 
the ground. You may disagree (I dona€™t buy all of it) but you wona€™t be able to let goa€!

He also says, wisely, that, for my book, I need an elevator pitch that directly hooks into the 
societal-scale problems potential book-buyers will be worrying about come September, and that would 
resonate with Terry Gross (not that I am that likely to actually get on a€oeFresh Aira€D).
Here is another try:

Start with the metaphor of the economic pie, and with the society-scale problems of baking, slicing 
and tasting. First you have a bake a large-enough piea€”a pie so that there is potentially enough 
for all. Then you have to slice the piea€”so everyone gets their share. Then people have to taste 
the piea€”use their material resources to live a good lifea€”be healthy, safe, secure, and happy.

Before 1870 the human technological level and ability to harvest natural resources was low relative 
to our population. Humanity could not even bake a large-enough pie. After 1870 things changed. 
Advancing science, turned into technology by industrial research labs, deployed at scale by modern 
corporations, and then diffused throughout the world by that magnificent crowdsourcing mechanism 
that is the market economy
solved the problem of baking what every previous era would have seen as enough. Anda€”since they 
saw the baking as the hard problema€”they would be very surprised to see that the problems of 
slicing and tasting have flummoxed us. They would expect us to live in utopia, as we manifestly do 
not.

My Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century is about how we solved the 
problem of baking the piea€”and how we fumbled the solution to the problems of slicing and tasting. 
That is its big narrative sweep, with lots of subthreads, digressions, and anecdotes along the way.

What happened? This, I think, my book has nailed. Letting the market economy rip to solve the 
problem of making enough had consequences. You see, the only rights the market economy recognizes 
are property rights; and the only gospel it preaches is "the market giveth; the market taketh away: 
blessed be the name of the market".
People will not, and did not, stand for that. They demand, instead: a€oethe market was made for 
man; not man for the marketa€D.

Perhaps humanity, came close to an institutional-societal setup to tackle the problems of slicing 
and tasting. Post-WWII "social democracy" in the rich countries was a good try. But social 
democracy failed its sustainability test: society may not know what "social justice" is, but it 
knows that it manifestly does not consist of giving benefits to and making life easy for those it 
calls "undeserving".
And so the wheel turned. Here we are. Our current situation: in the rich countries there is enough 
by any reasonable standard, and yet we are all unhappy, all earnestly seeking to discover who the 
enemies are who have somehow stolen our rich birthright and fed us unappetizing lentil stew 
instead.

What do we do next? This my book punts. That is for a younger generation than my failed one to 
decide. Global warming, ethno-national terrorism on all scales from the individual AR-15 to the 
Combined Arms Army, revived fascism, technokleptocracy a€”I quail.

As John Maynard Keynes wrote back in 1924: a€oe[That] assumes... a plan exists.... [But] we lack 
more than usual a coherent scheme of progress, a tangible ideal. All the political parties alike 
have their origins in past ideas and not in new ideas.... No one has a gospel. The next move is 
with the head...a€D
Now to try to compress this downa€!

I warned you that my principal concern until September would be with flogging the book, didna€™ 11?
Other elevator pitches at:



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

Tether to USD Chart


Price Market Cap Tradingview

80B

70B

60B

ID 7D 1M 3M 1Y YTD ALL 0                  LOG

50B


40B

30B

20B

10B

0

USD             2015              2016              2017              2018              2019        
      2020               2021

Very Briefly Noted:

• Timothy B. Lee: Joe Biden Has a Smart Plan to Tackle the Housing Shortage: a€~The Biden 
Administration aims to boost production of manufactured homesa€!. The federal government is going 
to start using financial incentivesa€’’specifically, Department of Transportation grantsa€”to 
encourage local governments to reform their land use regulationsa€!. The Biden Administration says 
it will encourage these companies to underwrite
mortgages to purchase manufactured homesa€! 
<https://fullstackeconomics.com/ioe-biden-has-a-smart-plan-to-tackle-the-housing-shortage/>

•  Garrett Anstreicher & al.: The Long-Run Impacts of Court-Ordered Desegregation: a€™ Exposure to 
desegregated schools resulted in better academic and economic outcomes for Black children in the US 
South, but that Black children in the North showed little benefit from comparable integration 
initiativesa€! <https://voxeu .org/article/long-run-impacts-court-ordered-desegregation>

Twitter & a€~Stack":

•  Matthew J. Brown: a€™ Sure, the Bayes-Laplace rule of succession has been a good guide to the 
probability of future events based on past evidence in the past. But will it continue to be a good 
guide in the future?a€!

@lastpositivist Sure, the Bayes-Laplace rule of succession has been a good guide to the probability 
of future events based on past evidence in the past. But will it continue to be a good guide in the 
future?
8:40 PM r™ May 16,2022

36Likes4Retweets

•  Dan Pfeiffer: What the Media Keeps Getting Wrong About Trump: a€~The story in 2022 is the 
strength of Trumpism the movement not Trump the mana€!


MESSAGE BOX

The Message Box

What the Media Keeps Getting Wrong About Trump

The primary season is in full swing and there is something bugging me about the media coverage of 
Donald Trump. After faux populist and Big Tech-funded demagogue, J.D. Vance won the Ohio primary, 
there was a round of stories touting Vancea€™ s win as a a€oeHuge Win for Trumpa€D and validation 
of his continuing hold over the Republican Party. And on Tuesdaya€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 27 likes A- 1 comment A- Dan Pfeiffer

Paragraphs:

This strikes me as an important insight, and one that I failed to grasp over the past 40 years and 
that led me to be too pessimistic in the past about China's growth possibilities. The distinction 
is between (1) that phase of development that can be "turnkey" (simply moving over blocks of 
industrial structure from elsewhere), (2) that part which requires knitting together a high middle 
income societal network division of labor, and (3) that part which
requires exploration of new productive possibilities. You can spend money like water inefficiently 
on investment and still succeed in the first. But investment financed by debt needs to be 
efficiently targeted in the second in order to avoid an ultimate nasty debt crash. And in the 
third? For that you really need an open society and a taught market economy. Or so I think now. I 
could be wrong:

Michael Pettis: The Only Five Paths Chinaa€™ s Economy Can Follow. a€~Chinaa€™ s overdependence on 
investment by entities that operate under soft budget constraints hasna€™t always resulted in a 
rising debt burden. China began its reform period in the late 1970s after five decades punctuated 
by the Second Sino-Japanese War, civil war, and Maoism, all of which left the country hugely 
underinvested in
infrastructure, logistics, and manufacturing capacity for its level of social development. Until 
the mida€“2000s, while the Chinese economy remained underinvested relative to the capacity of 
Chinese businesses and workers to absorb investment productively, most investment tended to be 
productive. Even with a substantial and rising amount of wasted investment, which showed up in the 
staggering amount of nonperforming
loans    in Chinaa€™ s banks that were cleaned up between 2000 and 2010, ChinaaC™ s high investment 
levels were nonetheless productive in the aggregate and resulted in rapid, sustainable growth. By 
2006 to 2008, however, like every other country that has followed a similar high savings, high 
investment growth modela€”most notoriously the Soviet Union in the 1950s and 1960s, Brazil during 
those same decades, Japan in
the 1970s and 1980s, and perhaps a dozen other countriesa€’’China seemed to have closed the gap 
between its level of capital stock and the level that its workers and businesses could productively 
absorb, after which ChinaaC™ s debt burden began to rise rapidlya€!

LINK: <https://carnegieendowment.org/chinafinancialmarkets/87007>

The abstract argument for billionaires is that the alternatives to billionaires are fast talking 
likely grifters on the one hand and bureaucracies on the other, and that there are certain kinds of 
explorations of the possible societal entrepreneurial and organizational space that the latter to 
simply cannot attempt. Hence you need a mix. Billionaires those become the pioneers who wind up 
with arrows in their backs. That, however, does not say that you need
many billionaires, and it does say that the billionaires you do need are those who are driven 
monomaniacs who will then bankrupt themselves, rather than prudent stewards and accumulators of 
wealth.

A more concrete argument for billionaires is that they have a lot of social power, and if any 
powerful group puts them in the bull's-eye, they will use that social power to try to hold what 
they have and so wreck the place:

Charlie Stross: The Impotence of the Long-Distance Trillionaire: a€~Are there any valid reasons to 
put up with billionaires?a€! Personal wealth has an upper bound beyond which the numbers are 
meaninglessa€!. [Yet] theyprobably feelabout ashelpless in the face of revolutions, climatechange,  
and economic upheaval as you and Ia€! accustomed to having their every whimgranted, merelyfor the 
askinga€! [but] they
cana€™ t insulate themselves from objective reality, although they can pretend it doesna€™ t exist 
and buy their very own luxury apocalypse bunker in New Zealand. So theya€™ re likely to succumb to 
brutal cognitive dissonance atsome pointa€L I cana€™ t see any good reason to let any individual 
claim ownership over more than a billion dollars of assetsa€”even $100M is pushing it. Canyou?a€!

LINK: <https://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/2022/05/the-impotence-of-the-long-dist.html>

Swapping out Netflix for Microsoft is surely right. But I am not at all confident that the Faamgs 
will be back. The plague years may well have been their zenith:

Robert Armstrong: The Faangs Will Be Back: a€~the Faangs are now technically the Faamgsa€!. Netflix 
is a media companya€!. Microsofta€™ s multiyear re-emergence as a cloud computing powera€!. Why do 
the Faangs matter so much, and why should we be alert to a chance to buy them at a discount? To 
start with, they represent a fifth of the S&P 500, with a market capitalisation of $7tn. As they 
go, the market will
(largely) go. Further, huge companies should be able to use their market position and abundant 
resources to defend their margins in tough periods such as the one we are sliding into nowa€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/acl200cd-75f7-4ea8-89ee-8125e0e9e67d>

Not just a demagogue, in Rothbarda€™ s view: a racist demagogue: African-Americans needed to be 
blamed, and cast as the enemies of the real people to be despised, degraded, and oppressed. For the 
people could only be united against the Establishment if there was an explicit enemy, and the 
Establishment was too nebulous to be a good enemy, in Rothbarda€™ s view. And from Thiela€™ s 
perspective, since he is part of the Establishment making
the Establishment as such the enemy of his movement is just too dangerous:

John Ganz: Letting the Beast Out: a€~In the early 1990s, the libertarian economist Murray 
Rothbarda€”a favorite of Thiela€™ s crony Curtis Yarvin and other techno-fascistsa€’’articulated 
his theory of a€oeright-wing populism: a€D a€ceThe basic right-wing populist insight is that we 
live in a statist country and a statist world dominated bya€! Big Government, Big Business, and 
various influential special interest groups.
More specifically, the old America of individual liberty, private property, and minimal government 
has been replaced by a coalition ofa€! Old Money financial elites (e.g. the Rockefellers, the 
Trilateralists); and the New Class of technocrats and intellectuals, including Ivy League academics 
and media elitesa€la€D. Rothbarda€! a demagogue a la Joe McCarthy or David Duke was needed to shock 
and a€ceshort-circuita€D the
systema€!. Trumpa€™ s appeal to the a€oeworking classa€D is precisely a form of cultural politics 
in the same way. He usefully divides a€cethe real workers,a€D based on the old idealized 20the 
century image of the working class, from the a€ceunderclassa€D and their allies in the 
a€oeprofessional-managerial classa€!

LINK:



Unpopular Front

Letting the Beast Out

In the first book of his Discourses on Livy, Machiavelli asks who is more likely to cause disorder 
and threaten the liberty of a republic: the people, who have little, or the a€cegrandia€Da€”the 
greata€”, who have much? One might expect the cause of public disorder to derive from the popular 
massesa€™ a€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 32 likes A- 2 comments A- John Ganz

I think that the very sharp BWW's view is clouded by his referring to Republicans as being for or 
against Trump. It is no longer about Trump. It is about Herrenvolk non-democracy:

Benjamin Wallace-Wells: The Strange Post-Trump Politics of the Pennsylvania Republican Primaries I 
The New Yorker: a€~I asked Costello, who is forty-five and had been widely discussed as a potential 
candidate for Senate or governor, whether there was still a path for an anti-Trump Republican. 
a€oeWhen I looked at the race, that was my thesis, a€D Costello said. a€oeAnd I think it will hold 
true.a€D But it was hard to
ignore that Costello, as well-positioned as anyone in Pennsylvaniaa€™ s Republican Party, had 
decided not to run in 2022.a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.newvorker.com/news/the-political-scene/the-strange-post-trump-politics-of-the-pennsylva
nia-republican-primaries>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions
Subscribe now


Benjamin Wallace-Wells: The Strange Post-Trump Politics of the Pennsylvania Republican Primaries I 
The New Yorker. a€~I asked Costello, who is forty-five and had been widely discussed as a potential 
candidate for Senate or governor, whether there was still a path for an anti-Trump Republican. 
a€oeWhen I looked at the race, that was my thesis,a€Q Costello said. a€oeAnd I think it will hold 
true.a€Q But it was hard to
ignore that Costello, as well-positioned as anyone in Pennsylvaniaa€™ s Republican Party, had 
decided not to run in 2022.a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.newyorker.com/news/the-political-scene/the-strange-post-trump-politics-of-the-pennsylva
nia-repubfican-primaries>
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Donate Subscriptions
Subscribe now

