4) Back in the late 1800s, the Iron Chancellor of the German Empire, Otto von Bismarck, could and 
did say that socialist measures had a placea€“a not un-prominent placea€”in his policies. Why? 
Because on their
implementation depended the health and wealth of the German people. The health and wealth of the 
German people was in the trust of the Emperor, and he was the Emperora€™ s servant. Plus the health 
and wealth of the
German people was essential if the Emperor was to be able to lead a strong Germany to accomplish 
his other purposes. And so it is conservative Imperial Germany in the late 1800s that leads the way 
toward national health
insurance, national unemployment insurance, and national pension benefits. There were Bismarck-like 
conservatives in America oncea€’’Herbert Hoover in his progressive moods in the 1920s, before the 
Great Depression
and  then the at least success of Franklin Roosevelt new deal made him totally deranged a€“ was one 
such. But where are the equivalent now?:


Brad DeLong: The Strange Death of Conservative America'. a€~ American conservatives once sought to 
ride the waves of markets and innovation toward ever-greater wealth and prosperity, but now
they cower in fear. And, as the trajectory of todaya€™ s Republican Party shows, that makes them a 
threat to democracy. If you are concerned about the well-being of the United States and interested
in what the country could do to help itself, stop what you are doing and read historian Geoffrey 
Kabaservicea€™ s superb 2012 book, Rule and Ruin: The Downfall of Moderation and the Destruction
of the Republican Party, from Eisenhower to the Tea Party <https ://global .oup 
.com/academic/product/rule-and-ruin-9780199768400?cc=us&lang=en&a€ !>

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/project-syndicate-the-strange-death>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere

1) Dan Alpert is right. The cutting-off of plague-time income support to the unemployed is a huge, 
huge shock. Yet Fridaya€™ s employment numbers show not a ripple. This powerfully reinforces the 
view that this shift is
having no effect on labor supply whatsoever. Thus everybody who has been talking about the adverse 
labor-supply effects of income support really needs to take a hard Look at their thought processes:

Dan Alpert: 'Second only to the lockdowns in spring of 2020, the biggest pandemic-era shock to the 
U.S. employment situation was the elimination^”by law, not economicsa€”of nearly 10mm
workers from the unemployment benefit rolls in September. Will that register yet in payrolls? Stay 
tuned. BLS NF payrolls up only 194,000. Unemployment falls to 4.8% (odd). Hourly wages up
0.6% M/M. "Good" news, I suppose is that private sector was up 317K as government fell 123K on huge 
(and odd, someone explain) collapse in teaching jobs -144K. Of the 317K gain in private

sector payrollsa€”at first blush about half were in traditionally low-wage/low-hours sectors 
(leisure, retail, administrative, healthcare and social assistance). But some of these sectors saw 
whopping
M/M hourly wage increases. Retail hourly wages were up 0.72% M/M and Education and Healthcare were 
up a stunning 1.47% M/M. The 52K gain in Goods Producing jobs is a decent number (had
the headline been bigger). But even with the good prior monthly revisions, the fact is that adding 
only 317K private sector jobs when there are supposedly 10mm on offer (and plenty of unemployed)
is stunningly low. Flipping over to the household survey for a minute, I am going to go out on a 
limb here: 183K workers left the labor force (unusual given "labor shortage" and rising wages). But
this may be the tip of the iceberg - some former benefit recipients may be throwing in the towela€!

Dan Alpert @ Daniel Alpert

Second only to the lockdowns in spring of 2020, the biggest pandemic-era shock to the U.S, 
employment situation was the elimination - by law, not economics - of nearly 10mm workers from the
unemployment benefit rolls in September. Will that register yet in payrolls? Stay tuned...

12:16 PM r™ Oct 8,2021

1 Like 1 Retweet

2) in the world in which there are powerful psychological and institutional reasons why nominal 
wage and price levels in many, many sectors and for many, many occupations are sticky downward, 
structural adjustment via
the market requires some inflation. And the more structural adjustment there is to be done in a 
shorter time, the more inflation is a desirable addition to rather than a subtraction from the 
supply-side potential of the economy.
And yet there are a remarkably large number of people who do not factor this into their thinking. 
They continue to hold, no matter what the underlying realities of the fundamental economic 
situation, 21 inflation target that
Alan Greenspan kicked out of the air in the 1990s as if it were a sacred totem:

Andrew Elrod: The Specter of Inflation'. a€~What are we to make of the jump? Thirteen years ago the 
bulge in prices was concentrated in petroleum products and food; today the spike is driven by
used cars, airfare, and restaurantsa€”sectors acutely impacted by the pandemic. But unlike 2008, 
there is little reason to suspect todaya€™ s rising prices are evidence of an overactive economy. 
The
U-6 rate of total unemployment, which includes those working part-time involuntarily and those who 
have quit looking for work, remains 9.2 percent. Total capacity utilization, meanwhile, remains
sharply depressed at 76 percent.... The history of inflation politics has a very different lesson.  
Inflation is not always a problem of excess demand; it can also be caused by mismatch between 
existing

demand and existing supplya€”a problem of shifting supply to changing demands. (Arguably this is 
what we are seeing now.) Moreover, reducing the level of spending in the economy can prevent us
from achieving other, higher goals.  Both Harry Truman and Franklin Roosevelt confronted inflation 
without hiking rates and tightening budgets, and there is no reason governments cana€™ t

manage their economies similarly today. Inflation, in short, does not have to be a totalizing 
problem, and we certainly have better prescriptions for dealing with it than those on offer today. 
The far
greater threat, history shows, is inflation fearmongeringa€!

LINK: <https://bostonreview.net/class-inequalitv-politics/andrew-elrod-specter-inflation>

3) Yes, it would be nice to have cheap reliable zero-carbon fission power. Yes, France got there. 
Yes, it would be even nicer to have even cheaper and more reliable fission power. Yes, it would be 
nicer still to have cheap
reliable fusion power. But it really looks like, for the next generation at least, the low-hanging 
economic fruit is all in solar power. It would be silly to make a difficult-to-attain second-best 
the enemy of a first best that is
already at hand:

Noah Smith: Nuclear vs. Solar: a€~One has promise for the future. The other is changing our world 
right now. I would love to see technological breakthroughs that solve fission powera€™ s basic

problems, and fusion, if it works would be even more exciting. Francea€™ s experience powering 
itself largely with nuclear reactors (thanks to massive government financing and coordination)

shows that we could have done so safely and efficiently a€’’and reduced our carbon emissions 
enormously in the processa€”had we chosen to do so. Furthermore, scrapping existing nuclear power
plants, like the one at Diablo Canyon, is crazy, and will increase carbon emissions for no good 
reason. a€oeClean firma€D power is key to rapidly decarbonizing the grid, and nuclear power is one

of the ways we get that. In sum, I am pro-nuclear. But I also feel that many of my techno-optimist 
friends, in their focus on the promise of nuclear, are giving short shrift to the even greater
technological revolution happening right under their nosesa€”the unbelievable progress in both 
solar power and battery storage. If you are a true techno-optimist, you should definitely be 
excited by
this!  Ita€™ s not the kind of thing that happens once in a generationa€”ita€™ s the kind of thing 
that has never happened beforea€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/nuclear-vs-solai>

4) I keep thinking that it is vitally important that I understand the Chinese economy and Chinaa€™ 
s political economy. But the more I read and study, the more I realize that I do not understand it. 
Here at Project Syndicate,
however, there are a number of well-written and persuasive pieces by smart people who think they do 
understand the Chinese economy and Chinese political economy today:

Project Syndicate: A Reckoning for the China Dream: a€~Chinese policymakers may well have the 
wherewithal to prevent the crisis at Evergrande, the countrya€™ s second-largest property
developer, from triggering a broader financial and economic meltdown. But whether they can 
successfully reorient Chinaa€™ s growth model is far less certain. Shang-Jin Wei urges the Chinese

authorities to make it clear that they will do what is necessary to contain potential 
spillovers.... Kenneth Rogoff... [says] the larger challenge. is to rebalance an economy that has 
depended for too

long on a bloated real estate sector.... Stephen S. Roach... fears that President Xi Jinpinga€™ s 
regulatory clampdown and a€oecommon prosperitya€D campaign will subdue... entrepreneurial....
Raghuram G. Rajan... warn[s]... Chinaa€™ s lack of political checks and balances heightens the 
risk.... Yuen Yuen Ang. explains why Xi is determined to take China out of its current decadent

Gilded Age and into its own era of progressive reform. But Northwestern Universitya€™ s Nancy Qian 
recalls that... consequences. prove calamitous when policymakers get it wronga€!

LINK: <https://www.project-svndicate.org/bigpicture/a-reckoning-for-the-china-dream>

5) A very well written and persuasive argument that, at least since 1948, academic economics has 
been under a powerful curse to increase its a€oeformal rigora€oe at the expense of greatly 
narrowing its range of proper
application, all the while pretending that it remains highly relevant to pretty much everything. 
This needed to be stopped at least two generations ago. And now, finally, it may actually be being 
stopped:

Nick Gruen: A Lucky Boy from a Golden Age of Economics: a€~Success as an economista€”a discipline 
which, as Keynes remarked, is intellectually a€oea very easy subject compared with the
higher branches of philosophy and pure science?a€D Keynesa€™ sting in the tail was that a€oegood, 
or even competent, economists are the rarest of birds.a€D. Economics itself is built on very

simnle foundations. .. I was once at a lunch following the launch of Nutlet Coombsa€™ last book. I 
resnonded that economics mipht look comnlex. a€cebut ita€™ s reallv all built on a single


Noah Smith: Nuclear vs. Solar: a€~One has promise for the future. The other is changing our world 
right now. I would love to see technological breakthroughs that solve fission powera€™ s basic

problems, and fusion, if it works would be even more exciting. Francea€™ s experience powering 
itself largely with nuclear reactors (thanks to massive government financing and coordination)

shows that we could have done so safely and efficiently a€’’and reduced our carbon emissions 
enormously in the processa€”had we chosen to do so. Furthermore, scrapping existing nuclear power
plants, like the one at Diablo Canyon, is crazy, and will increase carbon emissions for no good 
reason. a€oeClean firma€D power is key to rapidly decarbonizing the grid, and nuclear power is one

of the ways we get that. In sum, I am pro-nuclear. But I also feel that many of my techno-optimist 
friends, in their focus on the promise of nuclear, are giving short shrift to the even greater
technological revolution happening right under their nosesa€”the unbelievable progress in both 
solar power and battery storage. If you are a true techno-optimist, you should definitely be 
excited by
this!  Ita€™ s not the kind of thing that happens once in a generationa€”ita€™ s the kind of thing 
that has never happened beforea€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/nuclear-vs-solai>

4) I keep thinking that it is vitally important that I understand the Chinese economy and Chinaa€™ 
s political economy. But the more I read and study, the more I realize that I do not understand it. 
Here at Project Syndicate,
however, there are a number of well-written and persuasive pieces by smart people who think they do 
understand the Chinese economy and Chinese political economy today:

Project Syndicate: A Reckoning for the China Dream: a€~Chinese policymakers may well have the 
wherewithal to prevent the crisis at Evergrande, the countrya€™ s second-largest property
developer, from triggering a broader financial and economic meltdown. But whether they can 
successfully reorient Chinaa€™ s growth model is far less certain. Shang-Jin Wei urges the Chinese

authorities to make it clear that they will do what is necessary to contain potential 
spillovers.... Kenneth Rogoff... [says] the larger challenge. is to rebalance an economy that has 
depended for too

long on a bloated real estate sector.... Stephen S. Roach... fears that President Xi Jinpinga€™ s 
regulatory clampdown and a€oecommon prosperitya€D campaign will subdue... entrepreneurial....
Raghuram G. Rajan... warn[s]... Chinaa€™ s lack of political checks and balances heightens the 
risk.... Yuen Yuen Ang. explains why Xi is determined to take China out of its current decadent

Gilded Age and into its own era of progressive reform. But Northwestern Universitya€™ s Nancy Qian 
recalls that... consequences. prove calamitous when policymakers get it wronga€!

LINK: <https://www.proiect-syndicate.org/bigpicture/a-reckoning-for-the-china-dream>

5) A very well written and persuasive argument that, at least since 1948, academic economics has 
been under a powerful curse to increase its a€oeformal rigora€oe at the expense of greatly 
narrowing its range of proper
application, all the while pretending that it remains highly relevant to pretty much everything. 
This needed to be stopped at least two generations ago. And now, finally, it may actually be being 
stopped:

Nick Gruen: A Lucky Boy from a Golden Age of Economics: a€~Success as an economista€”a discipline 
which, as Keynes remarked, is intellectually a€oea very easy subject compared with the
higher branches of philosophy and pure science?a€D Keynesa€™ sting in the tail was that a€oegood, 
or even competent, economists are the rarest of birds.a€D. Economics itself is built on very

simple foundations.... I was once at a lunch following the launch of Nugget Coombsa€™ last book. I 
responded that economics might look complex, a€oebut ita€™ s really all built on a single

ideaa€D. Nugget, who like surprisingly many economists towards the end of their days despair of 
their profession, leant across to her and said: a€oeYes and ita€™ s wrong!a€D Max [Corden] and
my father made their careers during a golden age of economics in which conceptual simplicity was a 
feature not a bug and the central criterion of good work was its generality and usefulness.

Gradually academia somehow came to reward conspicuous cleverness as its apex value and quite 
quickly its usefulness of economics receded. The money quote from Hicks: a€oelt is, I believe, only

possible to salvage anything from this wreck... if we can assume that the markets... do not differ 
very greatly from perfectly competitive. At least this get-away seems well worth trying. We must be

aware, however, that we are taking a dangerous step, and probably limiting to a serious extent the 
problems with which our subsequent analysis will be fitted to deala€!
LINK: <https://www.themandarin.com.au/94551-a-lucky-boy-from-a-golden-age-of-economics/>

6) Paul Krugman is the best in the world at building a sensible economic model to serve as a very 
powerful intuition pump and mind opener. And he is thus one of the very few of us whom John Maynard 
Keynes would
classify as an excellent economist. I think he hits one of the nails squarely on the head here when 
he stresses that model-building is useful when it is used to open minds to possibilities, and 
destructive when it is used to close
minds to reality:

Paul Krugman (2018): Uses and Abuses of Economic Formalism: a€~[Nick] Gruen. really, really 
doesna€™t like the formalization of economies of scale and imperfect competition in trade that

went along with the rise of the a€oenew trade theorya€O, and compares it to the excessive faith in 
formalism that I myself have condemned in much of macroeconomics. Obviously I dona€™ t think
thata€™ s fair, and could say a lot about why I think the formalism was helpful. What the 
freshwater school did was to take the actual experience of business cycles and say, a€oeWe dona€™ t 
see

how to formalize this experience in terms of maximizing equilibrium models; therefore it doesna€™t 
exist .a€D. This attitude, Ia€™ ve argued, had major negative consequences, not just for

research, but for policy: it helped cultivate a sense of learned helplessness in the face of mass 
unemployment. What about new trade theory? What us new trade theorists did was say, a€oelt looks as 
if
therea€™ s a lot going on in world trade that cana€™t be explained in existing formal models. So 
leta€™ s see if therea€™ s a different approach to modeling that can make sense of what we
see.a€D In other words, the attitude toward formalization was. to help clarify our reality sense, 
not deny it. Now, we can argue about how much good this formalization did. I still believe that the

formal models provided a level of clarity and legitimacy to trade discussion that wasna€™ t there 
before. But one thing new trade theory certainly didna€™ t do was lend support to really bad ideas,

or induce policy paralysis. And another thing it didna€™ t do was divert trade economists away from 
studying the real world. It should be that formalism is there to open your mind, not close it, and

if the real world seems to be telling you something inconsistent with your model, the problem lies 
in the model, not the worlda€!
LINK: <https://www.nytimes 
.com/2018/06/27/opinion/uses-and-abuses-of-economic-formalism-wonkish-and-self-referential .html>

7) Out of my wheelhouse, but I do think it is very important to register that there are three 
things going on here: (1) mRNA (and other) vaccines remain very effective at preventing infection 
with the COVID plague. (2)
Conditional on catching the plague, having been vaccinated does not make you less infectious to 
others. (3) Conditional on catching the plague, having been vaccinated does make you much less 
vulnerable to severe disease
and death. Vaccines are very effective for the vaccinated. But vaccines do not make it any 
healthier for the unvaccinated to come in contact with a plague carrier:

Charlotte B. Acharya & al.: No Significant Difference in Viral Load Between Vaccinated & 
Unvaccinated, Asymptomatic & Symptomatic Groups Infected with SARS-CoV-2 Delta Variant: a€~This
article is a preprint and has not been peer-reviewed [what does this mean?]. It reports new medical 
research that has yet to be evaluated and so should not be used to guide clinical practicea€!

LINK: <https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.09.28.21264262v 1 >

8) Truth be told, I never thought much of the Yale program in a€oegrand strategya€oe. I was 
arrested by the fact that, in the introduction to his book On Grand Strategy, ex-program director 
John Lewis Gaddis thanks, as
a€oepractitionersa€oe of grand strategy, David Brooks and Peggy Noonan, among others. Anyone that 
eager to flatter right wing offered colonists is, I suspect, Not likely to be directing an academic 
program high-quality
enough to be worth my time. Now it appears that the Yale President and the Yale Development Office 
Regarded it as a money pump from donors rather than as an intellectual crown jewel, and Gaddisa€™ s 
successor as
program Director, history professor Beverly Gage, has resigned in protest against Development 
Office and donor infringements of academic freedom. Not a good look at all:

Yale Department of History: Statement: a€~The Department of History stands with Beverly Gage in her 
resignation from the Grand Strategy Program. No faculty member should have their courses
or programs under outside surveillance. It is a longstanding principle of academic freedom that 
donors to university programs do not control or shape the scholarship, curriculum, or classes that 
their
donations support. And they should not select the members of advisory boards, nor should we have 
advisory boards intended to oversee and regulate our teaching. We protest the infringement on
Professor Gagea€™ s admirable leadership of the Grand Strategy Program. We would like explicit 
reassurance that the university administration will protect the academic freedom of all faculty
members  and the integrity of all departments, programs, centers, and institutes on our campusa€!

LINK: <https://history.yale.edu/news/statement-department-history>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

