Josh Hausman inflation debate

Canes on inflation is the breaking of the social contract

Inflation as greasing, the wheels of the economy in normal times

What is the natural rate of inflation during a reopening/structural change shock ?
What is the inflation process?

Josh ends his article with "I would like to be wrong in my worries about inflation. I hope Brad 
DeLong convinces me that I am.a€D No. I don't think he is wrong.

Moreover, I think that there is a very important downside to moderate inflation that Josh does not 
highlight: he mentions it only at the very end, in an aside that: a€oelnflation can also have 
unfortunate political effectsaGD.

High unemployment is a worse tragedy than moderate inflation, and makes those who suffer from it 
angry. But high unemployment directly reflects only a small proportion of the population. 
Inflation, even moderate inflation, affects everybody: everybody sees the economy, as having broken 
its social compact with them. Everybody finds themselves unable to purchase at the prices they had 
expected, and had thought
reasonable. Everybody is consequently annoyed. When politics stands on the knife-edge of 
catastrophea€”as it does nowa€’’near-universal annoyance is more of a danger than is justified 
anger against the system on the part of relatively few.

John Maynard Keynes put his finger on the problem back in 1919, in his The Economic Consequences of 
the Peace:

Lenin is said to have declared that the best way to destroy the Capitalist System was to debauch 
the currency. By a continuing process of inflation, governments can confiscate, secretly and 
unobserved, an important part of the wealth of their citizens. By this method they not only 
confiscate, but they confiscate arbitrarily; and, while the process impoverishes many, it actually 
enriches some. The
sight of this arbitrary rearrangement of riches strikes not only at security, but at confidence in 
the equity of the existing distribution of wealtha€!. Lenin was certainly right. There is no 
subtler, no surer means of overturning the existing basis of society than to debauch the currency. 
The process engages all the hidden forces of economic law on the side of destruction, and does it 
in a manner which
not one man in a million is able to diagnosea€! 
<https://www.gutenberg.org/files/15776/15776-h/15776-h.htm>

The prose is overly purple. And Keynes was thinking of high and variable inflation, in which:

The currency fluctuates wildly from month to month, all permanent relations between debtors and 
creditors, which form the ultimate foundation of capitalism, become so utterly disordered as to be 
almost meaningless; and the process of wealth-getting degenerates into a gamble and a lotterya€!

But it does apply to even the moderate inflation we are currently undergoing, and even if this 
inflation turns out to be transitory. A perceived-by-everyone breaking of the social compact is a 
weighty thing. Getting inflation a€oeunder controla€D ought to be a very high priority.
Let me reset. Compare the situation today to what people feared two years ago would be the case 
today. How are we doing? The answer is: we are doing very well indeed. Jay Powell and his Federal 
Reserve (and Joe Biden and his administration) ought to be taking victory laps.

Let me ask ask uyou to back up a little more than a decade. Two and a half years after the start of 
the Global Financial Crisis in 2007, the U.S. unemployment rate was kissing 10%, the Federal 
Reserve had found that it had no traction to speed recovery, and the Obama administration had just 
thrown away its ability to use fiscal policy to speed recovery by promising to veto spending and 
tax bills that were insufficiently
austere. It would, after that moment in late 2009, take six years for the U.S. economy to approach 
full employment. The cumulative pointless and unnecessary economic losses of $7 trillion from 
deficient employment alone, plus a multiple from investments not made, business models not 
experimented with, and workers not trained during the decade of Ainemic recovery. Take that 
multiple, and add on the shadow cast on
the economy after 2015 by the anemic recovery. Guess that multiple to be three.

The key thing to hold on to is this: this time, we have avoided all of that.

Relative to the Bernanke Fed, therefore, the Powell Fed are public benefactors to the residents of 
the United States to the tune of $21 trillion dollars. We could afford to make each of the 19 
voting and alternate members of the Powell FOMC as rich as Elon Musk was at his peak, and that 
would only eat up 1/10 of the good they have done relative to the Fed, Congress, and President of a 
decade ago.
But we do now have an inflation problem.

So after it finishes taking its victory laps, and after the cheers the Powell Fed deservesa€”but 
that somehow I am not hearing right now?a€”die down, what should the Powell Fed do to deal with the 
current inflation problem?
A standard economist would start to think abou this question by asking themself: What does 
macroeconomic theory tell us?

Unfortunately, macroeconomic theory tells us nothing. Macroeconomic theory is a historical analogy 
dressed up in a leotard, a tutu, and pointe shoes. I do admit that there are a very few 
macroeconomistsa€”Paul Krugman comes to minda€”who are able to successfully use macroeconomic 
theories as intuition pumps. But for the rest of us macroeconomic theories are nothing but boxes 
into which we can file historical
analogies, or perhaps a better analogy would be that they are distilled and crystalized versions of 
memories of historical eventsa€’’distilled and crystalized versions adulterated with ideology, and 
you better hope the adulterant is simply oregano,

So what historical analogies are there?

The U.S. has faced fivea€”or maybe six, depending on whether you count the 1970s as one or two 
episodesa€’’inflation problems in the past century and a bit. One, the WWII inflation brought under 
control by wartime price controls, is not relevant to our situation. That leaves four (or maybe 
five) historical parallels.

(1) The first is the WWI-era inflation, brought under control when the newly-installed Fed raised 
its discount rate from 3.75% to 7%, and triggered a short but very deep recession accompanied by 
substantial deflation. Milton Friedman judged that the Fed had moved too latea€”should have started 
raising interest rates a year or more before it dida€”but moved too far when it did move.

(2) The second is the post-WWII inflation. Inflation peaked at 16.7% on a trailing annual basis in 
May of 1947 as the U.S. economy reoriented itself from its wartime to its post-war structural 
configuration. The Federal Reserve did nothing. It was focused on propping up the value of all the 
U.S. Treasury bonds that had been issued to fight World War II. Inflation then declined over the 
next two years to 8%, and then went
negative in 1949, when a minor recession came.

(3) The third is the 1951 inflation. Inflation peaked at 8.6% on a trailing annual basis in May 
1951 as the U.S. geared up to fight the Korean War and, perhaps more important, to build up the 
full Cold War military prepared to instantly project power anywhere on the globe. Again, the Fed 
did nothing. And the inflation wave passed. By May 1952 it was below 2%. And recession was avoided 
until a minor one in late 1953.

In both 1947 and 1951, we found ourselves wheeling the structure of our economy in a different 
directionA.. .a€’’demobilization from World War II and the firing-up of the civilian economy in 
1947, remobilization for the Cold War in 1951a€”with remarkable speed. There needed to be some wage 
inflation: cutting nominal wages in contracting industries, is devastating for worker, morale, and 
thus businesses do not do it;
in order to have market signals poll, workers into expanding industries, the wages in those 
industries have to risea€’’hence some wage inflation. There needed to be some bottleneck-driven 
cost inflation: it is the rise in prices around bottlenecks that the market needs to incentivize 
firms to correct them by economizing on the scarce and adding to supply. That is how the market 
undertakes the Hayekian price-discovery and
subsequent activity-reorientation process. The natural rate of inflationa€”the rate of inflation 
that allows the economy to reach not just full-employment equilibrium but the best full-employment 
equilibrium^”is elevated whenever we need to wheel the structure of the economy into a new 
configuration.

By how much is it elevated? We do not know. We do not have good models here.

Is this a problem? It should not be. A good central bank works to build credibility precisely so 
that it has enormous freedom of action to follow the policies in the short run that are best for 
the economy, even if that means it does not hit its long-run inflation target in the short run. And 
the Federal Reserve has spent generations building credibility, so it ought to have considerable 
short-run freedom of action to allow for
higher inflation now without creating expectations of a prolonged inflationary spiral.

(4) The fourth, or the fourth and fifth, are the 1965-1984 experience, when inflation rose from 2% 
at the start of 1966 to 4.4% on Richard Nixon's inauguration in January 1969, reached a trough of 
2.8% in August 1972, roared to 10.9% in November 1974 with the Oil Crisis, declined to 4.5% in 
December 1976, and then came roaring back to a peak of 12.8% in March 1980. The Federal Reserve 
wished and washed. Arthur
Burns, Fed Chair from 1970 to 1978, was too interested in having a strong economy while his friend 
and patron Richard Nixon ran for reelection in 1972, and did not believe that Congress would let 
him keep interest rates high enough for long enough to cure inflation by monetary policy. G. 
William Miller, Fed Chair over 1978-9, was out of his depth. And Paul Volcker raised interest rates 
to a peak of 16.9% in December
of 1980, and did not lower them below 10% until August of 1982.

The problem in that 1970s was that an expectation that wage inflation next year would be about what 
wage inflation had been this year, perhaps a percentage point per year or so more, also got 
embedded in the economy. But that embedding came with no countervailing information flow in terms 
of price discovery about the true real costs of energy intensive activities. We already knew what 
OPEC had done, and what its
consequences were going to be.

The thing that gives us hope that the second and third episodes, 1947 and 1951, are relevant is 
that long-term inflation expectations implicit in the bond market are still trading at their normal 
"in the long run bet that inflation will be about 2.5% range". One thing to fear is that this is 
like 1920a€”that the inflation rate would have passed on its own, but the Federal Reserve is in the 
process of tightening too much  right now.
The second thing to fear is that this is indeed like the 1970s, and that the important thing is to 
scotch any expectations of an inflationary spiral before they are even formed.

Back in the 1970s we knew what the structural-adjustment problem was. The two triplings of oil 
prices, in 1973 and 1979, meant that everything energy intensive had the relative price structure 
strongly tilted against it. There was not a great deal of price discovery to be done: simply take 
the energy intensity of an activity and multiply it by nine, and you get with the new 
equilibriumreal price of it was going to be.
John Cassidy: Over the weekend, I published a piece taking a closer look at Larry SummersaC™ 
argument that Bidena€™ s American Rescue Plan was largely to blame for the inflation surge and the 
Fed botched its responsea€L Much of the piece revolves around whether demand (stimulus/Fed) or 
supply (pandemic) is primarily driving inflationaC!.

Brad DeLong: a€™ I am not sure that the supply/demand division framing makes a lot of sense. 
Inflation is the result of a supply/demand mismatch. This mismatch could be transient and 
healthya€”a side effect of the good things of rapidly rejoining highway traffic at speed and 
wheeling the economy toward a more goods- and deliverator-heavy configuration. This mismatch could 
be long-lasting and unhealthy. The
question is which. And the answer to that question turns on whether the economy has lost its 
expectational inflation anchor: Do people still expect inflation to be about 2%? Or do people think 
inflation is up-for-grabs and recent past inflation (or recent past plus a little more) is your 
best guess for what inflation will be in the future? My bet is that the 5/5 series from FRED is our 
best guide to what the relevant people are
thinking. & the 5/5 has not (yet) moveda€!

LINK: <https://threadreaderapp.com/convos/1513507454033797126>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

The only way to buy insurance against the fiscal theory of the price levela€™ s becoming relevant 
for the inflation outlook is to keep Trump and Trumpists out of office
We have one political party that could well, someday, turn us inflation-wise into a€oeArgentinaa€n: 
the Republicans.

But thankfully we have only one such political party.


Democrats need to develop a policy framework for a time of inflation: capacity-building 
progressivism.

We do not yet know whether what the Fed has done is sufficient to return inflation to its 2%/year 
Core PCE target.

If the Fed overdoes inflation fighting, we might well find ourselves back at the zero lower bound 
on interest ratesa€”and that would be a hell of a mess, much worse than having Core PCE inflation 
at 5%/year for an extra year or so.

First: Why Isna€™t There an Inflation Non-Panic?
I read:

Mohamed El-Erian: The Key to 2022 Will Be How Inflation Is Brought Down: a€~For more than a decade, 
large-scale central bank purchases of assets boosted not just those being bought in markets but 
also virtually all other assets, be they financial or physical (such as housing, art and other 
collectibles). This was particularly the case in 202la€!. As the new year unfolds, both the Fed and 
markets have a huge stake in
inflation coming down in an orderly way. But the window of opportunity for policy to achieve this 
is rapidly closing. The alternative is a disorderly drop, which would involve the even bigger Fed 
policy error of having to be too abrupt in tightening monetary policy after being way too slow 
previouslya€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.eom/content/20e0857b-99cb-4495-8677-8746d97db836#myft:my-news:page>
And:

Robert Armstrong: How to Panic About Inflation: a€~High levels of panic will be appropriate if we 
see sharp acceleration in services prices, especially outside healthcare and transports I. This 
would indicate that the strong wage gains we have seen recently are spreading pervasively though 
the economy, in ways that could (in theory) scare everyone into thinking inflation is here to say, 
and trigger the dreaded wage-price
spirala€!. If the Fed gets to its target two per cent rate in 2023S”that still means negative 
short-term ratesS!. SoeThat is not going to constrain the cost of financing anythingSDS!. The Fed 
might have to get much more hawkish than it is now, with heavy consequences for markets. Unhedged 
is not there yet, because weS™re just not convinced demand will be strong for long, and the bond 
market supports our
doubts.  But MicheleS™ s argument frightens us all the sameS!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/04892blb-d977-473d-8b54-d34e33a29703>

And my immediate first response is to ask the question: In what sense is the Fed supposed to have 
been "way too slow" in tightening monetary policy? We still are way short of full employment. Some 
of that is due to childcare and virus-fear bottlenecks. But some of it isna€™ t. And to the extent 
that there are important jobs not being done because people cana€™ t afford to make alternative 
childcare arrangements or fear
the virusa€”well, the inflation that comes from paying people more to see if they will take those 
jobs is to be welcomed, not fought:

Plus the economy has undergone a great wheel: 6% less relative to trend in personal consumption 
expenditures on services, and 20% more relative to trend in personal consumption expenditures on 
goods. Not all of that is going to stick into the post-plague economy, but a good deal of it will. 
We have an economy in which nominal wages and some nominal prices are really sticky downward. That 
means that if market
prices are to do their job signals of where the value is, prices and wages in industries that need 
to expand must rise relative to prices and wages in industries that need the contract. With prices 
and wages in industries that need to contract sticky downward, that means: inflation:

Now it is certainly true that we do not want the inflation now, which we want, and which is an 
essential part of a rapid restoration of general prosperity, to stick around once we arrive at 
whatever our new normal is going to be. But I look outside my window now, and I see no new normal.

Thus my immediate second response is to ask the question: Why is it not obvious to nearly everybody 
questions of inflation control should be postponed until their proper datea€’’which will be when 
the plague has fallen to an endemic flu-like illness, and when the economy is back to full 
employment?

Perhaps I should not be surprised at our world of public discourse about finance and economics that 
does not seem to have thought much, if at all, about the relationship between macroeconomics and 
rapid structural change. This is, after all, the same world of public discourse about finance and 
economics that never managed to absorb Paul Krugman's very important 1998 point call if you find 
yourself at the zero lower
bound                                                                                               
                                                                                             on 
interest rates, that means that your inflation target is too low: 
<https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/1998b_bpea_krugman_dominquez_rogoff.pdf>

First: Six Episodes of U.S. Inflation Above 5%/Year in the 1900s

The top graph is the CPI inflation rate; the bottom graphs are overlapping graphs of the Federal 
Reserves™ s discount rateS”the rate at which it lends to banks on reasonable collateral.

Counting 1974 and 1979 as two episodes, there were six times in the twentieth century during which 
the annual inflation rate got above 5%. One was the World War II inflations’’cut off by price 
controls. Then came the post-WWII structural-rebalancing-and-pent up demand inflation, and then the 
Korean War structural-rebalancing inflation as the U.S. government wheeled its economy to fight the 
Cold War. During both
the Fed sat byS”it was then still focused on keeping the prices of Treasury bonds high. The 
inflations soon passed away.

Before those came the World War I episode. That episode of inflation was cut off by an increase in 
the discount rate from 3.75%/year to 7%/year, which not only ended the inflation but enforced 
deflation: a 20% decline in the price level from its peak. (This decline, I should ask, made the 
task of restoring the gold standard at anything like pre-World War I nominal parities much more 
difficult, hence much more pointless.)
Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz judged that the rise was Scenot only too late but also too 
muchSD <https://archive.org/details/monetaryhistoryo0000frie/page/230/>: the Fed should have moved 
earlier to prevent excessive bank discounts from inappropriately boosting high-powered money, and 
at the moment the Fed did move the structure of credit was sufficiently based on a continuation of 
Fed policy that the
FedS™ s move generated a€oeone of the most rapid declines [in economic activity] on recorda€D.

If the Federal Reserve had not moved to raise discount rates after World War I, what would have 
happened? Friedman and Schwartza€™ s judgment is that an earlier increase of, say, 125 basis points 
to remove the incentive for banks to engage in excessive discounts would have brought the excessive 
growth of the high-powered money stock to an end, and stopped the inflation.

Then came the 1970s: The Fed raised interest rates after the Yom Kippur War oil shock to control 
inflation; then, after inflation peaked, it lowered them to try to restore full employment; then 
came the year when, as the late Charlie Schultze said, a€oeour forecasts of nominal income growth 
were dead on, but inflation came in 2%-points high and real growth 2%-points lowa€D; and then came 
the Volcker disinflation,
reversed in September 1982 when they realized that they had bankrupted Mexico, and not resumed as 
the Fed decided to declare a fall in inflation to the 4-5%/year range as complete victory. That 
4-5% target lasted for a decade, followed by the opportunistic disinflation down to and Alan 
Greenspana€™ s declaration of the 2%/year inflation targeta€”a declaration that it is very hard 
today to argue was appropriate, given
the extraordinary amount of time global north economies have spent with interest rates at their 
zero lower bound since.

What does macroeconomic theory tell us that the Federal Reserve should do now, in the spring of 
2022?
Olivier Blanchard writes:

In early 1975, core inflation was running at 12 percent and the real policy rate was equal to about 
a"’6 percent, a gap of about 17 percent. Today, core inflation is running at 6 percent and the real 
policy rate is equal to a"’6 percent, a gap of 12 percenta€”smaller than in 1975, but still 
strikingly largea€!. It then took 8 years, from 1975 to 1983, to reduce inflation to 4 percent, 
with an increase in the real rate from bottom to
peak of close to 1,300 basis points, and a peak increase in the unemployment rate of 600 basis 
points from the early 1970s. Today is obviously different in many waysa€!. [But even so,] it 
reasonable to think that a 200-basis-point increase in the policy rate, so only 1/6 of the rate 
increase from 1975 to 1981, will do the job this time when the gap between core inflation and the 
policy rate is 2/3 of what it was in 1975? And
that unemployment will barely budge? I wish I could believe ita€! 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/why-i-worry-about-inflation-interest-rate
s-and-unemployment>

The suggestion seems to be that we have today 2/3 of the problem we had in 1975, and so the 
solution would be to do 2/3 as mucha€”to raise interest rates by 800 basis points, 8% pointsa€”but 
then to apply some haircut to that 800 basis-point interest-rate rise because a€oetoday is 
obviously different in many waysa€D.
But why does he pick 1975-1983, rather than 1951 or 1948 or 1920? Does economic theory tell him to 
do so?

Truth be told, there is no economic theory. There is only history, and its events, and analogies we 
make based on judgments concerning complicated emergent processes we do not understand very well 
that come out of the millions of interactions that are the economy. Sometimes, it is true, we 
distill and crystallize the history into something we call theory where little squiggles that look 
like E£, T, I2, If, and so on; we then
mainline the crystallized product. After mainlining it we can think we know something. But after 
mainlining crystal meth we experience increased energy, elevated mood, extraordinary confidence, 
racing thoughts, muscle twitches, and rapid breathing, among other things.

Move cautiously. Be data-dependent. Wait for it to become clearer which, if any, historical 
analogies are relevant to our situation. And always, always, always remember that in an economy 
that is near and that we have a good reason to fear will long remain in danger of hitting the zero 
lower bound on nominal interest rates, premature and excessively aggressive moves that raise 
interest rates cannot easily be corrected.
S

This is, to put it bluntly, exactly right. You cana€™t steer between Scylla and Charybdis unless 
you know how to read the currents, and core inflation is the best way to read the currents:

Paul Krugman: Wonking Out: The Meaning of Falling Inflation: a€~The majority of gas stations in the 
United States are already charging less than $4 a gallon, and declining wholesale prices suggest 
that retail prices still have further to fall. Food prices are also coming downa€!. Policymakersa€! 
should respond to the good inflation news by keeping calm and carrying ona€!. The concept of 
a€cecorea€D inflationa€”
distinguishing between volatile prices, like food and energy, and slower-moving prices that have a 
lot of inertiaa€”has been highly successful since the economist Robert Gordon introduced it in the 
1970s. Time and again, the Fed has steered through crises by ignoring critics who wanted it to 
panic over blips in inflation caused by temporary jumps in commodity prices.a€!

LINK: 
<https://messaging-custom-newsletters.nytimes.com/template/oakv2?CCPAOptOut=true&emc=edit_pk_2022080
5&instance_id=68584&nl=paul-krugman&productCode=PK&regi_id=64675225&segment_id=I00604

CONDITION: Fed Overreacting Watch

Ms. Market thinks the Fed has overdone it, and will be cutting, and trying to find the nerve to cut 
more, after February 2023.

Note that it is not Democrats who are making these financial market bets. This is what Republicans 
with money who are placing it on the line are thinking:

Bryce Elder: A Fed Funds Rate Dislocation: a€~Deutsche Bank strategist Jim Reida€I. investors are 
buying into the short-sharp-shock thesis. Futures are pricing in that US interest rates will peak 
at 3.39 percent at the February 2023 FOMC meeting, then come back by 0.7 percentage points over the 
following 12 monthsa€! <https://www.ft.com/content/29b568b6-83c5-4c52-a288-78894448386o

Paul Krugman: Taking the a€~Flationa€™ Out of Stagflation: a€~Powell acknowledged that this was a 
preliminary number that might be revised. Sure enough, the number was revised downa€!. The big 
story right now seems to be a quite sharp decline in market expectations of inflation over the 
medium terma€! supply chain problemsa€! have gone into reversea€! evidence that the economy is 
weakeninga€! it seems
reasonable to suggest that inflation will also fall fast. That, at any rate, is what the markets 
seem to be anticipatinga€! 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2022/07/01/opinion/inflation-fed-stagflation-recession.html>


FIRST: Monthly CPI Inflation at???... ZERO!
Excluding shelter, monthly CPI change = -0.3%
Well, that was a surprise!

Given that Jay Powell let himself get panicked out of his forward guidance into a much bigger 
stomping-on-the-brakes because of a preliminary consumer confidence number that vanished as more 
data came in, will he now allow himself to be guided back to what he was planning to do before he 
freaked? Or would that be too humiliating?
What he should, of course, be watchinga€”and what he says he is watchinga€”is core PCE:

which now stands 2%-points below where it would be had the Federal Reserve actually hit its 2%/year 
inflation target since the Great Recession began. And he should also be watching the 5/5 forward 
inflation breakeven
which shows no signs of inflationary psychology.

Add in a remarkable tightening of financial conditions from January-May, which will put substantial 
drag on the economy next year as its effects hit exports and construction:

And the reliable recession indicator that is yield-curve inversion.

So tell me: What is the argument for the Federal Reserve not standing pat, and seeing what the 
policies it has already undertaken will do to the economy?

Greenspan made his reputation by cutting-shorta€”over the objections of other Fed governorsa€”his 
interest rate increases in the mid-1990s, and so triggering the high productivity-growth late 1990s 
of the dot-com boom. Bernanke thought he had done all that he ought to in the early 2010s and 
presided over a flatlining depression-condition employment level half-decade, followed by continued 
anAimic recovery. Powell
ought to be thinking about how to manage the situation so that he will be able to take a 
rapid-return-to-full-employment victory lap.

Some respected economists are talking as if the US economy is in serious inflationary trouble. But 
the current uptick in price growth is highly likely to be a largely benign consequence of the 
post-pandemic recovery.

BERKELEY a€“ In the past three years, technological advances have provided about one percentage 
point of warranted US real wage growth each year a€“ admittedly, only half the rate of earlier 
times, but still something. Yet, real wages are currently 4% below their warranted value from 
adding on the underlying fundamental productivity trend to the pre-pandemic real wage Employment 
Cost Index (ECI) level. Does
that sound like a a€cehigh-pressurea€D labor market to you?

Those who believe that the US labor market is in some sense a€cetighta€D point out that the ECI 
increased by 3.7% in the year to September a€“ well above its 3% annual growth rate in the 
pre-pandemic years of former US President Donald Trumpa€™ s administration. But, because US 
consumer prices have increased by 5.4% over the past year, the ECI-basis real wage has fallen by 
1.7% in that period. In a high-
pressure economy with a tight labor market, workers would have enough bargaining power to obtain 
real wage increases.

Nowcasting is extremely difficult, and hazardous. But the a€cenowa€D that I see today is the one I 
forecasted two to three quarters ago. Yes, the recovering US economy, like a driver who suddenly 
accelerates, is leaving inflationary skid marks on the asphalt. But, as I argued in May, these 
should not concern us, because a€oeburning rubber to rejoin highway traffic is not the same thing 
as overheating the engine.a€D
The US is not currently in a situation where too much money is chasing too few goods, which would 
result in a surfeit of demand for labor and likely trigger an inflationary spiral. This is despite 
the fact that the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic and its associated disruptions continue to cause a 
substantial undersupply of labor.

Today, the US economy a€™ s overall employment-to-population ratio is three percentage points below 
what we used to regard as its full-employment level. The ratios for women, African-Americans, and 
workers without a college degree are, respectively, five, 4.5, and four percentage points below 
this level.

Yet, economists whom I respect talk as if the economy is in serious inflationary trouble. Jason 
Furman, a former chairman of President Barack ObamaaC™ s Council of Economic Advisers, thinks 
a€cethe original sin was an oversized American Rescue Plan,a€D the $1.9 trillion recovery package 
that President Joe Biden signed into law in March. In FurmanaC™ s view, it would have been better 
to have less aggressive
policy measures and thus a slower employment and growth recovery this year, because Bidena€™ s plan 
a€ recontributed to higher output but also higher prices.a€D And according to the same New York 
Times report, former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers thinks that a€reinflation now risks 
spiraling out of control.a€D

The inflation worriers then argue that the COVID-19 crisis has permanently damaged the supply side 
of the economy by causing a lot of early retirements, as well as lasting disruption to the 
lean-and-mean supply chains on which a good deal of productivity and prosperity had depended. 
Perhaps. But similar arguments in the early 2010s, in the aftermath of the 2008 global financial 
crisis, aimed to justify policies that did
not put the pedal to the metal and attempt rapidly to re-employ so-called 
a€cezero-marginal-producta€D workers. One consequence of this timidity was the election of Trump, 
whose rise was fueled by the rage of those who thought a€ceelitesa€D cared more about immigrants 
and minorities than they did about blue-collar workers whose economic opportunities had never 
recovered to pre-2008 levels.

Lastly, some claim that, regardless of whether or not the labor market is tight, inflation a€“ 
whether driven by supply-side or demand-side factors a€“ is high and salient enough that firms and 
households will swiftly incorporate it into their expectations. Thus, the inflationary snake has to 
be scotched now, while it is small, before it grows and devours everything of value.

But so far, rising inflation has not been incorporated into any of the a€restickya€O prices in the 
economy, according to the measure constructed by the Atlanta Federal Reserve. True, the financial 
marketa€™ s current 30-year breakeven inflation rate, at 2.35%, is more than half a percentage 
point above where it settled in the second half of the 2010s. But todaya€™ s rate is similar to 
that in the first half of the decade, and
slightly below the level that would be consistent with the US Federal Reservea€™ s inflation target 
of 2% per year.

The current uptick in US inflation is highly likely to be simply rubber on the road, resulting from 
the post-pandemic recovery. There is no sign that inflation expectations have become de-anchored. 
The labor market is still weak enough that workers are unable to demand substantial increases in 
real wages. Financial markets are bias A© about the possibility of rising inflation. And a 
substantial fiscal contraction is already in
train.

Given these facts, why would anybody argue that the a€oeoriginal sina€D was the a€reoversized 
American Rescue Plan,a€D and that tightening monetary policy starting right now is the proper way 
to expiate it? I, for one, simply cannot follow their logic.

First: No, the Fed Is Not (Far) Behind the Curve!

Here is a reason I do not think that the Fed is (far) behind the curve:

It seems highly likely that at least the manufacturing part of the economy will slow markedly over 
the next 1 1/2 years, no?

And that is with what the Fed has already done (and is expected to do). Would one want more slowing 
than the FC index tells us is already baking in the cake? If you think so, why?
Yes, bottlenecks, oil shocks, wheat shocks, and China-lockdowns will do what they will do to 
inflation in the short run.

But over the medium and the long run, the bond market is still quite happy with the outlook as far 
as inflation is concerned, at least if you believe the information in TIPS:

So then why now do we have the extremely sharp Olivier Blanchard, commenting on Reifschneider and 
Wilcox 
<https://www.piie.com/publications/policy-briefs/case-cautiously-optimistic-outlook-us-inflation>, 
writing 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/why-i-worry-about-inflation-interest-rate
s-and-unemployment>:

?

Moreover, he is far from alone:

Neil Irwin: a€«When did the Fed start getting behind the curve? I think it was one year ago this 
week. Between December '20 and March '21 meetingsa€!a€D <

Neil Irwin @Neil Irwin

When did the Fed start getting behind the curve? I think it was one year ago this week. Between 
December '20 and March '21 meetings, $2.8t in pandemic stimulus passed, vaccine rollout got 
underwaya€”yet fed funds rate forecast didn't budge.


axios.comFederal Reserve likely to raise interest rates this weekWith inflation nearing 8%, and 
unemployment below 4%, the Fed is far behind the curve in raising rates.
1:37 PMT™ Mar 14,2022

36Likes 11 Retweets

Irving Swisher: a€oeConsensus is that the Fed has fallen behind the curvea€!a€D <


Skanda Amarnath (Neoliberal Sellout) @IrvingSwisher

Consensus is that the Fed is behind the curve, while the Fed itself seems to have fallen short of 
laying out what they really meant by "broad and inclusive11 with respect to maximum employment. But 
we should take stock of what has been a historic labor market recovery.

This Recovery Will Likely Not BeGenerationally Disastrous...

-Unlike Previous Recoveries

Prime-Age 25-54 Employment Rate(%) vs Pre-Recession Peak

----- 1990 Peak 2000 Peak -------------------- 2007 Peak    2020 Peak

4:46 PM a*™ Mar 15. 2022

18Likes2Retweets

Squawk Box: a€oea€~We are behind the curve. We have to movea€™, says Former Dallas Fed President 
Richard Fishera€!a€D <

SQUAWK

Squawk Box @SquawkCNBC

"We are behind the curve. We have to move," says Former Dallas Fed President Richard Fisher. "So, 
yes I'd be advocating to begin the process. Reverse the gears."

12:02 PM r™ Mar 14,2022

42Likes 15Re tweets

(never mind that Fisher made precisely zero correct calls his entire time at the Fed);

Mohamed El-Erian: a€oeThe US Federal Reserve, the worlda€™s most powerful central bank, is already 
dealing with self-inflicted damage to its inflation-fighting credibility. With that comes the 
likelihood of de-anchored inflationary expectationsa€!a€D 
<https://www.ft.com/content/db9e3706-84dd-47bc-a943-90d7dfef6abe>;


Eric Rosenbaum: a€oeFed 'behind the curve' on inflation, says former Obama economist Jason 
Furmana€!a€D 
<https://www.msn.com/en-us/money/markets/fed-behind-the-curve-on-inflation-says-former-obama-economi
st-jason-furman/ar-AAQybLT>.
a€oeSelf-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™s] inflation-fighting credibility a€ I a€D:

a€oeSelf-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™s] inflation-fighting credibility a€ I a€D:

I simply do not see this a€oeself-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™ s] inflation-fighting 
credibilitya€!a€D

Now maybe there is an argument did the people treating in the bond market are weirdos, disconnected 
from the inflation expectations embedded in the actors in the economya€’’those whose beliefs and 
expectations really matter because they drive decisions. Maybe there is an argument that we need to 
fear not bond-market vigilantes, but rather other actors and agents. Maybe it is their expectations 
of inflation have become
substantially de-anchored already. Maybe they are already taking steps that will produce a 
persistent inertial inflationary spiral.

But who are they?

What are their expectations?

How are their expectations now being translated into actions?
And how are those actions not easily reversible?

I have not seen any of those arguments made.

Blanchard writes, apropos of the 200 basis-point increase in the Federal Funds rate we expect to 
see over the next two years:

Is it reasonable to think that a 200-basis-point increase in the policy rate, so only 1/6 of the 
rate increase from 1975 to 1981, will do the job this time when the gap between core inflation and 
the policy rate is 2/3 of what it was in 1975? And that unemployment will barely budge? I wish I 
could believe ita€!

But why is the rate increase from 1975-1981 relevant? We have a target: inflation from five to ten 
years out. We have an instrument: the current level and planned forward path for the Fed Funds 
rate. We have a reading on whether we are on a glide path to the targeta€”the bond marketa€™ s 
5-year, 5-year forward expected inflation rate. That reading says we are.
Is there a better reading available as to whether we are on the glide path?

If so, what is it?

I believe that there is not. So why is the conclusion not: a€oePolicy is appropriate. The Fed is 
not behind the curveaCd? This is, to me, a very genuine mystery.
Blanchard writes:

There are good reasons, however, to think that the Phillips curve will, as it has done many times 
in the past, shift, and that the landing will be harder than Reifschneider and Wilcox conclude. 
Part of the inflation will indeed go away on its own, but the Fed may have to increase interest 
rates by more than 200 basis points to get back to its targeta€!
Indeed. The Fed may have to raise interest rates by more than 200 basis points. The Phillips Curve 
may well shift. And when there is evidence that the Fed is indeed behind the curve and not on an 
appropriate glide path, it will be time for the Fed to use forward guidance that it has changed its 
policy plans to shape expectations.

But why is today that day?

Especially since errors in not raising interest rates quickly enough are errors from which we can 
recover, but at and near the zero lower bounda€’’which we area€’’errors in raising rates too 
quickly are errors from which we cannot reasonably recover.

FIRST: Optimal Control & the Optimistic Inflation Forecasts from the Bond Market

Optimal control. You have an objective: to get inflation back into its target range over the medium 
terma€”five to ten years from nowa€”and to do so while doing the least damage to other objectives 
like employment and growth. If your best forecast is that your current policy path gets you there, 
you maintain your currency policy path. If your best forecast is that your current policy path does 
not get you there, you take
the cheapest and most effective step to move the future needle. If the bond-market 5-year 5-year 
forward inflation breakeven is not the best forecast, what is the best forecast? Indeed, given that 
inflation is an expectational phenomenon in all our standard modelsa€’’inflation will be what it is 
expected to be plus policy-change and economic-shock termsa€”it is very hard to see how the 
bond-market 5-year 5-year forward
inflation breakeven could not be the best forecast. And if our standard models are not the best 
models, what are the best models?

Thus I look at this, and I think those who claim inflation is a€oeout of controla€D are doing their 
audiences and their selves no good servicea€!
Me over at Project Syndicate:

With commentators offering increasingly dismal warnings about the inflation situation in the United 
States, one might think that the US Federal Reserve has failed completely at its primary task. But 
the bond market is telling a different story, and there is no reason to think that it is driven by 
doves.

BERKELEY a€“ As of Friday, May 6, the bond market expected US consumer price inflation to average 
2.5% between five and ten years from now. That is the rate of inflation needed to equalize returns 
on inflation-indexed and non-indexed US Treasury securities. And given that CPI inflation has been 
running higher than the rate associated with the implicit price deflator for personal consumption 
expenditures, I count
that 2.5% five-year, five-year-forward rate as hitting the US Federal Reservea€™ s 2% 
price-deflator inflation target.

What, then, would it take to get the economy back to the Feda€™ s targeted inflation rate? Since 
the five-year breakeven rate at the close of May 6 was 3.22%, the implicit expectation is that 
inflation will run a cumulative total of 3.6 percentage points above the Feda€™ s target over the 
next five years. If it does not cause the economya€™ s inflation anchor to vanish, a deviation of 
that size would be an exceedingly small
price to pay for the rapid recovery from the pandemic-induced recession. If the recovery delivers 
the structural economic transformation that we need, the higher inflation that we have experienced 
will have been well worth it.

Accordingly, it seems to me that the Fed should be taking a victory lap. It has done precisely what 
it is supposed to do, by enabling Americaa€™ s sticky-price, sticky-wage, sticky-debt economy to 
return rapidly not just to full employment but to the right version of full employment a€“ the one 
that has workers working in sectors making products for which there is real, fundamental demand a€“ 
after a shock. And it has
done so without disrupting confidence in the monetary system and its stability.

So why does the very sharp Kenneth Rogoff of Harvard University argue that a€oethings are way out 
of controla€D? If you have been diverted from your desired trajectory, and you then find yourself 
on a path where you can expect to return to it, I would think the only way to describe the 
situation is as a case of being a€oein control.a€D

Rogoff makes clear that there is a€oea lot of uncertainty,a€D and that he is a€oenot going to say I 
know exactly what needs to be done.a€D But his observation that inflation is a€oeway out of 
controla€D makes sense only to the extent that he is willing to declare the bond market and its 
implicit expectations to be wrong. Only then could the expected evolution of Fed policy lead to 
inflation significantly higher than
3.22% over the next five years, and to average inflation significantly above 2.5% 5-10 years hence.

Sure, that could happen. The economy is a surprising place, and our models and forecasts are 
ultimately just poorly informed guesses. The Fed might have to change course substantially. It 
might have to send the US economy into a substantial recession with significantly 
higher-than-expected interest rates to return inflation to its target over the five- to ten-year 
medium run.

For Rogoffa€™ s own implied forecast to come to pass, workers and bosses would have to reach wage 
bargains that assume inflation well above 3.2% for the next five years and well above 2.5% for the 
five years after that. Moreover, those inflationary wage bargains would have to be locked in place 
through contracts and institutional arrangements that would make it hard to revise them downward 
should they turn out to
have exaggerated actual inflation. For workers and bosses to do that, they would have to be pretty 
confident that bond traders are irrationally Panglossian a€“ that they are inflation doves despite 
the evidence to the contrary.

Is there any reason to think that bond traders are irrational Panglossian inflation doves? Are 
there any reasons to think that workers and bosses now believe that bond traders are irrational 
Panglossian inflation doves?
I see none.

In our modern economy, an outbreak of inflation is a peculiar expectations-driven process. It 
requires a vicious circle in which expectations of high inflation drive actions that then validate 
those expectations a€“ with higher wages leading to higher consumer prices that in turn lead to 
demands for higher wages, ad infinitum. For this to happen, the expectation of high inflation has 
to come from somewhere, and as of now, it
is not in evidence.

Yes, additional adverse supply shocks could lie in our future. The COVID-19 virus still has the 
potential to mutate and confront us with dangerous, disruptive new strains. Further disruptions 
could emanate from a widening of Russian President Vladimir Putina€™ s war on Ukraine or from an 
economically catastrophic interaction of new virus variants and Chinaa€™ s zero-COVID policy. These 
kinds of developments
could push inflation out of control.

But the fact that such risks exist does not mean we should live as if they have already come to 
pass, and thus ignore the world as it currently is.
LINK: 
<https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/bond-market-medium-term-inflation-currently-on-target-
by-j-bradford-delong-2022-05>

Brad DeLong: Why the US Federal Reservea€™ s Options Are Limited: The US Federal Reservea€™ s 
Federal Open Market Committee ought to announce a rate increase that is large enough to bring its 
policy rate to an optimal neutral-plus level. But it has an even greater interest in adhering to 
its own forward guidance, implying that it will probably maintain its incremental approach.
BERKELEY a€“ What policy will the US Federal Reserve announce after the Federal Open Market 
Committeea€™ s two-day meeting this week, and what policy should it announce?

The first question is easy: There is a high probability a€“ 75% a€“ that the Fed will follow its 
previous forward guidance and raise its target for the short-term safe nominal interest rates that 
it controls by 50 basis points, from 0.75a€“l% to 1.25a€“l .5%. By validating its previous 
statements, the Fed hopes to steer the economy in the desired direction by shaping expectations of 
future interest rates.


Because this a€cejawboninga€D strategy is effective only insofar as the Feda€™ s forward guidance 
is trusted, building and maintaining that trust is a major policy objective in itself. The Fed 
should deviate from previous forward guidance only if there is substantial evidence that the 
economy is on the wrong track. Currently there is no such evidence. Bond-market expectations of the 
underlying long-run consumer price
index inflation trend remain under 2.5% per year a€“ which is lower than in the prea€“2014 period, 
when no rational person had any reason to fear that CPI inflation would soon deviate upward from 
its target.

To be sure, the bond market expects the annual CPI inflation rate to be around 3% over the next 
five years, before falling to its longer-run 2.5% annual trend. Wouldna€™ t that higher rate 
justify additional steps to tighten monetary policy more than was previously expected? No, because 
the Fed does not merely want to hit its inflation target on a year-by-year basis. Rather, its 
primary task is to maintain confidence in the
economya€™ s nominal price-level anchor over time. As long as it is doing that, it has the 
short-run policy freedom to do whatever else is needed to maximize employment and growth.

By contrast, if the Fed were to deviate from its own forward guidance by raising interest rates 
faster than previously planned, it would reduce confidence in its word, and reduce employment and 
growth in the construction, export, and import-competing sectors. A 0.75 percentage-point increase 
carries palpable costs for little gain, implying that there is little chance that the Fed will go 
this far.

The question of what the Fed should do is more difficult. Bond-market expectations (after 
accounting for duration-risk premiums) suggest that the federal funds rate will average about 2.75% 
per year over the next two years, before falling to 2.5% per year over the next decade. In other 
words, markets expect the Fed to raise its policy rate to 3.5% over the next year, and then move on 
to a glide path back down to perhaps
2% a€“ or until something else happens to the macroeconomy. This trajectory implies three 50-bps 
interest-rate increases and four 25-bps increases over the next seven meetings.

The least preferable path is for the Fed to dribble out interest-rate increases in a manner that 
leaves people uncertain about how far it thinks it ultimately will need to go. The far better 
option would be to move immediately to a neutral plus-or-minus federal funds rate a€“ choosing 
a€ceplusa€D if demand seems too high for the Fed to maintain the credibility of the nominal 
inflation anchor in the long run, and
a€oeminusa€n if it thinks that demand is unsustainably low. Optimal control theory dictates that if 
the nose of your sailboat is not pointing where you want to go a€“ if your control is not at the 
optimal level a€“ you should turn the nose as fast as possible until you reach a bearing where you 
can no longer tell whether your next course correction will need to be to the port or to the 
starboard.

What this means for monetary policy is that the Fed should change its target each month so that 
people do not know whether the next move will be up or down. Yes, there is an argument that this 
principle of optimal control theory does not apply to monetary policy: the Fed needs to avoid 
disruptions in the money market. But such disruptions are feared precisely because the Fed never 
makes larger moves.

Moreover, the Fed must conduct monetary policy with the tools and procedures that it has. If it 
raises its policy rate by only 0a€“25 bps this week, even though it wants the federal funds rate to 
be considerably higher, it will have departed from its forward guidance. There is no argument for 
doing that. But it has not prepared the ground for a rate hike larger than 50 bps. That is 
unfortunate. Ideally, the ground would have
been prepared for an increase as high as 200 bps, because that is what it would take to get the 
federal funds rate to an optimal neutral-plus level. But, because that hasna€™t happened, and 
because departing from forward guidance is almost never worth it, there is a 75% chance that the 
Fed will increase its policy rate by 50 bps at its coming meeting a€“ and a 25% chance that it will 
go as high as 75 bps.

FIRST: No. The Federal Reserve Did Not 'a€~Drink the Kool-Aida€™ in 2021:

Let me enthusiastically endorse the second half of this from Olivier Blanchard.

It seems to me to be completely right: The way to bet for the medium- and long-run is that we are 
still in a rA©gime of secular stagnation. The demand for safe assets continues to be extremely 
high, because so much wealth is being held and will continue to be held by actors that are not 
pursuing a portfolio strategy of maximizing their real risk-adjusted expected return. (And do 
remember that Steve Cohen and I noted this
emerging trend and tried to grapple with understanding what it was going to mean back ina€! it was 
2010: The End of Influence: What Happens When Other Countries Have the Money 
<https://www.amazon.com/End-Influence-Happens-Other-Countries/dp/0465018769/>.) As long as the 
demand for assets that are a€cesafea€D in the sense that their nominal values track one of the 
global reserve currencies is so high
relative to supply as to be constantly pushing their values up to par, things are going to be 
really weird:

But that consideration seems to me to make the first half of what he says wrong. Indeed, I do not 
understand what argument could lead somebody to believe it:

Olivier Blanchard: Economists Exchange: a€~I didna€™t anticipate the role of the goods market, 
which is that in many sectors the strong demand led to supply disruptions and very large increases 
in prices. In the end, inflation came first not from where I would have expected it to come, which 
was wages, but rather from pricesa€!. I think that the increase in prices, the disruptions in 
supply chains, are very much the
result of strong demand hitting supply walls. So, I would claim that I should get a few points for 
being right in February or March of 2021. Anybody could have come to the same conclusion. Ia€™ m 
happy I dida€!. What should the Fed have done or said when the fiscal package was passed? I hope 
that Jay Powell picked up his phone and told the administration that this was going to be an issue. 
His staff drank the Kool-
Aid, and he, not being a professional economist, could not easily second-guess them. They thought 
inflation expectations would remain anchored and that the Phillips curve was flata€!.

The question is, indeed, how much of this is a blip. I use the word bump, which I think has a 
slightly longer length than a blip. But I believe we will then go back to low real interest rates. 
So, on this, Ia€™ m going to do the Larry Summers thing. I am going to say, with probability 0.9, 
wea€™ 11 return to something like that world. I think therea€™ s a tendency for markets to focus on 
the current, on the present and
extrapolate it forever. But if I look at the factors behind the decline in real interest rates 
since the mida€‘T980s, none of them seems about to turn around, except perhaps one, which is 
investment^!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/e63dab63-bf41-4c43-b827-lbl736fc518d>

The point that in a rA©gime of secular stagnation the loss function is asymmetric is decisive.

The Federal Reserve can deal with an overheated economy by raising interest rates, 
sharplya€’’sharply !a€’’decreasing demand for construction investment, for exports, and for 
domestic production of import-competing goods, and so freeing-up productive capacity to satisfy the 
other components of domestic demand, thus removing inflationary pressures. The Federal Reserve 
cannota€’’cannot!a€’’deal with a frozen
economy at its zero nominal lower bound on interest rates. Forward guidance is simply not effective 
at the required scale: modern central banks have inordinate difficulty in credibly committing to be 
a€oeirresponsiblea€n and inflationary in the future. Quantitative easing is the closest thing to 
powerless that a monetary-management tool can be. Therefore monetary policy needs to focus, unless 
doing so has the most dire
consequences, at avoiding situations in which nominal interest rates hit the zero nominal lower 
bound. And there was a definite, palpable risk in early 2021 that the economy without the early 
2021 fiscal package was going to stay at the zero nominal lower bound.

Indeed. Blanchard says that he expected a€oeinflation [to] c[o]me firsta€! froma€! wagesa€Da€”an 
overheated labor market giving workers the power to bargain for substantial real wage increases, 
which would then force businesses to raise their prices to try to recoup some of the costs. But 
that is not what happened: instead, under the pressure of plague waves, supply chains broke and 
bottlenecks emerged. Prices of
bottlenecked goods spiked, and so the world economy turned its attention to the now-crowdsourced 
problem of figuring out how to get rid of those bottlenecks and expand productive capacity.

Price increases that focus crowdsourced attention on places in the economy where there are 
constraining bottlenecks is usually seen as a good thing for a market economy to have: it is how we 
become richer. Would it be a better world if we had not had that focus of attention on relieving 
bottlenecks, and so expanding productive capacity? I really do not think so.

After all, in any reasonable societal well-being function, short-run inflation has significant 
costs only if it destroys the long-run inflation anchor. And it has not done so. So when Blanchard 
says that Powella€™ s a€oestaff drank the Kool-Aida€! thought inflation expectations would remain 
anchoreda€!a€D and so a failure to raise interest rates substantially was a policy mistake, I say: 
a€ceHuh?!a€D

Not passing the early 2021 fiscal package, or having the Federal Reserve immediately respond by 
raising interest rates a year ago, would have slowed down the recovery: a serious loss. And it 
would have produced nothing more than an infinitesimal gaina€”as long as the long-run inflation 
anchor remains. Which it does. Long-term inflation expectations have remained anchored:. Should 
they breakout above 2.5%, I will
be calling on the Federal Reserve to do more, and do it faster. But they are still on track, still 
where they should be:

WE HAVE a very nice reframing of the current mindset of the Federal Reserve by the extremely smart 
Robert Armstrong and Ethan Wu of the Financial Times:

The Federal Reserve currently anticipates that their medium-run inflation target can be restored 
with an increase in interest rates of only 250 basis points over the next three years.

The first thing to say is thata€”if the Federal Reserve is correcta€”that low a level of interest 
rates at their peak means that we will once again hit the zero lower bound on interest rates if and 
win another negative demand shock hits the economy. That means, above all, that the long-run 
inflation target is too low to maintain macroeconomic balance. The Federal Reserve should already 
have thought about this and take an
action to raise the inflation target.

The second thing to say is that the overwhelming bulk of the inflation we are right now seeing must 
be transitory if such a small increase in interest rates will be sufficient to return the economy 
to its 2 1/2% per year long-run inflation target. This is, as I say over and over again, not a 
1970s like inflationary spirala€”not melting the enginea€”but rather leaving rubber on the road as 
you rejoin the highway traffic at speed.
Rejoining the highway traffic at speed is a good thing to do. Leaving rubber on the road is a 
necessary consequence of doing that. Ita€™ s stupid to complain about it.

The third thing to say is that restoring an economy to full employment while undertaking a massive 
structural shift in an economy with sticky downward wages (and some prices) has always, in our 
experience, been accompanied by a transitory burst of inflation. You have to incentivize movement 
into the sectors that need to expand by creating price differentials vis-a-vis the contracting 
sectors. And with their wages (and
some of their prices) downward-sticky, that is a transitory burst of inflation. It is the post 
World War II demobilization and the Korean war era mobilization from the Cold War that should serve 
as are examples, if indeed there are any examples that are relevant. Those who look at the US 
post-Korean War experience and try to generalize from that are, I think, barking up the wrong tree:

Robert Armstrong & Ethan Wu: The Fed Still Thinks Inflation Is Transitory: a€~The most surprising 
thing in the Feda€™ s sedate December meeting was the newsa€! that monetary policy committee 
members project three interest rate increases next year, rather than the two that consensus had 
called for. Even this spooked no onea€!. The Fed is acknowledging short rates will need to rise 
somewhat to hedge against
persistent inflation. That is evident in the 2022 and 2023 dots. But the median forecast for rates 
in 2024 nudged up only a bit, from 1.75 percent to just over 2 percent. The longer-run dots have 
stayed the samea€!. The committee thinks, with a high level of unanimity, that a short raising 
cycle, topping out at 2.5 percent, will ensure that inflation is transitorya€!. Above target 
inflation will last about a year. Everybody, say it
together now: transitory! The Fed retired the word, but it still thinks the same waya€!. The bond 
market wholeheartedly agrees with the Feda€™ s attitudea€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/024e4598-61cf-487l-89dc-0626d71a8c96>

Ini-«,ation worries

Joshua K. Hausman a'— University of Michigan
September 2,2022

The price level in the U.S. today (July 2022) is 8.5 percent above its level in July 2021 and 15.5 
percent above its level in July 2019. 1 How worried should we be about ini-«,ation persisting? 
Until recently, the answer from i-Onancial markets and the Federal Reserve was clear: very little. 
In the words of Gabriel Chodorow-Reich, the Fed and i-Onancial markets believed in a€ceimmaculate 
disim'-sation.aCn 2
Disini‘-',ation would be immaculate, since it was expected to neither involve large increases in 
interest rates nor a signii-Ocant increase in unemployment. 3 More recently, the Fed has moved away 
from its prediction of immaculate disim-',ation, at least in its rhetoric. 4 At the Feda€™ s annual 
Jackson Hole conference on 26 August, for instance, Jay Powell noted that the labor market is 
a€oeclearly out of balancea€D
and    that reducing ini-nation will a€oebring some paina€D (Powell, 2022). As I write this on 
September 2nd, the extent to which the Feda€™ s rhetorical shift will be accompanied by a change in 
its quantitative forecasts and I or its actions is unclear. The Fed has yet to convince i-Qnancial 
markets that its rhetorical shift will translate into signii-Ocantly tighter policy.5

I shall argue the task ahead of the Fed is a dii-ifcult one, more dii-ifcult than the Feda€™ s 
recent hawkish rhetoric acknowledges. I start by arguing that ini-',ation is likely to remain high 
in
Ford School of Public Policy and Department of Economics, University of Michigan. 735 S. State St. 
#3309, Ann Arbor, MI 48109. Email: hausmanj@umich.edu.

a"—

1 FRED series CPIAUCNS.

2 See Chodorow-Reich. Twitter. 3/17/22.


3 The median forecast from the August 2022 Survey of Professional Forecasters was for an annual 
average unemployment rate of 3.9 percent in 2023 and 2024, and headline and core consumer price 
index (CPI) ini-nation (Q4 to Q4) slightly above 3 percent in 2023 and 2.5 percent in 2024 (SPF). 
These forecasts are similar to those made by Federal Reserve board members and Federal Reserve bank 
presidents in June
2022. The median forecast in the June Summary of Economic Projections was for an unemployment rate 
of 3.9 percent in the fourth quarter of 2023 and 4.1 percent in in the fourth quarter of 2024. The 
median forecast was for headline and core personal consumption expenditure (PCE) ini-i,ation (Q4 to 
Q4) equal to 2.6 and 2.7 percent in 2023 and 2.2 and 2.3 percent in 2024. Markets and the Fed also 
agreed that interest
rates would not need to rise much. On 10 August 2022, the two-year government bond yield was 3.2 
percent (FRED series DGS2) slightly below the Feda€™ s June Survey of Economic Projections which 
had a median forecast for the federal funds rate of 3.4 percent at the end of 2022,3.8 percent at 
the end of 2023, and 3.4 percent at the end of 2024.

4 For more on the Feda€™ s shift away from faith in immaculate disini-nation, see Chodorow-Reich, 
Twitter, 8/30/22.

5 Jay Powella€™ s Jackson Hole speech led to only a small increase in the yield on two-year 
government bonds: two-year government bonds yielded 3.35 percent on 8/25, the day before Powella€™ 
s speech, 3.37 percent on 8/26, and 3.42 percent on 8/29 (FRED series DGS2).

1 the short-run. High ini-nation in the short-run will then collide with political obstacles to 
tight monetary policy. As a result, I suspect that there is a good chance that neither the Fed nor 
the Federal government more broadly will be willing to implement the contractionary policy 
necessary to return ini'-nation to low levels (2 to 3 percent). The U.S. may thus face a prolonged 
period of high ini'-nation akin to that in the
1970s. I hope I am wrong, since high ini'-nation would almost certainly have unfortunate economic 
and political consequences.

1 The Short-Run

Over the three months from April to July 2022, the core consumer price index (CPI) rose at 
annualized rate of 6.8 percent. 6 From June to July, core CPI ini-',ation slowed to an annualized 
rate of 3.8 percent, but it is unclear how much to make of this one month reading. 7 Rent 
increases, supply-side, and demand-side factors all point to ini'-nation remaining high.

Start with rents. One-third of the CPI is shelter. Most of this is a€oeowners-equivalent rent,a€D 
what the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) guesses one would pay in rent for a house that one owns. 
8 The BLS measures what households on average pay in rent, not the rent one would pay if one signed 
a new rental contract today. Thus the shelter component of the CPI lags changes in rents charged in 
new contracts. If the
goal is to measure the cost of living, the BLS method is roughly correct. 9 Changes in rents in new 
contracts only ai-^ect Americansa€™ cost of living as existing rental contracts are renegotiated. 
In any case, this way of measurement means that one can expect the shelter component of the CPI to 
contribute perhaps a percentage point to CPI ini'-nation through 2023.10 The ei-^ect is large 
because rents in new contracts
have risen rapidly since early 2020; data from Zillow and Apartment List show rents on new 
contracts up about 25 percent since February 2020. 11 By contrast, the shelter component of the CPI 
rose

6 FRED series CPILFESL. The core CPI is the CPI excluding food and energy. Food and energy prices 
are volatile and often unrelated to macroeconomic conditions. Thus excluding them provides a better 
indicator of underlying ini'-nation, of what ini-«,ation is likely to be in the future.

7 In July, core PCE ini'-nation also fell (FRED series PCEPILFE). But reasons for caution in 
concluding that the July data was a signal of a durable decline in core CPI ini-nation to below 
four percent include that both trimmed mean and median ini'-nation were higher than core CPI 
ini'-nation. See Jason Furman, Twitter, 8/10/22.

8 See CPI Weights.

9 It is only roughly correct, because the BLS uses rental data from month t a"’ 6 through month t 
to calculate the shelter component of the CPI in month t. For more on BLS measurement of shelter, 
see BLS shelter.

10 Lansing, Oliveira, and Shapiro (2023) argued in February 2022 that a€oeOur panel model predicts 
that future rent ini'-nation could increase by about 3.4 percentage points (pp) in both 2022 and 
2023 relative to the prepandemic f-Ove-year average. This prediction translates into an additional 
Lipp increase in overall CPI ini'-nation for both 2022 and 2023a€D (p. 1). See also Bolhuis, 
Cramer, and Summers (2022).
11 See the i-Ogure from Jason Furman, Twitter, 8/13/22.

2 only 9 percent over this period. 12 The shelter component of the CPI will catch up to new rents 
as rental contracts roll over. Thus the large expected eiH€ect on CPI ini-«,ation going forward.

Rents alone would not be an an insurmountable barrier to achieving low (say 3 percent) ini-nation 
in the short-run. But both supply and demand factors add to the challenge. Two of the most obvious 
supply shocks are high natural gas prices resulting from Russiaa€™ s invasion of Ukraine and the 
computer chip shortage. The computer chip shortage is rei-nected in the fact that the U.S. produced 
12 percent fewer cars and
light trucks in the i-Orst seven months of 2022 than it did in the i-iDrst seven months of 2019.13

Covid itself is also an ongoing supply shock pushing up ini-i,ation. Hundreds of thousands of 
infections a day mean many workers missing work, limiting the supply of goods and services. Long 
covid cases have shrunk (and will continue to shrink) the labor force. 14 Covid-mitigation eiH€orts 
also constrain supply. Childcare centers may limit hours and thus limit hours worked by parents 
because of measures to keep
children and stai-<€ in pods. Covid-protocols (e.g. sanitizing surfaces, plexiglass barriers) may 
reduce productivity in some service industries. And Covid border restrictions (e.g. the closure of 
China) may make producing goods abroad more dii-'fcult.l5

Predicting future supply shocks, positive or negative, is impossible. But I see little reason for 
supply to be a reason for optimism about ini-nation. Both rosy and bleak scenarios are plausible. 
On balance, the existing supply shocks are likely to diminish, but new ones may occur. The war in 
Ukraine might end, lowering energy prices. And there are glimmers of hope that the computer chip 
shortage will become less acute.
16 But economic disruption from Covid could increase rather than decrease. And a lesson from the 
past two years is that new, unexpected, supply shocks can easily occur. Candidates include natural 
disasters (e.g. a hurricane in the U.S. disrupting Gulf of Mexico energy production), and the end 
of Chinaa€™ s zero covid policy. Economic recovery in China could lead to a large increase in 
global commodity

12 FRED series CUSR0000SAH1.

13 FRED series MVAAUTLTTN. For more on the impact of the chip shortage on the auto industry, see JP 
Morgan.

14 See Brookings.

15 In December 2021,1 wrote about the relationship between covid and ini-i,ation at more length in 
The Atlantic. Relative to my views then, I now think that Covid is playing less of a role in 
driving ini-nation, with high aggregate demand playing a larger role.

16 See JP Morgan.

3 prices. 17 Ini-i,ation itself may also induce supply shocks, as ini-nation lowers real wages 
leading to worker strikes.

Unfortunately, supply shocks are colliding with an overheated economy. Indeed what are reported as 
indicators of supply shocks may instead be indicators of high demand. Widely reported congestion at 
U.S. ports, for instance, might be better seen as an ei-«€ect of high demand rather than as a shock 
to supply. Real goods imports in 2021 were 8 percent above their 2019 level. Ports were congested 
because more imports
were passing through them. 18

Indeed, indicators of high demand are everywhere. Most obviously, the labor market is 
extraordinarily tight, with the unemployment rate at 3.7 percent. 19 The ratio of job openings to 
the number of unemployed implies that the labor market is even tighter than the unemployment rate 
suggests (Domash and Summers, 2022). Given i-Ormst€™ dii-ifculty hiring, it is unsurprising that 
over the 12 months from June 2021-
June 2022, private sector wages and salaries rose 5.7 percent. This was the most rapid 12-month 
increase since 1982. 20 In the decade from the end of 2009 through 2019, annual private sector wage 
and salary growth averaged 2.3 percent. Thus returning to pre-Covid ini-nation rates is likely to 
require a signii'-Ocant decrease in nominal wage growth. This matches the conclusion of Jason 
Furman, who argues that the
employment cost data are consistent with a 4 percent ini-i,ation rate. 21 Unfortunately, as Domash 
and Summers (2022) convincingly argue, both theory and empirical evidence suggest that nominal wage 
growth is unlikely to decrease without a substantial weakening of the labor market and a recession.

Continued shortages of goods and services ranging from childcare to new cars rei-i,ect a 
combination of high demand and constricted supply. It is dii—•/cult to i-Ond childcare because 
childcare centers are struggling to hire the workers they need. 22 It is dii-ijcult to buy a new 
car because car computer chips are in short supply. Shortages are evidence of high demand relative 
to supply, but they may also forecast future
ini-«,ation. Firms are unlikely to persistently fail

17 On the ei-«€ect of demand in China on commodity prices, see Matthew Klein, Financial Times, 
8/16/22. 18 NIPA table 1.1.6. Using data on port volumes, Jason Furman has also made this point 
about port congestion being an indicator of high demand. See Furman, Twitter, 10/15/21. The 
ini->,uence of demand on port congestion, of course, does not rule out some additional role for 
supply factors.
19 This is the unemployment rate in August 2022 (FRED series UNRATE) 20 Employment cost index, 
series ID CIU2020000000000I and ECU20002I.

21 Furman, Twitter, 7/29/22. Jason Furman argues that the more recent average hourly earnings data 
are also consistent with 4 percent ini-i,ation (Furman, Twitter, 9/2/2022).

22 See, e.g., U.S. News & World Report.

4 to meet demand without raising prices. A car manufacturer that cannot provide its customers with 
the car they want at the existing price will eventually raise that price. Some empirical evidence 
supports this view. Lamont (1997) i-Onds that in the 1970s, newspaper mentions of shortages 
forecast ini-nation.
2 The Policy Response

Ini-«,ationa€™ s persistence beyond 2023 will depend both on lucka€’’unforeseen shocks to supply 
and demanda€”and policy. My guess is that there a good chance, call it 50 percent, that both 
monetary and i-<nscal policy are expansionary enough that ini-nation remains above three percent 
for several years. In this prediction, I i-Ond myself out of step with the Fed, i-Onancial markets, 
and many economists.

Jay Powell and other FOMC members have said clearly that they will take whatever actions are 
necessary to lower ini'-nation. At the Feda€™ s annual Jackson Hole conference, Jay Powell 
concluded his speech by saying: a€oeWe are taking forceful and rapid steps to moderate demand so 
that it comes into better alignment with supply, and to keep ini-nation expectations anchored. We 
will keep at it until we are
coni-Odent the job is donea€D (Powell, 2022). Financial markets and professional forecasters 
believe these statements. Thus long-run ini->,ation expectations from professional forecasters and 
from i-Onancial markets are near two percent. In the August 2022 Survey of Professional 
Forecasters, forecasters expect ini-nation over the next decade to average 2.8 percent (CPI) or 
2.45 percent (PCE). 23 On 1 September
2022, expected ini-nation over the next ten years from ini-nation-linked bonds (TIPS) was 2.45 
percent. 24 Given higher expected ini-nation in the near term, these forecasts imply that 
ini-nation will be even lower in the long run. The TIPS forecast for 5-year ini-',ation, 5 years 
ahead is 2.38 percent.25

I do not share the coni-Odence of professional forecasters and markets. Let me suggest three 
reasons for doubt. First, the 1970s provide reason to doubt that professional forecasters are good 
at forecasting ini-',ation when the economy switches from a low to a high ini-nation regime. During 
the entire decade of the 1970s, actual ini-nation in every year was the same or higher than that 
forecast in the Survey of Professional
Forecasters (DeLong (1997), p. 266-267). The 1970s look more consistent with high actual 
ini'-nation leading to high expected ini-nation, rather

23 See SPF.

24 FRED series T10YIE. 25 FRED series T5YIFR.

5 than low expected ini'-nation leading to low actual ini'-nation.

A second reason for doubt is that the Feda€™ s actions thus far do not inspire coni'-Odence. July 
was the 14th consecutive month in which 12-month core CPI ini-i,ation was above 4 percent and the 
10th consecutive month in which core PCE ini-’,ation was above 4 percent. 26 Yet over this time, 
the Fed has done relatively little to tighten policy. It increased the nominal federal funds rate 
by 2.25 percentage points, from a
range of 0-0.25 percent to a range of 2.25-2.5 percent. The increase in the real interest rate was 
less, however, since ini-i,ation expectations rose. 27 Consistent with the view that the Fed did 
little to tighten policy, the unemployment rate fell 1.5 percentage points between August 2021 and 
August 2022.28

The 1970s are often taken as an example of a decade in which the Fed responded insui'-'Jciently to 
ini-«,ation. But the Fed responded far more in the 1970s than it did in 2021-22. Figure 1 compares 
the path of 12-month core CPI ini-nation and the Federal Funds rate around three dates when core 
ini'-nation rose above four percent: January 1968, October 1973, and June 2021. For comparison, the 
i-iDgure also shows the
path of core ini-i,ation and the federal funds rate around August 1979, when Paul Volcker become 
Fed chair. 2021 stands out relative to the 1970s for both the low level of nominal rates relative 
to ini-i,ation and for the small change in nominal rates after the increase in ini'-nation. That 
the current Fed has done so little in comparison to its actions in 1968 and 1973-74 or to Paul 
Volckera€™ s actions in 1979 may cast doubt
on whether the Fed todav will follow through on its hawkish rhetoric.


Such doubts are increased by the fact that the Fed will almost certainly soon face strong political 
pressure to stop tightening. Indeed, such pressure has already begun. Senator Elizabeth Warren told 
Jay Powell at a hearing on June 22,2022:

[T]he reason Ia€™ m so concerned about this is rate increases make it more likely that companies 
will i-Cre people and slash hours to shrink wage costs. Rate increases also make it more expensive 
for families to do things like borrow money for a house and so far this year, the cost of a 
mortgage has already doubled.

26 FRED series CPILFENS and PCEPILFE.

27 Expected ini-nation over the next year from the Michigan Survey of Consumers increased from 4.7 
percent in July 2021 to 5.2 percent in July 2022 (FRED series MICH). In the August 2021 Survey of 
Professional Forecasters, the expected change in the headline CPI between the fourth quarter of 
2021 and the fourth quarter of 2022 was 2.4 percent (SPF Q3 2021); in August 2022, the expected 
change in the headline
CPI between the fourth quarter of 2022 and the fourth quarter of 2023 was 3.2 percent (SPF Q3 
2022).

28 FRED series UNRATE.

6 Core CPI inflation (12-mth % change)
2021m7

Fed Funds rate
2021ml
2022ml
2022m7

Month
0

2

4

6

Percent 8 10

12

14

16

18

(a) 2021
1973m4

1973ml0

1974m4

1974ml0

Month
0

2

4

6

Percent 8 10

12

14

16

18

(c) 1973
1967m7

1968ml
1968m7

1969ml
Month
0

2

4

6

Percent 8 10

12

14


16

18

(b) 1968

1979ml
1979m7

1980ml
1980m7

Month
0

2

4

6

Percent 8 10

12

14

16

18

(d) 1979

Figure 1 a€“ Notes: The i-Ogures compares the path of core ini-nation (the 12-month percent change) 
and the ei^ective federal funds rate around three dates (indicated by vertical lines) when core 
ini-nation rose above four percent: June 2021, January 1968, and October 1973. For comparison, the 
i-Ogure also shows the path of core ini->,ation and the federal funds rate around the month when 
Paul Volcker become Fed
chair, August 1979. Sources: Core CPI - FRED series CPILFENS; Federal funds rate - FRED series 
FEDFUNDS.

7 Inf-nation is like an illness. And the medicine needs to be tailored to the specii-Oc problem. 
Otherwise, you could make things a lot worse.

And right now, the Fed has no control over the main drivers of rising prices, but the Fed can slow 
demand by getting a lot of people i-iDred and making families poorer. And while President Biden is 
working to increase energy supplies and straighten out supply chain kinks and break up the 
monopolies and bring down prices, you could actually tip this economy into a recession.
So, I just want to say, you know whata€™ s worse than high ini-nation and low unemployment? Ita€™ s 
high ini-i,ation and a recession with millions of people out of work. And I hope youa€™ 11 
reconsider that before you drive this economy oi-'€ a clii-<€ .29

I quote this at length, since it captures the sort of criticism that the Fed will almost certainly 
receive more of in the near future. Suppose it is a year from now, August 2023, and ini-nation is 
i-Ove or six percent, the unemployment rate i-Ove percent and rising, mortgage rates are seven 
percent, and housing and stock prices down I-Ove to ten percent. In this plausible situation, the 
Fed will face enormous pressure to lower
interest rates. That the Biden administration currently supports the Feda€™ s tightening ei-^orts 
tells one little about what political support will look like when or if the unemployment rate is 
high and rising and when or if Fed actions look likely to endanger the Democratsa€™ chance of 
holding the White House in 2024.

More broadly, the current U.S. political environment may be inconsistent with low ini-i,ation. High 
ini-nation in the 1970s ended because Jimmy Carter was willing to risk his political career to end 
it; appointing Paul Volcker as Fed chair led both to the end of the Great Ini-nation and 
contributed to Carter losing the 1980 election. It is unclear that either the Republicans or 
Democrats would be willing to make such a
political sacrii-Oce today. 30 If winning elections is (perhaps correctly) regarded as 
existentially important, then committing to tight monetary policy will be dii-ijcult.

Of particular concern is the Republican party and specii-Ocally Donald Trumpa€™ s willingness to

29 Senataor Warren Press Release, 6/22/22.

30 How much Jimmy Carter understood of what Paul Volcker would do to the economy and his election 
chances is unclear (DeLong (2022), p. 440). But regardless of whether the appointment of Paul 
Volcker was a deliberate ei-i€ort to tighten policy, his appointment came amidst an environment of 
administration support for tighter monetary policy (DeLong (1997), p. 274). For the more on the 
current politics of Fed
tightening, see Timiraos, WSJ, 8/26/22.

8 pressure the Fed for looser policy. Any unconditional forecast of ini-«,ation must put 
substantial weight on the path of ini-nation in a second Trump administration. (On 29 August 2022, 
the online betting market Predictlt had Trump with a 24 percent chance of winning the 2024 
election.) Against a background of an unemployment rate below 4 percent and a recent cut in the 
Federal Funds rate, Donald Trump tweeted on
23 August 2019 a€oeMy only question is, who is our bigger enemy, Jay Powel [sic] or Chairman Xi.a€D 
31 This was one of numerous tweets from Donald Trump criticizing the Fed. Given the volume of 
criticism in 2019, when unemployment was historically low, it is likely that a second Trump 
administration would strongly oppose tight Fed policy. The Fed does have substantial independence, 
of course, but this
independence is not written in the constitution; a congressional majority has complete control over 
the Fed. Thus the Feda€™ s ability to resist strong political pressure is limited.

My doubts about future Fed policy are likely to meet with skepticism from economists. I suspect 
there is more agreement with my prediction that a substantial i-Oscal contraction is unlikely. 
Unknowns suggest betting on larger rather than smaller future dei-Ocits. Ini-«,ation itself may 
lead to more expansionary i-Oscal policy, as voters demand tax cuts and I or transfer payments to 
oi'-i€set higher prices. And while the
debate surrounding what became the Ini-i,ation Reduction Act suggests that the Democratic party is 
unlikely to entirely ignore budget dei-Ocits in making policy, it hard to i-Ond evidence that a 
Republican administration would have any similar concern about the dei-Ocit. The worry is that 
budget dei-’□cits will both raise aggregate demand directly through Keynesian mechanisms and 
constrain monetary policy.

Monetary policy could be constrained, since high real interest rates would make i-Onancing U.S. 
government debt expensive. The U.S. government in 1980 had little debt, so in this respect 
controlling ini-nation now could be more dii-'fcult than it was for Volcker.32
3 Conclusion

I have made the case for pessimism about U.S. ini-i,ation. In the short-run, the feeding through of 
new rents to existing renters, and supply and demand factors will likely keep ini'-nation high. In 
the longer-run, there is a substantial probability that political pressure will prevent

31 See screenshot here: CNBC.

32 See Hanno Lustig, Twitter, 4/2/22. A further dii-ifculty is that relative to 1980, much more of 
U.S. debt is now held abroad; thus high real interest rates would mean large real payments to 
foreign bondholders. This could cause political dii-'fculties. See Chodorow-Reich, Twitter,4/2/22.
9 the Fed from doing what is necessary to lower ini-nation.

Persistent high ini-nation could be a disaster for the U.S. As an economic problem, the costs of 
moderate ini-nation may be small. A year with a ten percent ini-nation rate is much better than a 
year with a ten percent unemployment rate. The higher ini-nation becomes, however, the larger a 
recession will need to be in order to lower ini-nation. Thus the costs of unemployment become costs 
of ini-nation. Ini-i,ation can also
have unfortunate political ei-^ects. Voters hate ini-«,ation, and high ini-nation would contribute 
to dysfunctional U.S. politics.

I would like to be wrong in my worries about ini-nation. I hope Brad DeLong convinces me that I am.
References

Bolhuis, Marijn A., Judd N. L. Cramer, and Lawrence H. Summers, a€oeThe Coming Rise in Residential 
Ini-nation,a€D 2022. NBER Working Paper 29795.

DeLong, J. Bradford, a€oeAmericaa€™ s Peacetime Ini-«,ation: The 1970s,a€D in Christina D. Romer 
and David H. Romer, eds., Reducing Ini-nation: Motivation and Strategy, 1997, pp. 247a€“280.

, Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century, Basic Books, 2022.

Domash, Alex and Lawrence H. Summers, a€oeA Labor Market View on the Risks of a U.S. Hard 
Landing,a€D 2022. NBER Working Paper 29910.

Lamont, Owen, a€oeDo "Shortages" Cause Ini-nation?,a€D in Christina D. Romer and David H. Romer, 
eds., Reducing Ini-«,ation: Motivation and Strategy, 1997, pp. 281a€“306.
Lansing, Kevin J., Luiz E. Oliveira, and Adam Hale Shapiro, a€oeWill Rising Rents Push Up Future 
Ini-',ation?,a€n FRBSF Economic Letter, 2023,2022-03.

Powell, Jerome H., a€oeMonetary Policy and Price Stability,a€D 2022. Remarks at the 2022 Jackson 
Hole Economic Policy Symposium, 8/26/2022.


Top economist Brad DeLong speaks on student debt, NIMBYism, inflation and his new book on our 
economy slouching towards dystopia
BYNICK LICHTENBERG

September 5,2022 at 4:00 AM PDT
Brad DeLong

UC Berkeley economist Brad DeLong

GENEVIEVE SCHIFFRAR; COURTESY OF BRAD DELONG

Ita€™ s the best of (economic) times and the worst of (economic) times.

Thata€™ s the argument in Slouching Toward Utopia, out Tuesday by J. Bradford DeLong, the UC 
Berkeley economist, former Clinton White House official, and old-school member of the economic 
blogosphere (dating all the way back to the late 1990s.)

Forget about the a€oelong 19th century,a€D DeLong argues. Thata€™ s the theory made famous by Eric 
Hobsbawm, who The New Yorker profiled in 2019 as a€oethe communist who explained history.a€D The 
pivotal period in world history occurred from the American and French Revolutions of the late 1700s 
to the first World War in 1914, Hobsbawm argued.

To hear DeLong tell it, Hobsbawm just didna€™ t live long enough to see himself proven wrong, as 
DeLonga€™ s a€oelong 20th centurya€D from 1870 to 2010 was a period of unsurpassed economic growth. 
The problem, DeLong says, is thata€™ s been over now for more than a decade and the global economy 
might never recapture its momentum. Humans got closer to utopia than ever before, but wea€™ ve been
slouching toward it for too long.

He sat down with Fortune ahead of his booka€™ s release to talk about whether the economya€™ s best 
days are behind us, or if we are doomed to live in a dystopia full of killer robots flying through 
the air, scorching summer temperatures wrought by climate change, and, to paraphrase Allen Ginsberg 
(DeLong loves economic paraphrases, as the title of his book indicates), the best technical minds 
of the world turned to
selling ads by figuring out how to scare people.

But he says he still believes that the United States is the a€cefurnace where the future is being 
forged.a€D
The following interview has been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.

Congratulations on your book and thank you for taking the time after walking your dog.

Yes, we got two dogs during the plague year. Ita€™ s very good to have the daily exercise of 
dog-walking: Ita€™ s an effective way of gaining and outsourcing additional willpower.
Ia€™ ve been a reader of yours for a long time, and you have always had this unique style among 
economic writers.

I personally really love this book, because I have long been a big fan of Eric Hobsbawm and his 
concept of the a€oelong 19th century.a€D When did you first read him?

I first came across Hobsbawm when [former Harvard economics professor] David Landes made me read 
them back when I was an undergraduate, around 1980 or so. Landes would say, a€oel dona€™ t really 
recommend left-wing students read Hobsbawm, because hea€™ s too convincing, but youa€™re enough of 
a right winger that it will annoy you, but also teach you and youa€™re really the kind of person who
ought to read this.a€D

Well, thinking about the long 19th century, you have democracy and industry starting off together 
in the middle of the 1700s, and then the globalized industrial revolution with steam, the 
industrial economy changing to coal and oil, and empire. That then takes you up to 1914 and the 
catastrophe that starts there. The arc of those three books is, I think, quite wonderful and 
extremely successful. Especially the first two.
Your a€oelong 20th centurya€D runs from 1870 to 2010, when the world had a burst of economic 
progress that you say is now over, thus proving Hobsbawm wrong. So is it really over?

In 1870, the last institutions fall into place to produce technology that doubles every generation, 
thus enabling Schumpeterian creative destruction in which the next generation is twice as rich, but 
also a huge chunk of industries, occupations and patterns of life vanish in order to make that 
happen, and that makes a lot of people angry. Whatever running code of societal organization you 
crafted, the forces of production as
they existed at any moment after 1870, those no longer work 30 or 40 years later, and you have to 
build new and different patterns and institutions on the fly. And thata€™ s a very hard task, and 
ita€™ s now very hard.

As for when it ends, you could say between 2001 and 2003, when the George W. Bush administration 
says the United States is no longer the benevolent, hegemonic, technological pioneer, wea€™re just 
another country and wea€™re going to follow our own interests.
You could say 2006, when my friend John Fernald says it becomes clear that information technology 
is actually not going to be as big a deal for most people as electrification or the internal 
combustion engine or modern materials.

You could say ita€™ s 2007, when the idea that you actually needed to manage finance because it 
wasna€™ t trustworthy on its own turned out to be nonexistent.

Or you could say 2010, at a time when standard Keynesian theory would say the private sector has 
sat down on spending and the government sector needs to stand up, and even Barack Obama is saying 
no, the government must tighten its belt, and if the Democratic Congress actually passes any 
spending bills, Ia€™ m going to veto them.
You could also say ita€™ s 2016 with the election of Donald Trump. And if I had to write it over 
again, I would say therea€™ s a case for saying ita€™ s 2022, with the return of major power war 
[between Russia and Ukraine].

But sometime between 2002 and 2020 the whole complex of things that gave us the long 20th 
centurya€’’this technologically progressive, globalized United States, the furnace where the future 
was being forgeda€”dissolves piece by piece, and it leaves us in a new world in which China and 
India are likely superpowers and in which dealing with global warming is likely to become all 
important.

You know, you go around the world and ask about Xi Jinping and hear back that he may have some 
rough edges, but at least hea€™ s been tested as a competent administrator and someone who listens 
to advice, as opposed to the ethnonationalist politicians being thrown up by the industrial 
democracies right nowa€”Trump was no prize and Boris Johnson was no prize. Thata€™ s a very strange 
configuration of things.
And people have not quite wrapped their minds around this new world yet.

Another part of this new configuration is the high inflation wea€™ ve been experiencing. What are 
people not wrapping their minds around with this highest inflation in 40 years?
On inflation, my view was that we were going to have some coming out of the plague. And it was 
going to be by and large, a good thing.

Let me explain: The plague has given us maybe 15 years of metaverse-style technological development 
in just over two years. And the economy has a new configuration: Fewer in-person workers in retail 
establishments, a lot more delivery orders, substantially more goods production, and also 
substantially more information entertainment and production as well. That requires that we shift a 
lot of people into new jobs, and
you cana€™ t cut anyonea€™ s wages nominally without making them extremely angry at you, which 
means that in the expanding sectors, you have to raise wages in order to pull people into what are 
the growth sectors of the post-plague economy, and thata€™ s going to give us a bunch of inflation.

Plus, when you reopen the economy, you discover all the supply-chain bottlenecks, and you need the 
prices of things where there are bottlenecks to go up in order to get people focused on how do we 
produce more of this stuff or how do we use less of it?

Your book is called Slouching Towards Utopia because you describe how we made so much progress in 
the 20th century and then stalled out, but now that we have gone through this accelerated metaverse 
evolution, do you think in a way wea€™ ve sprinted towards a new kind of economic utopia, coming 
out of the plague?
I wrote in my book that I saw the best technical minds of the world turned to selling ads by 
figuring out how to scare people, so their eyeballs stayed glued to the screen.

And they figured out how we can use the screen youa€™re looking at to hack your brain so that you 
keep watching so we can sell you more ads.
So do you see this as a dystopia that we have emerged into?

It certainly has dystopian elements. Technological progress always has dystopian elements implicit 
in it, of which large-scale thermonuclear war is only one, and now we are also cooking the 
planeta€”how hot is it in Beijing today? Is reaching 120 degrees or so a normal climate kind of 
thing? We have gotten extremely good at advancing our technology but extremely poor at using it to 
build a proper socioeconomic
political system that makes us happy.

We also shouldna€™ t underestimate the fact that while three-quarters of the world went to bed 
seriously hungry in 1870, now ita€™ s only about one-fifteenth of the world that does so today. 
Ita€™ s a huge accomplishment when one of your chief mental concerns is where am I going to get my 
food tomorrow, rather than which of the 93 things I might want tomorrow should I pick up at the 
supermarket?
But revealed political preferences are that this does not make people happy or satisfied or 
thinking that things are going well.

So is it possible to recapture our momentum with economic progress, or is that asking the wrong 
question? It sounds like we still have a lot of progress, but youa€™re describing a crisis of 
values about how that technological progress is used.
Well, we certainly could recover our momentum.

The nice thing about invention is that two heads are not twice as good as one, but two heads are 
far better than that. And now the potential of the scientists and engineers that we could deploy, 
if we really wanted to, is absolutely enormous. Yes, the low-hanging fruit has been picked and 
ita€™ s getting harder and harder to push the technological frontier forward. But our resources are 
still immense and they still scale.

There are people, my colleague and neighbor Fred Block among them, who think that one of the big 
things my book misses is the neoliberal turn in the United States that pushed corporations toward 
declaring maximum short-term profits, which means all the Xerox Parcs and the IBM Labs and the Bell 
Labs were essentially dismantled, and business started saying, instead of doing research, just 
figure out how to make
what wea€™re making 1% cheaper next year. And the loss of those semi-public industrial research lab 
organizationsa€”which because they were research-oriented were for the benefit of all, but were 
inside corporations and actually focused on technologies that might worka€”has been a huge minus 
and a major cause of the slowing down of technological progress.

Another huge cause of the slowdown is our failure to keep expanding education. When my father went 
to Harvard in 1955, it admitted 900 men and 300 women. Now it has 700 men and 900 women. Thata€™ s 
only gone up from 1,200 to 1,600 in total over 65 years, not a huge increase in capacity in a 
country thata€™ s much more than doubled in size and in a world in which maybe five times more 
people are qualified


selling ads by figuring out how to scare people.

But he says he still believes that the United States is the a€cefurnace where the future is being 
forged.a€D
The following interview has been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.

Congratulations on your book and thank you for taking the time after walking your dog.

Yes, we got two dogs during the plague year. Ita€™ s very good to have the daily exercise of 
dog-walking: Ita€™ s an effective way of gaining and outsourcing additional willpower.
Ia€™ ve been a reader of yours for a long time, and you have always had this unique style among 
economic writers.

I personally really love this book, because I have long been a big fan of Eric Hobsbawm and his 
concept of the a€oelong 19th century.a€D When did you first read him?

I first came across Hobsbawm when [former Harvard economics professor] David Landes made me read 
them back when I was an undergraduate, around 1980 or so. Landes would say, a€oel dona€™ t really 
recommend left-wing students read Hobsbawm, because hea€™ s too convincing, but youa€™re enough of 
a right winger that it will annoy you, but also teach you and youa€™re really the kind of person who
ought to read this.a€D

Well, thinking about the long 19th century, you have democracy and industry starting off together 
in the middle of the 1700s, and then the globalized industrial revolution with steam, the 
industrial economy changing to coal and oil, and empire. That then takes you up to 1914 and the 
catastrophe that starts there. The arc of those three books is, I think, quite wonderful and 
extremely successful. Especially the first two.
Your a€oelong 20th centurya€D runs from 1870 to 2010, when the world had a burst of economic 
progress that you say is now over, thus proving Hobsbawm wrong. So is it really over?

In 1870, the last institutions fall into place to produce technology that doubles every generation, 
thus enabling Schumpeterian creative destruction in which the next generation is twice as rich, but 
also a huge chunk of industries, occupations and patterns of life vanish in order to make that 
happen, and that makes a lot of people angry. Whatever running code of societal organization you 
crafted, the forces of production as
they existed at any moment after 1870, those no longer work 30 or 40 years later, and you have to 
build new and different patterns and institutions on the fly. And thata€™ s a very hard task, and 
ita€™ s now very hard.

As for when it ends, you could say between 2001 and 2003, when the George W. Bush administration 
says the United States is no longer the benevolent, hegemonic, technological pioneer, wea€™re just 
another country and wea€™re going to follow our own interests.
You could say 2006, when my friend John Fernald says it becomes clear that information technology 
is actually not going to be as big a deal for most people as electrification or the internal 
combustion engine or modern materials.

You could say ita€™ s 2007, when the idea that you actually needed to manage finance because it 
wasna€™ t trustworthy on its own turned out to be nonexistent.

Or you could say 2010, at a time when standard Keynesian theory would say the private sector has 
sat down on spending and the government sector needs to stand up, and even Barack Obama is saying 
no, the government must tighten its belt, and if the Democratic Congress actually passes any 
spending bills, Ia€™ m going to veto them.
You could also say ita€™ s 2016 with the election of Donald Trump. And if I had to write it over 
again, I would say therea€™ s a case for saying ita€™ s 2022, with the return of major power war 
[between Russia and Ukraine].

But sometime between 2002 and 2020 the whole complex of things that gave us the long 20th 
centurya€’’this technologically progressive, globalized United States, the furnace where the future 
was being forgeda€”dissolves piece by piece, and it leaves us in a new world in which China and 
India are likely superpowers and in which dealing with global warming is likely to become all 
important.

You know, you go around the world and ask about Xi Jinping and hear back that he may have some 
rough edges, but at least hea€™ s been tested as a competent administrator and someone who listens 
to advice, as opposed to the ethnonationalist politicians being thrown up by the industrial 
democracies right nowa€”Trump was no prize and Boris Johnson was no prize. Thata€™ s a very strange 
configuration of things.
And people have not quite wrapped their minds around this new world yet.

Another part of this new configuration is the high inflation wea€™ ve been experiencing. What are 
people not wrapping their minds around with this highest inflation in 40 years?
On inflation, my view was that we were going to have some coming out of the plague. And it was 
going to be by and large, a good thing.

Let me explain: The plague has given us maybe 15 years of metaverse-style technological development 
in just over two years. And the economy has a new configuration: Fewer in-person workers in retail 
establishments, a lot more delivery orders, substantially more goods production, and also 
substantially more information entertainment and production as well. That requires that we shift a 
lot of people into new jobs, and
you cana€™ t cut anyonea€™ s wages nominally without making them extremely angry at you, which 
means that in the expanding sectors, you have to raise wages in order to pull people into what are 
the growth sectors of the post-plague economy, and thata€™ s going to give us a bunch of inflation.

Plus, when you reopen the economy, you discover all the supply-chain bottlenecks, and you need the 
prices of things where there are bottlenecks to go up in order to get people focused on how do we 
produce more of this stuff or how do we use less of it?

Your book is called Slouching Towards Utopia because you describe how we made so much progress in 
the 20th century and then stalled out, but now that we have gone through this accelerated metaverse 
evolution, do you think in a way wea€™ ve sprinted towards a new kind of economic utopia, coming 
out of the plague?
I wrote in my book that I saw the best technical minds of the world turned to selling ads by 
figuring out how to scare people, so their eyeballs stayed glued to the screen.

And they figured out how we can use the screen youa€™re looking at to hack your brain so that you 
keep watching so we can sell you more ads.
So do you see this as a dystopia that we have emerged into?

It certainly has dystopian elements. Technological progress always has dystopian elements implicit 
in it, of which large-scale thermonuclear war is only one, and now we are also cooking the 
planeta€”how hot is it in Beijing today? Is reaching 120 degrees or so a normal climate kind of 
thing? We have gotten extremely good at advancing our technology but extremely poor at using it to 
build a proper socioeconomic
political system that makes us happy.

We also shouldna€™ t underestimate the fact that while three-quarters of the world went to bed 
seriously hungry in 1870, now ita€™ s only about one-fifteenth of the world that does so today. 
Ita€™ s a huge accomplishment when one of your chief mental concerns is where am I going to get my 
food tomorrow, rather than which of the 93 things I might want tomorrow should I pick up at the 
supermarket?
But revealed political preferences are that this does not make people happy or satisfied or 
thinking that things are going well.

So is it possible to recapture our momentum with economic progress, or is that asking the wrong 
question? It sounds like we still have a lot of progress, but youa€™re describing a crisis of 
values about how that technological progress is used.
Well, we certainly could recover our momentum.

The nice thing about invention is that two heads are not twice as good as one, but two heads are 
far better than that. And now the potential of the scientists and engineers that we could deploy, 
if we really wanted to, is absolutely enormous. Yes, the low-hanging fruit has been picked and 
ita€™ s getting harder and harder to push the technological frontier forward. But our resources are 
still immense and they still scale.

There are people, my colleague and neighbor Fred Block among them, who think that one of the big 
things my book misses is the neoliberal turn in the United States that pushed corporations toward 
declaring maximum short-term profits, which means all the Xerox Parcs and the IBM Labs and the Bell 
Labs were essentially dismantled, and business started saying, instead of doing research, just 
figure out how to make
what wea€™re making 1% cheaper next year. And the loss of those semi-public industrial research lab 
organizationsa€”which because they were research-oriented were for the benefit of all, but were 
inside corporations and actually focused on technologies that might worka€”has been a huge minus 
and a major cause of the slowing down of technological progress.

Another huge cause of the slowdown is our failure to keep expanding education. When my father went 
to Harvard in 1955, it admitted 900 men and 300 women. Now it has 700 men and 900 women. Thata€™ s 
only gone up from 1,200 to 1,600 in total over 65 years, not a huge increase in capacity in a 
country thata€™ s much more than doubled in size and in a world in which maybe five times more 
people are qualified
for an Ivy League education. That failure to scale is really quite remarkable and amazing.

The problems with education at the private level are very much the NIMBYism, that is the not 
expanding capacity. At the public school level, ita€™ s simply that we seem to be pretty good at 
what we do at teaching people things and preparing them for lives in which they appear to be very 
productive, but we have no idea how we do it. We really have zero idea about what parts of the 
educational process are useful. What
are we doing that is simply a medieval ritual that was a response a long time ago to bad 
educational technology, and what things actually encourage people to think and talk and acquire 
skills so they can then better understand and deal with the world? American education is still an 
attractive thing to people from all over the world, but it needs to be reformed and we have very 
little idea of how to reform it. So ita€™ s a big
puzzle.

And understanding NIMBYism, the a€oenot in my backyarda€D mentality, comes from how the creative 
destruction process indeed destroys a lot of things. But we five in a market economy where the only 
rights that really matter are property rights. And if you have property rights, then you tend to 
think you should have a voice about the surrounding built and natural environment not being changed 
without your buy-in,
or at least without you getting bought off in some way.

Huge numbers of people are tremendously offended at the Biden student loan relief plan, but whoever 
we are, we have all had more than $20,000 of good or bad luck affect our lifetime income paths. 
There are a lot of people who went to school, and then with the totally crappy labor market of the 
past 15 years, it really didna€™ t pay off. So if your principal reaction is that those people are 
getting something they
dona€™t deserve, that shows a very powerful thing about human psychology.

Also, many people do not like creative destruction at all. The idea that your job or your industry, 
the fabric of your life, might blow away if some rootless Cosmopolis decides the business you work 
for no longer satisfies a maximum profitability test gets people very angry. These things have been 
animating progress and its effect on politics ever since the days of William Jennings Bryan.
Well thata€™ s quite a note to end on, a reminder that these are not new concerns even if they feel 
that way, and that creative destruction versus NIMBYism is a major issue to resolve.

What I hope is that a lot of younger people read my book. When you get to my generation, you look 
around and ita€™ s by and large a retrospective on what went wrong while we were supposedly in 
control. And Ia€™ d like the younger generation to have a stronger sense of how this kind of 
conflict between property rights and other rights on the one hand, in an environment of repeated 
creative destruction, on the other
hand, has greatly hobbled our ability to actually use our huge technological powers to build a kind 
of human world as opposed to a world in which Beijinga€™ s temperature reaches 120 degrees 
Fahrenheit and in which right now, killer robots are flying in the skies above Ukraine looking for 
people to kill.

You know, back when I was 12 or 13, there was a difference between the utopian science fiction 
novels with amazing technological competence and virtual reality and so forth, and the dystopian 
science fiction novels in which you had excessive heat from the greenhouse effect and killer 
robots, and yet it turns out in real life those have become something like the same thing. Yeah. We 
have managed to purchase both.
Wow, well that really sums it up. Ijust want to say I read your book and I devoured it. I really 
loved it.

Thank you. Oh, thata€™ s excellent. Thata€™ s excellent. I remember [UC Berkeley colleague and 
former Obama advisor] Christina Romer saying, a€oeWow, this is actually readable,a€D And the more 
people who say that, the happier I am.


selling ads by figuring out how to scare people.

But he says he still believes that the United States is the a€cefurnace where the future is being 
forged.a€D
The following interview has been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.

Congratulations on your book and thank you for taking the time after walking your dog.

Yes, we got two dogs during the plague year. Ita€™ s very good to have the daily exercise of 
dog-walking: Ita€™ s an effective way of gaining and outsourcing additional willpower.
Ia€™ ve been a reader of yours for a long time, and you have always had this unique style among 
economic writers.

I personally really love this book, because I have long been a big fan of Eric Hobsbawm and his 
concept of the a€oelong 19th century.a€D When did you first read him?

I first came across Hobsbawm when [former Harvard economics professor] David Landes made me read 
them back when I was an undergraduate, around 1980 or so. Landes would say, a€oel dona€™ t really 
recommend left-wing students read Hobsbawm, because hea€™ s too convincing, but youa€™re enough of 
a right winger that it will annoy you, but also teach you and youa€™re really the kind of person who
ought to read this.a€D

Well, thinking about the long 19th century, you have democracy and industry starting off together 
in the middle of the 1700s, and then the globalized industrial revolution with steam, the 
industrial economy changing to coal and oil, and empire. That then takes you up to 1914 and the 
catastrophe that starts there. The arc of those three books is, I think, quite wonderful and 
extremely successful. Especially the first two.
Your a€oelong 20th centurya€D runs from 1870 to 2010, when the world had a burst of economic 
progress that you say is now over, thus proving Hobsbawm wrong. So is it really over?

In 1870, the last institutions fall into place to produce technology that doubles every generation, 
thus enabling Schumpeterian creative destruction in which the next generation is twice as rich, but 
also a huge chunk of industries, occupations and patterns of life vanish in order to make that 
happen, and that makes a lot of people angry. Whatever running code of societal organization you 
crafted, the forces of production as
they existed at any moment after 1870, those no longer work 30 or 40 years later, and you have to 
build new and different patterns and institutions on the fly. And thata€™ s a very hard task, and 
ita€™ s now very hard.

As for when it ends, you could say between 2001 and 2003, when the George W. Bush administration 
says the United States is no longer the benevolent, hegemonic, technological pioneer, wea€™re just 
another country and wea€™re going to follow our own interests.
You could say 2006, when my friend John Fernald says it becomes clear that information technology 
is actually not going to be as big a deal for most people as electrification or the internal 
combustion engine or modern materials.

You could say ita€™ s 2007, when the idea that you actually needed to manage finance because it 
wasna€™ t trustworthy on its own turned out to be nonexistent.

Or you could say 2010, at a time when standard Keynesian theory would say the private sector has 
sat down on spending and the government sector needs to stand up, and even Barack Obama is saying 
no, the government must tighten its belt, and if the Democratic Congress actually passes any 
spending bills, Ia€™ m going to veto them.
You could also say ita€™ s 2016 with the election of Donald Trump. And if I had to write it over 
again, I would say therea€™ s a case for saying ita€™ s 2022, with the return of major power war 
[between Russia and Ukraine].

But sometime between 2002 and 2020 the whole complex of things that gave us the long 20th 
centurya€’’this technologically progressive, globalized United States, the furnace where the future 
was being forgeda€”dissolves piece by piece, and it leaves us in a new world in which China and 
India are likely superpowers and in which dealing with global warming is likely to become all 
important.

You know, you go around the world and ask about Xi Jinping and hear back that he may have some 
rough edges, but at least hea€™ s been tested as a competent administrator and someone who listens 
to advice, as opposed to the ethnonationalist politicians being thrown up by the industrial 
democracies right nowa€”Trump was no prize and Boris Johnson was no prize. Thata€™ s a very strange 
configuration of things.
And people have not quite wrapped their minds around this new world yet.

Another part of this new configuration is the high inflation wea€™ ve been experiencing. What are 
people not wrapping their minds around with this highest inflation in 40 years?
On inflation, my view was that we were going to have some coming out of the plague. And it was 
going to be by and large, a good thing.

Let me explain: The plague has given us maybe 15 years of metaverse-style technological development 
in just over two years. And the economy has a new configuration: Fewer in-person workers in retail 
establishments, a lot more delivery orders, substantially more goods production, and also 
substantially more information entertainment and production as well. That requires that we shift a 
lot of people into new jobs, and
you cana€™ t cut anyonea€™ s wages nominally without making them extremely angry at you, which 
means that in the expanding sectors, you have to raise wages in order to pull people into what are 
the growth sectors of the post-plague economy, and thata€™ s going to give us a bunch of inflation.

Plus, when you reopen the economy, you discover all the supply-chain bottlenecks, and you need the 
prices of things where there are bottlenecks to go up in order to get people focused on how do we 
produce more of this stuff or how do we use less of it?

Your book is called Slouching Towards Utopia because you describe how we made so much progress in 
the 20th century and then stalled out, but now that we have gone through this accelerated metaverse 
evolution, do you think in a way wea€™ ve sprinted towards a new kind of economic utopia, coming 
out of the plague?
I wrote in my book that I saw the best technical minds of the world turned to selling ads by 
figuring out how to scare people, so their eyeballs stayed glued to the screen.

And they figured out how we can use the screen youa€™re looking at to hack your brain so that you 
keep watching so we can sell you more ads.
So do you see this as a dystopia that we have emerged into?

It certainly has dystopian elements. Technological progress always has dystopian elements implicit 
in it, of which large-scale thermonuclear war is only one, and now we are also cooking the 
planeta€”how hot is it in Beijing today? Is reaching 120 degrees or so a normal climate kind of 
thing? We have gotten extremely good at advancing our technology but extremely poor at using it to 
build a proper socioeconomic
political system that makes us happy.

We also shouldna€™ t underestimate the fact that while three-quarters of the world went to bed 
seriously hungry in 1870, now ita€™ s only about one-fifteenth of the world that does so today. 
Ita€™ s a huge accomplishment when one of your chief mental concerns is where am I going to get my 
food tomorrow, rather than which of the 93 things I might want tomorrow should I pick up at the 
supermarket?
But revealed political preferences are that this does not make people happy or satisfied or 
thinking that things are going well.

So is it possible to recapture our momentum with economic progress, or is that asking the wrong 
question? It sounds like we still have a lot of progress, but youa€™re describing a crisis of 
values about how that technological progress is used.
Well, we certainly could recover our momentum.

The nice thing about invention is that two heads are not twice as good as one, but two heads are 
far better than that. And now the potential of the scientists and engineers that we could deploy, 
if we really wanted to, is absolutely enormous. Yes, the low-hanging fruit has been picked and 
ita€™ s getting harder and harder to push the technological frontier forward. But our resources are 
still immense and they still scale.

There are people, my colleague and neighbor Fred Block among them, who think that one of the big 
things my book misses is the neoliberal turn in the United States that pushed corporations toward 
declaring maximum short-term profits, which means all the Xerox Parcs and the IBM Labs and the Bell 
Labs were essentially dismantled, and business started saying, instead of doing research, just 
figure out how to make
what wea€™re making 1% cheaper next year. And the loss of those semi-public industrial research lab 
organizationsa€”which because they were research-oriented were for the benefit of all, but were 
inside corporations and actually focused on technologies that might worka€”has been a huge minus 
and a major cause of the slowing down of technological progress.

Another huge cause of the slowdown is our failure to keep expanding education. When my father went 
to Harvard in 1955, it admitted 900 men and 300 women. Now it has 700 men and 900 women. Thata€™ s 
only gone up from 1,200 to 1,600 in total over 65 years, not a huge increase in capacity in a 
country thata€™ s much more than doubled in size and in a world in which maybe five times more 
people are qualified
for an Ivy League education. That failure to scale is really quite remarkable and amazing.

The problems with education at the private level are very much the NIMBYism, that is the not 
expanding capacity. At the public school level, ita€™ s simply that we seem to be pretty good at 
what we do at teaching people things and preparing them for lives in which they appear to be very 
productive, but we have no idea how we do it. We really have zero idea about what parts of the 
educational process are useful. What
are we doing that is simply a medieval ritual that was a response a long time ago to bad 
educational technology, and what things actually encourage people to think and talk and acquire 
skills so they can then better understand and deal with the world? American education is still an 
attractive thing to people from all over the world, but it needs to be reformed and we have very 
little idea of how to reform it. So ita€™ s a big
puzzle.

And understanding NIMBYism, the a€oenot in my backyarda€D mentality, comes from how the creative 
destruction process indeed destroys a lot of things. But we five in a market economy where the only 
rights that really matter are property rights. And if you have property rights, then you tend to 
think you should have a voice about the surrounding built and natural environment not being changed 
without your buy-in,
or at least without you getting bought off in some way.

Huge numbers of people are tremendously offended at the Biden student loan relief plan, but whoever 
we are, we have all had more than $20,000 of good or bad luck affect our lifetime income paths. 
There are a lot of people who went to school, and then with the totally crappy labor market of the 
past 15 years, it really didna€™ t pay off. So if your principal reaction is that those people are 
getting something they
dona€™t deserve, that shows a very powerful thing about human psychology.

Also, many people do not like creative destruction at all. The idea that your job or your industry, 
the fabric of your life, might blow away if some rootless Cosmopolis decides the business you work 
for no longer satisfies a maximum profitability test gets people very angry. These things have been 
animating progress and its effect on politics ever since the days of William Jennings Bryan.
Well thata€™ s quite a note to end on, a reminder that these are not new concerns even if they feel 
that way, and that creative destruction versus NIMBYism is a major issue to resolve.

What I hope is that a lot of younger people read my book. When you get to my generation, you look 
around and ita€™ s by and large a retrospective on what went wrong while we were supposedly in 
control. And Ia€™ d like the younger generation to have a stronger sense of how this kind of 
conflict between property rights and other rights on the one hand, in an environment of repeated 
creative destruction, on the other
hand, has greatly hobbled our ability to actually use our huge technological powers to build a kind 
of human world as opposed to a world in which Beijinga€™ s temperature reaches 120 degrees 
Fahrenheit and in which right now, killer robots are flying in the skies above Ukraine looking for 
people to kill.

You know, back when I was 12 or 13, there was a difference between the utopian science fiction 
novels with amazing technological competence and virtual reality and so forth, and the dystopian 
science fiction novels in which you had excessive heat from the greenhouse effect and killer 
robots, and yet it turns out in real life those have become something like the same thing. Yeah. We 
have managed to purchase both.
Wow, well that really sums it up. Ijust want to say I read your book and I devoured it. I really 
loved it.

Thank you. Oh, thata€™ s excellent. Thata€™ s excellent. I remember [UC Berkeley colleague and 
former Obama advisor] Christina Romer saying, a€oeWow, this is actually readable,a€D And the more 
people who say that, the happier I am.


selling ads by figuring out how to scare people.

But he says he still believes that the United States is the a€cefurnace where the future is being 
forged.a€D
The following interview has been lightly edited and condensed for clarity.

Congratulations on your book and thank you for taking the time after walking your dog.

Yes, we got two dogs during the plague year. Ita€™ s very good to have the daily exercise of 
dog-walking: Ita€™ s an effective way of gaining and outsourcing additional willpower.
Ia€™ ve been a reader of yours for a long time, and you have always had this unique style among 
economic writers.

I personally really love this book, because I have long been a big fan of Eric Hobsbawm and his 
concept of the a€oelong 19th century.a€D When did you first read him?

I first came across Hobsbawm when [former Harvard economics professor] David Landes made me read 
them back when I was an undergraduate, around 1980 or so. Landes would say, a€oel dona€™ t really 
recommend left-wing students read Hobsbawm, because hea€™ s too convincing, but youa€™re enough of 
a right winger that it will annoy you, but also teach you and youa€™re really the kind of person who
ought to read this.a€D

Well, thinking about the long 19th century, you have democracy and industry starting off together 
in the middle of the 1700s, and then the globalized industrial revolution with steam, the 
industrial economy changing to coal and oil, and empire. That then takes you up to 1914 and the 
catastrophe that starts there. The arc of those three books is, I think, quite wonderful and 
extremely successful. Especially the first two.
Your a€oelong 20th centurya€D runs from 1870 to 2010, when the world had a burst of economic 
progress that you say is now over, thus proving Hobsbawm wrong. So is it really over?

In 1870, the last institutions fall into place to produce technology that doubles every generation, 
thus enabling Schumpeterian creative destruction in which the next generation is twice as rich, but 
also a huge chunk of industries, occupations and patterns of life vanish in order to make that 
happen, and that makes a lot of people angry. Whatever running code of societal organization you 
crafted, the forces of production as
they existed at any moment after 1870, those no longer work 30 or 40 years later, and you have to 
build new and different patterns and institutions on the fly. And thata€™ s a very hard task, and 
ita€™ s now very hard.

As for when it ends, you could say between 2001 and 2003, when the George W. Bush administration 
says the United States is no longer the benevolent, hegemonic, technological pioneer, wea€™re just 
another country and wea€™re going to follow our own interests.
You could say 2006, when my friend John Fernald says it becomes clear that information technology 
is actually not going to be as big a deal for most people as electrification or the internal 
combustion engine or modern materials.

You could say ita€™ s 2007, when the idea that you actually needed to manage finance because it 
wasna€™ t trustworthy on its own turned out to be nonexistent.

Or you could say 2010, at a time when standard Keynesian theory would say the private sector has 
sat down on spending and the government sector needs to stand up, and even Barack Obama is saying 
no, the government must tighten its belt, and if the Democratic Congress actually passes any 
spending bills, Ia€™ m going to veto them.
You could also say ita€™ s 2016 with the election of Donald Trump. And if I had to write it over 
again, I would say therea€™ s a case for saying ita€™ s 2022, with the return of major power war 
[between Russia and Ukraine].

But sometime between 2002 and 2020 the whole complex of things that gave us the long 20th 
centurya€’’this technologically progressive, globalized United States, the furnace where the future 
was being forgeda€”dissolves piece by piece, and it leaves us in a new world in which China and 
India are likely superpowers and in which dealing with global warming is likely to become all 
important.

You know, you go around the world and ask about Xi Jinping and hear back that he may have some 
rough edges, but at least hea€™ s been tested as a competent administrator and someone who listens 
to advice, as opposed to the ethnonationalist politicians being thrown up by the industrial 
democracies right nowa€”Trump was no prize and Boris Johnson was no prize. Thata€™ s a very strange 
configuration of things.
And people have not quite wrapped their minds around this new world yet.

Another part of this new configuration is the high inflation wea€™ ve been experiencing. What are 
people not wrapping their minds around with this highest inflation in 40 years?
On inflation, my view was that we were going to have some coming out of the plague. And it was 
going to be by and large, a good thing.

Let me explain: The plague has given us maybe 15 years of metaverse-style technological development 
in just over two years. And the economy has a new configuration: Fewer in-person workers in retail 
establishments, a lot more delivery orders, substantially more goods production, and also 
substantially more information entertainment and production as well. That requires that we shift a 
lot of people into new jobs, and
you cana€™ t cut anyonea€™ s wages nominally without making them extremely angry at you, which 
means that in the expanding sectors, you have to raise wages in order to pull people into what are 
the growth sectors of the post-plague economy, and thata€™ s going to give us a bunch of inflation.

Plus, when you reopen the economy, you discover all the supply-chain bottlenecks, and you need the 
prices of things where there are bottlenecks to go up in order to get people focused on how do we 
produce more of this stuff or how do we use less of it?

Your book is called Slouching Towards Utopia because you describe how we made so much progress in 
the 20th century and then stalled out, but now that we have gone through this accelerated metaverse 
evolution, do you think in a way wea€™ ve sprinted towards a new kind of economic utopia, coming 
out of the plague?
I wrote in my book that I saw the best technical minds of the world turned to selling ads by 
figuring out how to scare people, so their eyeballs stayed glued to the screen.

And they figured out how we can use the screen youa€™re looking at to hack your brain so that you 
keep watching so we can sell you more ads.
So do you see this as a dystopia that we have emerged into?

It certainly has dystopian elements. Technological progress always has dystopian elements implicit 
in it, of which large-scale thermonuclear war is only one, and now we are also cooking the 
planeta€”how hot is it in Beijing today? Is reaching 120 degrees or so a normal climate kind of 
thing? We have gotten extremely good at advancing our technology but extremely poor at using it to 
build a proper socioeconomic
political system that makes us happy.

We also shouldna€™ t underestimate the fact that while three-quarters of the world went to bed 
seriously hungry in 1870, now ita€™ s only about one-fifteenth of the world that does so today. 
Ita€™ s a huge accomplishment when one of your chief mental concerns is where am I going to get my 
food tomorrow, rather than which of the 93 things I might want tomorrow should I pick up at the 
supermarket?
But revealed political preferences are that this does not make people happy or satisfied or 
thinking that things are going well.

So is it possible to recapture our momentum with economic progress, or is that asking the wrong 
question? It sounds like we still have a lot of progress, but youa€™re describing a crisis of 
values about how that technological progress is used.
Well, we certainly could recover our momentum.

The nice thing about invention is that two heads are not twice as good as one, but two heads are 
far better than that. And now the potential of the scientists and engineers that we could deploy, 
if we really wanted to, is absolutely enormous. Yes, the low-hanging fruit has been picked and 
ita€™ s getting harder and harder to push the technological frontier forward. But our resources are 
still immense and they still scale.

There are people, my colleague and neighbor Fred Block among them, who think that one of the big 
things my book misses is the neoliberal turn in the United States that pushed corporations toward 
declaring maximum short-term profits, which means all the Xerox Parcs and the IBM Labs and the Bell 
Labs were essentially dismantled, and business started saying, instead of doing research, just 
figure out how to make
what wea€™re making 1% cheaper next year. And the loss of those semi-public industrial research lab 
organizationsa€”which because they were research-oriented were for the benefit of all, but were 
inside corporations and actually focused on technologies that might worka€”has been a huge minus 
and a major cause of the slowing down of technological progress.

Another huge cause of the slowdown is our failure to keep expanding education. When my father went 
to Harvard in 1955, it admitted 900 men and 300 women. Now it has 700 men and 900 women. Thata€™ s 
only gone up from 1,200 to 1,600 in total over 65 years, not a huge increase in capacity in a 
country thata€™ s much more than doubled in size and in a world in which maybe five times more 
people are qualified
for an Ivy League education. That failure to scale is really quite remarkable and amazing.

The problems with education at the private level are very much the NIMBYism, that is the not 
expanding capacity. At the public school level, ita€™ s simply that we seem to be pretty good at 
what we do at teaching people things and preparing them for lives in which they appear to be very 
productive, but we have no idea how we do it. We really have zero idea about what parts of the 
educational process are useful. What
are we doing that is simply a medieval ritual that was a response a long time ago to bad 
educational technology, and what things actually encourage people to think and talk and acquire 
skills so they can then better understand and deal with the world? American education is still an 
attractive thing to people from all over the world, but it needs to be reformed and we have very 
little idea of how to reform it. So ita€™ s a big
puzzle.

And understanding NIMBYism, the a€oenot in my backyarda€D mentality, comes from how the creative 
destruction process indeed destroys a lot of things. But we five in a market economy where the only 
rights that really matter are property rights. And if you have property rights, then you tend to 
think you should have a voice about the surrounding built and natural environment not being changed 
without your buy-in,
or at least without you getting bought off in some way.

Huge numbers of people are tremendously offended at the Biden student loan relief plan, but whoever 
we are, we have all had more than $20,000 of good or bad luck affect our lifetime income paths. 
There are a lot of people who went to school, and then with the totally crappy labor market of the 
past 15 years, it really didna€™ t pay off. So if your principal reaction is that those people are 
getting something they
dona€™t deserve, that shows a very powerful thing about human psychology.

Also, many people do not like creative destruction at all. The idea that your job or your industry, 
the fabric of your life, might blow away if some rootless Cosmopolis decides the business you work 
for no longer satisfies a maximum profitability test gets people very angry. These things have been 
animating progress and its effect on politics ever since the days of William Jennings Bryan.
Well thata€™ s quite a note to end on, a reminder that these are not new concerns even if they feel 
that way, and that creative destruction versus NIMBYism is a major issue to resolve.

What I hope is that a lot of younger people read my book. When you get to my generation, you look 
around and ita€™ s by and large a retrospective on what went wrong while we were supposedly in 
control. And Ia€™ d like the younger generation to have a stronger sense of how this kind of 
conflict between property rights and other rights on the one hand, in an environment of repeated 
creative destruction, on the other
hand, has greatly hobbled our ability to actually use our huge technological powers to build a kind 
of human world as opposed to a world in which Beijinga€™ s temperature reaches 120 degrees 
Fahrenheit and in which right now, killer robots are flying in the skies above Ukraine looking for 
people to kill.

You know, back when I was 12 or 13, there was a difference between the utopian science fiction 
novels with amazing technological competence and virtual reality and so forth, and the dystopian 
science fiction novels in which you had excessive heat from the greenhouse effect and killer 
robots, and yet it turns out in real life those have become something like the same thing. Yeah. We 
have managed to purchase both.
Wow, well that really sums it up. Ijust want to say I read your book and I devoured it. I really 
loved it.

Thank you. Oh, thata€™ s excellent. Thata€™ s excellent. I remember [UC Berkeley colleague and 
former Obama advisor] Christina Romer saying, a€oeWow, this is actually readable,a€D And the more 
people who say that, the happier I am.


On inflation, my view was that we were going to have some coming out of the plague. And it was 
going to be by and large, a good thing.

Let me explain: The plague has given us maybe 15 years of metaverse-style technological development 
in just over two years. And the economy has a new configuration: Fewer in-person workers in retail 
establishments, a lot more delivery orders, substantially more goods production, and also 
substantially more information entertainment and production as well. That requires that we shift a 
lot of people into new jobs, and
you cana€™ t cut anyonea€™ s wages nominally without making them extremely angry at you, which 
means that in the expanding sectors, you have to raise wages in order to pull people into what are 
the growth sectors of the post-plague economy, and thata€™ s going to give us a bunch of inflation.

Plus, when you reopen the economy, you discover all the supply-chain bottlenecks, and you need the 
prices of things where there are bottlenecks to go up in order to get people focused on how do we 
produce more of this stuff or how do we use less of it?

Your book is called Slouching Towards Utopia because you describe how we made so much progress in 
the 20th century and then stalled out, but now that we have gone through this accelerated metaverse 
evolution, do you think in a way wea€™ ve sprinted towards a new kind of economic utopia, coming 
out of the plague?
I wrote in my book that I saw the best technical minds of the world turned to selling ads by 
figuring out how to scare people, so their eyeballs stayed glued to the screen.

And they figured out how we can use the screen youa€™re looking at to hack your brain so that you 
keep watching so we can sell you more ads.
So do you see this as a dystopia that we have emerged into?

It certainly has dystopian elements. Technological progress always has dystopian elements implicit 
in it, of which large-scale thermonuclear war is only one, and now we are also cooking the 
planeta€”how hot is it in Beijing today? Is reaching 120 degrees or so a normal climate kind of 
thing? We have gotten extremely good at advancing our technology but extremely poor at using it to 
build a proper socioeconomic
political system that makes us happy.

We also shouldna€™ t underestimate the fact that while three-quarters of the world went to bed 
seriously hungry in 1870, now ita€™ s only about one-fifteenth of the world that does so today. 
Ita€™ s a huge accomplishment when one of your chief mental concerns is where am I going to get my 
food tomorrow, rather than which of the 93 things I might want tomorrow should I pick up at the 
supermarket?
But revealed political preferences are that this does not make people happy or satisfied or 
thinking that things are going well.

So is it possible to recapture our momentum with economic progress, or is that asking the wrong 
question? It sounds like we still have a lot of progress, but youa€™re describing a crisis of 
values about how that technological progress is used.
Well, we certainly could recover our momentum.

The nice thing about invention is that two heads are not twice as good as one, but two heads are 
far better than that. And now the potential of the scientists and engineers that we could deploy, 
if we really wanted to, is absolutely enormous. Yes, the low-hanging fruit has been picked and 
ita€™ s getting harder and harder to push the technological frontier forward. But our resources are 
still immense and they still scale.

There are people, my colleague and neighbor Fred Block among them, who think that one of the big 
things my book misses is the neoliberal turn in the United States that pushed corporations toward 
declaring maximum short-term profits, which means all the Xerox Parcs and the IBM Labs and the Bell 
Labs were essentially dismantled, and business started saying, instead of doing research, just 
figure out how to make
what wea€™re making 1% cheaper next year. And the loss of those semi-public industrial research lab 
organizationsa€”which because they were research-oriented were for the benefit of all, but were 
inside corporations and actually focused on technologies that might worka€”has been a huge minus 
and a major cause of the slowing down of technological progress.

Another huge cause of the slowdown is our failure to keep expanding education. When my father went 
to Harvard in 1955, it admitted 900 men and 300 women. Now it has 700 men and 900 women. Thata€™ s 
only gone up from 1,200 to 1,600 in total over 65 years, not a huge increase in capacity in a 
country thata€™ s much more than doubled in size and in a world in which maybe five times more 
people are qualified
for an Ivy League education. That failure to scale is really quite remarkable and amazing.

The problems with education at the private level are very much the NIMBYism, that is the not 
expanding capacity. At the public school level, ita€™ s simply that we seem to be pretty good at 
what we do at teaching people things and preparing them for lives in which they appear to be very 
productive, but we have no idea how we do it. We really have zero idea about what parts of the 
educational process are useful. What
are we doing that is simply a medieval ritual that was a response a long time ago to bad 
educational technology, and what things actually encourage people to think and talk and acquire 
skills so they can then better understand and deal with the world? American education is still an 
attractive thing to people from all over the world, but it needs to be reformed and we have very 
little idea of how to reform it. So ita€™ s a big
puzzle.

And understanding NIMBYism, the a€oenot in my backyarda€D mentality, comes from how the creative 
destruction process indeed destroys a lot of things. But we live in a market economy where the only 
rights that really matter are property rights. And if you have property rights, then you tend to 
think you should have a voice about the surrounding built and natural environment not being changed 
without your buy-in,
or at least without you getting bought off in some way.

Huge numbers of people are tremendously offended at the Biden student loan relief plan, but whoever 
we are, we have all had more than $20,000 of good or bad luck affect our lifetime income paths. 
There are a lot of people who went to school, and then with the totally crappy labor market of the 
past 15 years, it really didna€™ t pay off. So if your principal reaction is that those people are 
getting something they
dona€™t deserve, that shows a very powerful thing about human psychology.

Also, many people do not like creative destruction at all. The idea that your job or your industry, 
the fabric of your life, might blow away if some rootless Cosmopolis decides the business you work 
for no longer satisfies a maximum profitability test gets people very angry. These things have been 
animating progress and its effect on politics ever since the days of William Jennings Bryan.
Well thata€™ s quite a note to end on, a reminder that these are not new concerns even if they feel 
that way, and that creative destruction versus NIMBYism is a major issue to resolve.

What I hope is that a lot of younger people read my book. When you get to my generation, you look 
around and ita€™ s by and large a retrospective on what went wrong while we were supposedly in 
control. And Ia€™ d like the younger generation to have a stronger sense of how this kind of 
conflict between property rights and other rights on the one hand, in an environment of repeated 
creative destruction, on the other
hand, has greatly hobbled our ability to actually use our huge technological powers to build a kind 
of human world as opposed to a world in which Beijinga€™ s temperature reaches 120 degrees 
Fahrenheit and in which right now, killer robots are flying in the skies above Ukraine looking for 
people to kill.

You know, back when I was 12 or 13, there was a difference between the utopian science fiction 
novels with amazing technological competence and virtual reality and so forth, and the dystopian 
science fiction novels in which you had excessive heat from the greenhouse effect and killer 
robots, and yet it turns out in real life those have become something like the same thing. Yeah. We 
have managed to purchase both.
Wow, well that really sums it up. Ijust want to say I read your book and I devoured it. I really 
loved it.

Thank you. Oh, thata€™ s excellent. Thata€™ s excellent. I remember [UC Berkeley colleague and 
former Obama advisor] Christina Romer saying, a€oeWow, this is actually readable,a€D And the more 
people who say that, the happier I am.

