What did the people who stormed the Capitol building on January 6,2021 think whata€™ s going to 
happen?

Let us look at what happened at the other end of Pennsylvania Avenue before the insurrection. At 
the beginning of Donald Trump speech, he tells his audience that they are the overwhelming majority 
of America, and that the
corrupt media are trying to hide that fact:

Donald Trump: Speech: a€oeSave Americaa€dRally Transcript January 6: a€~The media will not show the 
magnitude of this crowd. Even I, when I turned on today, I looked, and I saw thousands of people 
here, but you
dona€™t see hundreds of thousands of people behind you because they dona€™t want to show thata€!a€™

(Parenthetically, there werena€™t hundreds of thousands of people. The permit was for a rally of 
30,000. OANN claimed a€cethousandsa€D. Eyeballing the pictures after the march to the Capitol, my 
guess is 10,000.1 see
no reliable numbers on those who got into the building with intent to commit or threaten violence, 
and no reliable numbers on those who got into the building intending to peaceably assemble and 
petition for a redress of
grievances.)

Hundreds of thousands of American patriots are committed to the honesty of our elections and the 
integrity of our glorious Republic. All of us here today do not want to see our election victory 
stolen
by emboldened radical left Democrats, which is what they a€™ re doing and stolen by the fake news 
media. Thata€™ s what theya€™ ve done and what they a€™ re doing. We will never give up. We
will never concede, it doesna€™ t happen. You dona€™ t concede when therea€™ s theft involved.

Our country has had enough. We will not take it anymore and thata€™ s what this is all about. To 
use a favorite term that all of you people really came up with, we will stop the steal.  We won 
this

election, and we won it by a landslide. This was not a close election. I say sometimes jokingly, 
but therea€™ s no joke about it, Ia€™ ve been in two elections. I won them both and the second one, 
I
won much bigger than the first.... I was told by the real pollsters, we do have real pollsters. 
They know that we were going to do well, and we were going to win. What I was told, if I went from 
63
million, which we had four years ago to 66 million, there was no chance of losing. Well, we didna€™ 
t go to 66. We went to 75 million and they say we lost. We didna€™ t lose...

That is the beginning.

In the middle of the speech, he says that the problem is that the Republican congressional 
leadership is not strong and courageous:

Today we will see whether Republicans stand strong for integrity of our elections, but whether or 
not they stand strong for our country, our country....

Wea€™ re going to see whether or not we have great and courageous leaders or whether or not we have 
leaders that should be ashamed of themselves throughout history, throughout eternity,
theya€™ 11 be ashamed. And you know what? If they do the wrong thing, we should never ever forget 
that they did. Never forget. We should never ever forget. With only three of the seven states in
question, we win the presidency of the United Statesa€!

And he says that the stakes are very higha€”much higher because Mitch McConnell (whom he has just 
denounced as weak) is about to be replaced as Senate majority leader by Chuck Schumer:

And by the way, ita€™ s much more important today than it was 24 hours ago. Because I spoke to 
David Perdue, what a great person, and Kelly Loeffler, two great people, but it was a setup. And I
said, a€oeWe have no back line anymore,a€D The only back line, the only line of demarcation, the 
only line that we have is the veto of the president of the United States. So this is now what
wea€™re doing, a far more important election than it was two days agoa€!

But, he says, the cause is not lost. There are many members of the Republican caucus fighting very 
hard for truth, justice, and the American Way:

I want to thank the more than 140 members of the House. Those are warriors. They a€™ re over there 
working like youa€™ ve never seen before, studying, talking, actually going all the way back,
studying the roots of the Constitution, because they know we have the right to send a bad vote that 
was illegally got.  I also want to thank our 13 most courageous members of the US Senate, Senator

Ted Cruz, Senator Ron Johnson, Senator Shadowless, Kelly Loeffler. And Kelly Loeffler, Ia€™ 11 tell 
you, shea€™ s been so great. She works so hard. So leta€™ s give her and David a little special
head, because it was rigged against them. Leta€™ s give her and David. Kelly Loeffler, David 
Perdue. They fought a good race. They never had a shot. That equipment should never have been
allowed  to be used.a€! Mike Brauna€! Bill Hagerty, John Kennedy, James Lankford, Cynthia Lummis. 
Tommy Tubervillea€!. And Roger Marshall. We want to thank them, senators that stepped up,
we want to thank them....

The problem is that there are the weak leaders who do not want to use their constitiutional powers 
to do the Right Thing:

For some reason, Mitch and the group, they dona€™ t want to put it in there. And they dona€™ t 
realize that thata€™ s going to be the end of the Republican party as we know it, but ita€™ s never
going to be the end of us, never. Let them get out. Let the weak ones get out. This is a time for 
strength.  We got to get rid of the weak congresspeople, the ones that arena€™ t any good, the Liz

Cheneys of the world, we got to get rid of them. We got to get rid of them. She never wants a 
soldier brought home. Ia€™ ve brought a lot of our soldiers home.  Remember I used to say in the 
old

days, a€oeDona€™ t go into Iraq. But if you go in, keep the oil.a€D We didna€™ t keep the oil. So 
stupid. So stupid, these people. And Iraq has billions and billions of dollars now in the bank. And
what did we do? We get nothing. We never get...

For, remember, the election was stolen:

If Georgia had merely rejected the same number of unlawful ballots, as in other years, there should 
have been approximately 45,000 ballots rejected, far more than what we needed to win, just over
11,000. They should find those votes. They should absolutely find that just over 11,000 votes, 
thata€™ s all we need. They defrauded us out of a win in Georgia, and wea€™re not going to forget
ita€!

At the end of the speech there is the call to action:

So wea€™re going to, wea€™re going to walk down Pennsylvania Avenuea€!. Wea€™re going to try and 
give our Republicans, the weak ones, because the strong ones dona€™ t need any of our
help, wea€™re going to try and give them the kind of pride and boldness that they need to take back 
our country. So leta€™ s walk down Pennsylvania Avenue. I want to thank you all. God bless you
and God bless America. Thank you all for being here, this is incredible. Thank you very much. Thank 
you.

Suppose that you believed that the President of the United States was a serious person, rather than 
a demented, lying clown? Suppose that you believed he was telling the trutha€”or at least not 
exaggerating things more than
your typical politician in a fit of enthusiasm? What would you conclude?

You would conclude that you should march down to the Capitol, and get in their face, and so give 
Vice President Pence, Majority Leader McConnell, and all of the senators in the Republican caucus 
who were not the brave
thirteen the backbone to halt the certification, send the fake certificates back to the states, and 
ask the states to send the real certificates.

And you would be willing to push past police, break windows, ascend scaffolding, and keep pushing 
as long as you could to get into the face of the legislators and give them backbone.
And you would succeed.

But then you would find that, even though you had done your job, you still had not given the 
senators backbonea€”that in fact your actions caused the number of a€cebravea€D senators to fall in 
half, to seven. (But do note
that you would neither increase nor decrease the numbers of the 130 Republican House caucus members 
on your sidea€’’although it is not clear how many of those voted for the objections just because 
they knew they were
not going to pass).

And then you would go home, puzzled. You are the real majority of the nation. You gave the cowardly 
Republican legislators and cowardly Vice President Pence the opportunity tol do the Right Thing. 
You showed them in
ways that they could not mistake that the people were behind them. And yet they did not pick up the 
baton.

So what do you conclude? What will you do next?

AND BRIEFLY NOTED:

Time to de-escalate and read and watch something totally unrelated to bad political actors 
destroying norms of republican political conduct in an attempt to further entrench a plutocracy: 
Plutarch: Life of Tiberius
GracchushWp://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Plutarch/Lives/Tiberius Gracchus* ,htmla€!

Heron of Alexandria was a BOSS: Jeremy Norman: Automata Invented by Heron of 
AlexandriahWps://www.historyofinformation.com/detail,php?id= 10

I do know not whether I should be amazed at how much or depressed at how little computing can be 
done without semiconductors: Wikipedia: Mechanical

CompHterhttps://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mechanical_computer#Examplesa€!


I am happy not getting 3/4 of the illusions that Dorothy L. Sayers makes to history and literature. 
But if you are not, this is essential: Bill Peschel: Annotations to Gaudy 
M>Arhttps://planetpeschel.com/the-wimsey-
annotations/gaudy-night/a€!

.#brieflynoted #noted #2021-01-07

Briefly Noted for 2021-01-07

https://w ww.bradford-delong .com/2020/12/briefly-noted-for-2021-01 -07 .html

