*»ikeJiPnCia'm, wWe'Ne^°°\


This is the DeLongTODAY Briefing. I am Brad DeLong, an economics professor at the University of 
California at Berkeley, and a sometime Deputy Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury. This is the 
weekly DeLongToday briefing. Here I hold forth here on the Leigh Bureaua€™ s vimeo platform on my 
guesses as to what I think you most need to know about what our economy is doing to us right now.
I promised Wes Neff when he agreed to provide the infrastructure for this that I and my briefings 
would be: lively, interesting, curious, thoughtful, and relatively brief.

Relatively.

I promised I would provide briefings on a mix of: forecasting, politics, macroeconomic analysis, 
history, and political economy.

Today is entirely a political economy, a moral philosophy, an intellectual history and orientation 
briefing. And it is also, sort of, a book review.

"Mike Konczal [is] one of our most powerful advocates of financial reform,

[a] heroic critic of austerity, and a huge resource for progressives."

-PAUL KRUGMAN

FREEDOM


FROM THE
MARKET

America's Fight to Liberate Itself
from the Grip of the Invisible Hand

Mike Konczal of the Roosevelt Institute has a wonderful new book: Freedom from the Market chttps: 
//books .google .com/books ?id=0aDLD w AAQB AJ> <https://tinyurl .com/dl-2021 -02-18a>. What is it 
about? And why do I love it?

Let me start with what may seem to you to bea€”but is really nota€”a digression. Let me start with 
the moment in 1964 when the Republican Party went all-in against African-American hopes for voice, 
status, and a fairer share of Americaa€™ s wealth: the 1964 presidential campaign of Arizonaa€™ s 
Barry Goldwater. As he ran for President, Goldwater was dead certain that the Republican Party 
should make no effort to win any African-American votes.
a€oelf you go hunting for ducks ,a€D Goldwater said, a€oeyou go where the ducks area€D. And there 
were no ducks in even making noises in support of African-American aspirations. Goldwater believed 
that Nixon had lost the election of 1960 because his running mate Henry Cabot Lodgea€™ s prediction 
that Nixon would name an African-American to the cabinet, coupled with Nixona€™ s a€oechange in 
language of the civil rights planka€! it changed the
sound of that and they didna€™ t like ita€D, had a€cecurdleda€D Nixona€™ s chances in the south. 
Goldwater was not going to make that same mistake.


CAN
GOLDWATER

Others in Phoenix remember Operation Eagle Eye. too.

Charlie Stevens, then the head of the local Young Republicans, said he
got a phone call from the same lawyer Pena remembered throwing out of
Bethune School. The guy wanted to know why Charlie hadn't joined
Operation Eagle Eye.


WIN IN M?

THE RACE ISSUE, "HAPPY,” HIS
PERSONAL CHARM MAKE HIM THE
GOP’S SURPRISE FRONT RUNNER.

"I think they called them flying squads/ Stevens said. "It was perfectly

legal. The law at the time was that you had to be able to read English
and interpret what you read."

But he didn't like the idea and he told Bill this.

"My parents were immigrants," Stevens said. They’d settled in
Cleveland, Ohio, a pair of Greeks driven out of Turkey who arrived in
the   United States w ith broken English and a desire to be American. After
their son went to law school and settled in Phoenix, he even
Americanized  the name. Charlie Tsoukalas became Charlie Stevens.

"1 didn't think it was proper to challenge my dad or my mother to
interpret the Constitution," Stevens said. "Even people who are bom
here have trouble interpreting the Constitution. Lawyers have trouble
interpreting it."

The guy told Stevens that if he felt that way about it, then he could take
a pass.

It was in that election that Supreme Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist won his spurs by running 
a€oeballot securitya€D efforts in which a€oeevery Black or Mexican [-looking] person was being 
challenged.a€D Why did he do this?

[As] a deliberate effort to slow down the votinga€! to cause people waiting their turn to vote to 
grow tired.., and leavea€!. Handbills were distributed warning persons that if they were not 
properly qualified to vote they would be prosecuteda€!

And that effort never harmed Rehnquist one iota within the late-twentieth century Republican Party. 
Rather, it boosted him.

Up until 1901, twenty African-Americans had been elected to the U.S. House of Representatives. All 
of them had been Republicans. The last of them, George Henry White, left his office representing 
the 2nd District of North Carolina in 1901. As he left he said:

We have 32,000 teachers in the schools of the country; we have built, with the aid of our friends, 
about 20,000 churches, and support 7 colleges, 17 academies, 50 high schools, 5 law schools, 5 
medical schools and 25 theological seminariesa€!. We have done it in the face of lynching, burning 
at the stake, with the humiliation of a€oeJim Crowa€D laws, the disfranchisement of our male 
citizens, slander and degradation of our women,
with the factories closed against us, no Negro permitted to be conductor on the railway carsa€lno 
Negro permitted to run as engineer on a locomotive, most of the mines closed against usa€! With all 
these odds against us, we are forging our way ahead, slowly, perhaps, but surelya€! You may use our 
labor for two and a half centuries and then taunt us for our poverty, but let me remind you we will 
not always remain poor! You may
withhold even the knowledge of how to read Goda€™ s word anda€!then taunt us for our ignorance, but 
we would remind you that there is plenty of room at the top, and we are climbinga€!!a€!. This, Mr. 
Chairman, is perhaps the Negroesa€™ temporary farewell to the American Congress; buta€!phoenix-like 
he will rise up some day and come againa€!


The next African-American to be elected was in 1929, and was, again, a Republican: Oscar Stanton De 
Priest, from the 1st District of Illinois, the seat now held by Bobby Rush. Congressman De Priest 
served until 1935, when he was replaced in his district by a Democratic African-American, Arthur W. 
Mitchell. (Then come 41 Democratic African-American congress members before the election of 
Republican Gary Franks from the 5th District of Connecticut
in 1991.) Over 1936-1944 African-American registration was split equally between Democrats and 
Republicans. From 1948-1960 African-American voter registration was split 5-3 with the advantage to 
the Democratic Party.

The Democratic edge from 1948 to 1960 wasa€! peculiar. The Democratic Party then had all the 
biggest racists in America, after all, and gave many of them very powerful positions as committee 
chairs in the U.S. Congress. A greater proportion of Republican than Democratic congress members 
were, after all, going to vote for Johnsona€™ s Civil Rights Acta€’’although, note, not the Voting 
Rights Act.

Black party identification

Data complied by the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies from a variety of sources.

CIVIL RIGHTS ACT

100%

80

60

40

20

'36 40 '44 48 52 56 60 *64 '68 72 76 80 84 88 ‘92 '96 ’00 04 08 12


Trumana€™ s Secretary of State Dean Acheson mused that the a€oeapparent contradiction in the fact 
that the Southern racist belongs to the same political party as the New York supporter of the Fair 
Employment Practices Commissiona€n was resolved by the fact that both saw 
themselvesa€”werea€”getting a short end of the stick in the business-centered civilization of 
America. Nevertheless, the historical commitment of the Republican Party to African-
American rights and uplift still had real bite, and if were offset in the 1950s by a superior 
Democratic commitment to lunchpail issues, to organization and mobilization, and to patronage, the 
growing number and proportion of African-American votes was a battleground Republicans should have 
been eager to contest.

Buta€! not. Why did Goldwater decide to throw away that historical commitments’’that founding 
principle of the Republican Partya€”in pursuit of voters whose deeply racist principles were 
antithetical to all that the Republican Party had stood for for more than a century. How did this 
make sense to him? And to Rehnquist? And to those who made Rehnquist first a justice and then chief 
justice of the United States government, and who still revere Goldwater?

The answer, I think, is that African-American aspirationsa€’’hopes for an equal voice, and then 
that with that equal voice they could ask and get a redistribution and redefinition of property to 
redress at least some of past injuries and abusesa€”made Goldwater and company extremely uneasy. 
They were asking for real democracy. And real democracya€’’especially African-American 
democracya€’’for Rehnquist and his compadres in Arizonaa€™ s Republican
Party in 1964, and for many others as well, touched uncomfortably on matters of governance with 
respect to the market economy, and notions of the just and the fair and the equitable.

To make sense of this fear, let me now turn to two Vienna-born intellectuals: the 
Austrian-British-Chicagoan right-wing economist Friedrich August von Hayek (1899-1992), and the 
slightly-earlier Austro-Hungarian economist Karl Polanyi (1886-1964).

We first give the floor to von Hayek, who teacheth the lesson: Seethe market giveth, the market 
taketh away: blessed be the name of the markets □.

Hayek always argued that to inquire whether a market economyS™ s distribution of income and wealth 
was ScefairSD or ScejustSD was to commit a fatal intellectual blunder. S ce Justices □ and 
ScefairnessSD of any form requires that you receive what you deserve. But a market economy gives 
not to those who deserve but rather to those who happen to be in the right place at the right time. 
Who controls resources that are valuable for future
production is not a matter of fairness. Once you step into the morass of Soesocial justice ,SD 
Hayek believed, you would not be able to stop chasing a ScejustSD and ScefairSD outcome Sceuntil 
the whole of society was organizedS! in all essential respectsS! [as] the opposite of a free 
society.SD

Note that this did not mean you were morally obligated to watch the poor starve and the injured 
bleed out and die in the street. Society should make Scesome provision for those threatened by the 
extremes of indigence or starvation due to circumstances beyond their controls D if only as the 
cheapest way to protect the hard-working and successful Soeagainst acts of desperation on the part 
of the needy.SD And note that Hayek did not believe (much) in
inherited feudal, guild, and customary blockages to decentralized market exchange. They should be 
steamed away. But beyond that you should not interfere with the market. The market was, or would 
lead us to, utopiaS”or as close to utopia as humans could attain. And in von HayekS™ s eyes 
interference with the market was, as John Maynard Keynes snarked, Soenot merely inexpedient, but 
impiousSD.

That a market economy can produce a highly unequal distribution of income and wealth just as it can 
produce a less unequal distribution of income and wealth was beside the point. To even raise the 
question of what distribution of wealth should be made the presumptions’’false to HayekS”that 
people had rights other than property rights and obligations to others in addition to those they 
freely assumed through contract.

Besides, rectifying inequality was awful because it was chimerical. Hayek believed we lacked and 
would always lack the knowledge to create a better society. Centralization always led to 
misinformation and bad decisions. Top-down was a disaster. Only bottom-up Soespontaneous ordersSD 
could possibly lead to progress. What humanity had was market capitalism, the only system that 
could possibly be even moderately efficient and productive, for
Soeprices are an instrument of communication and guidance which embody more information than we 
directly have, [and so] the whole idea that you can bring about the same order based on the 
division of labor by simple direction falls to the grounds D. Any attempts to reorder the market 
distribution of income in order to reward the deserving at the expense of the undeserving would 
erode market capitalism: Seethe idea [that] you can arrange for
distributions of incomesS! correspond [ing] toS! merit or needSD does not fit with your Sceneed 
[for] prices, including the prices of labor, to direct people to go where they are needed.SD And 
once you start planning you are on the Road to Serfdom: Seethe detailed scale of values which must 
guide the planning makes it impossible that it should be determined by anything like democratic 
meansSD. Hayek's was a Soethis-is-as-good-as-it-is-ever-going-
to-getSD sort of utopianism.

Accepting that this better organizing of society cared not a whit for the fair and the just, Hayek 
understood, was not likely to be done to universal huzzahs! That the only rights the market economy 
recognizes are property rightsS”and indeed only those property rights that are valuables’’didnS™ t 
inspire the multitudes. The fact that the most valuable property rights are those useful in making 
things for which the rich have a serious jones made matters worse.
It was clear that people thought they had other rights beyond those that accrued to the property 
they happened to hold. And this feeling posed an enormous problem for Friedrich von Hayek. He 
identified two substantive enemies to a good (or at least as good as it is likely to get) society: 
egalitarianism and permissiveness.

In a younger generation of libertarians, Milton Friedman would dismiss HayekS™ s worries. Friedman 
was morally certain that most wealth was not and would never be inherited, and that most people 
were pretty much equal. Provide people with access to education and reward them for what 
contribution they made to production and you would have a middle-class society in which it did not 
matter much that rights accrued to property rather than to people.
Voila: the overwhelming bulk of people would have a not-grossly-unfair share of the property.

Qn    QC from rxiif                 A mpripano in anrl mwin'i/4 1               innnmp rli       
/ATA           TM o     prnrlnnp0         TA/A/AI /AF        nr 1/A/AV" IAO/^IZ- /ATA flno mnrn     
    ri I 01 f I IAI I t I/ATA /AF 1 QAA nr F/ATAiznyrl f/A fin of /AF f/Arloxr anJ flnr* or* tn or* 
/AF Into tn/Actft/Atn rli ccnRrnc


For the less pollyannish Hayek, however, democracy itself was a grave danger because it taught 
egalitarianisms^'that society should treat me as well as it treats you even though you have the 
property and thus the right to the market economya€™ s concern and solicitude. 
a€oea€~Egalitarianisma€™ is,a€D Hayek wrote, a€oea product of the necessity under unlimited 
democracy to       solicit the support even of the       worst ,a€D Poisonous to Hayek was 
democracy

in Alexis de Tocquevillea€™ s sense that mere luck made one master and the other valeta€”and luck 
might change tomorrow. a€oelt is,a€D warned Hayek, a€oenot by conceding a€~a right to equal concern 
and respecta€™ to those who break the code that civilization is maintained .a€D

The fearsome result would be permissiveness, which a€oeassisted by a scientistic psychology, has 
come to the support of those who claim a share in the wealth of our society without submitting to 
the discipline to which it is due.a€D The lesson to learn was clear. A prosperous market economy 
could only flourish if it were protected from the tides of democracy and permissiveness.

Perhaps, indeed probably, for von Hayek societies would periodically need a Spartan Lykourgos, a 
Chilean General Augusto Pinochet. They would need someone to seize power and reorder society in an 
authoritarian mode that would respect the market economy. That the spilling of more than ink would 
be necessary to enforce such reordering was a regrettable consequence of this tarnished utopia.
Hayek, standing on the shoulders of giants and tyrants alike, articulated a position about the 
market economy that throughout the twentieth century generated a strong willingness on the 
political right to view democracy a€’’political and sociala€”not even as a lesser good but as a 
genuine evil. These forces did not lose strength as World War I came nearer.

Hayek he serves as a marker for a very powerful current of thought and action, powerful not least 
because it found itself congenial too and backed by very rich and powerful people. And it is true 
that the democratic political sphere can turn into one in which the logic is not cooperation and 
growth but rather confiscation and redistribution to the a€cedeservinga€D, or even one of friends   
         and enemiesin which the logic is punishment for the a€oeundeservinga€n.
Hayek is not altogether wrong that keeping your head down, concentrating on win-win production for 
market exchange, and ignoring appeals to "social justicea€Da€’’for a€cejusticea€D involves not just 
treating equals equally but treating unequals unequally, and humans have not historically been very 
good at treating all others as of equal significance^”as chimerical can be vastly better.

And Hayek was a far-sighted genius in one aspect. He did grasp most thoroughly and profoundly what 
the market system could do for human benefit. All societies in solving their economic problem face 
profound difficulties of getting reliable information to the deciders and then incentivizing the 
deciders to act for the public good. The market order of property, contract, and exchange cana€”if 
property rights can be arranged so that they are carved at the joints
so that those principally affected by an action are at the tablea€’’pushes decision-making out to 
the decentralized periphery where the reliable information already is, thus solving the information 
problem, and by rewarding those who bring resources to valuable uses automatically solves the 
incentivization problem. (There remain the distribution problem, and many of the flaws in Hayeka€™ 
s thinking come from his inability to recognize the nature of those
problems at all. But absolutely nailing two out of three aina€™ t bad. Plus there is the 
macro-coordination problem, but that one is at a lower, more technical and technocratic level than 
the study of history and moral philosophy.)

On the other side, there is Karl Polanyi, who teacheth the lesson: a€oethe market is made for man, 
not man for the marketa€D.

Friedrich von Hayek loved that the market turned everything into a commodity, and feared those who 
thought it a fundamental strike against the market that it did not make everybody materially equal. 
Polanyi disagreed emphatically. In The Great Transformation, Polanyi explained that land, labor, 
and finance were a€oefictitious commodities,a€D They could not be governed by the logic of 
profit-and-loss but needed to be embedded in society and managed by
the community, taking into account religious and moral dimensions. The result, Polanyi wrote, was a 
tension, a contest, a double movement. Ideologues of the market and the market itself attempted to 
dissembled land, labor, and finance from societya€™ s moral and religious governance. In reaction, 
society struck back by restricting the domain of the market and putting its thumb on the scales 
where market outcomes seemed a€oeunfair.a€D

As a consequence, a market society will face a backlasha€”it can be a left-wing backlash, it can be 
a right-wing backlash, but there will be a backlasha€”and it will be powerful.

Now these werea€”area€’’brilliant insights. As expressed by Polanyi in the original, they are also, 
sadly, incomprehensible to an overwhelming proportion of those who try to read him. With deference 
to comprehension, Polanyi can be summed as follows:

The market economy believes that the only rights that matter are property rights, and the only 
property rights that matter are those that produce things for which the rich have high demand. But 
people believe that they have other rights.

1. With respect to land, people believe that they have rights to a stable community. This includes 
the belief that the natural and built environment in which they grew up or that they made with 
their hands is theirs whether or not market logic says it would be more profitable if it were 
differenta€”say a highway ran through ita€”or more lucrative if somebody else lived there.

2. With respect to labor, people believe that they have rights to a suitable income. After all, 
they prepared for their profession, played by the rules, and so society owes them a fair income, 
something commensurate with their preparation. And this holds whether or not the logic of the world 
market says otherwise.

3. With respect to finance, people believe that as long as they do their job of working diligently, 
the flow of purchasing power through the economy should be such as to give them the wherewithal to 
buy. And rootless cosmopolite financiers who may be thousands of miles away should have no 
commensurate right to decide that this or that flow of purchasing power through the economy is no 
longer sufficiently profitable, and so should be shut off. They
should not be able to make your job dry up and blow away.

People have not just property rights, Polanyi declared, but these other economic rights. Which a 
pure market economy will not respect. It will lay down that highway, ignore years of preparation 
when doling out an income, and allow your purchasing power to dry up and blow away along with your 
job if someone thousands of miles away decides better returns on investments are to be found 
elsewhere. Hence societya€”by government decree or by mass action,
left-wing or right-wing, for good or illa€”mW intervene, and re-embed the economy in its moral and 
religious logic so that these rights are satisfied.

Note that these rights that society will attempt to validate do nota€”or might nota€”be rights to 
anything like an equal distribution of the fruits of industry and agriculture. And it is probably 
wrong to describe them as fair: they are what people expect, given a certain social order. Equals 
should be treated equally, yes; but unequals should be treated unequally. And societies do not have 
to and almost never do presume that people are of equal significance.
And now we come back around to Mike Konczal, and his excellent new book. He takes a very Polanyian 
line, on how our freedom ought to be much more than freedom to buy or sell limited by the wealth 
and income that history and the market give us:

The things we need to lead our fives are forced into markets where we are compelled to obtain them, 
at the mercy of private, profitseeking actors and our own ability to paya€!

That is not freedom, but is instead a form of compulsion:

When citizens declare that health care is a human right, they are making a stand against market 
dependency. In this view there are still markets. Doctors and nurses get salaries, MRI machines and 
bandages are purchased, and so on. But it also holds that individuals should not be dependent on 
the market as the sole determinant of what care they get. Health care should go to those who are 
sick, not those who are sick and who also happen
to have moneya€!

Konczal wants to reach into the past, for an American understanding that market dependency can be a 
source of unfreedom both when wealth is unequally and unfairly distributed and when individual 
market actors have too much market power and can charge unfair pricesa€”a€oeall the market will 
beara€D is not a general principle. The rhetoric of the market is about how it is all voluntary 
exchange, and voluntary exchange is what people agree to, and so how
can that be unfair? Adam Smith had an answer, with a piece of rhetorical judo in his Wealth of 
Nations. Suppose the market produced an equilibrium in which the great majority of the people were 
desperately poor and in want. What would we think of that? Smitha€™ s answer:

What improves the circumstances of the greater part can never be regarded as an inconvenience to 
the whole. No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the 
members are poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe and lodge the 
whole body of the people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be 
themselves tolerably well fed, cloathed and
lodgeda€!

Focus on that a€oeit is but equitya€D, besides. Faira€”that is, voluntarya€’’exchange can be 
unfair, and lead to an overall outcome that nobody would voluntarily accept under any definition of 
a€oevoluntarya€D that excludes being under severe compulsion. Smith has been ambling along 
throughout the book, pointing out the extraordinary benefits of the market economy, and how it is 
an arena of freedom because people choose to undertake acts of economic
exchange which are in accord with equity, as each trades what he or she values less for what he or 
she values more. And then he brings people up short, with this passage.


Konczal says that America has always agreed with Smith, and that it is only today that a€oeglib 
libertariansa€D purveying a€cefantasiesa€D are trying to make us forget a€oethat free programs and 
keeping things free from the market are as American as apple piea€!a€D One of the best passages in 
the book is where he notes the connection between the Fight for $15 minimum wage campaign and human 
freedom:
Service sector workers demanding a $15 minimum wage and a uniona€! have already won huge victories 
[with] ideas about how low-wage, precarious work is a form of unfreedoma€!. The Rev. William Barber 
noted that a€~it took 400 years from slavery to now to get from zero to $7.25 [an hour]. We cana€™t 
wait another 400 yearsa€™ to get to $15a€!a€D

And as Henry Farrell says in his review of Mike Konczal, he turns the Hayekian system of thought 
against itself:

Hayeka€™ s notion of spontaneous order is supposed to be evolutionary, to provide a more supple 
response to what people (thought of as individuals want). But if there is a need to provide 
collective goods for people that cannot be fulfilled through voluntarism, the Hayekian logic 
becomes a brutal constraint on adaptations^!

Ultimately, if all you can say in response to the ills of society is a€oethe market giveth, the 
market taketh away, blessed be the name of the marketa€!a€D you have very little to say indeed. 
Konczal quotes Oliver Wendell Holmesa€™ s fear and alarm that his fellow justices on the Lochner 
Supreme Court were, in their a€oewillingness to use a very specific understanding of economics to 
override law, writ[ing] a preferential understanding of economics into the
constitution itselfa€!a€D in a fundamentally illegitimate and societally-disruptive way.

But a better maxim is: a€oeThe market was made for man, not man for the marketa€D
Ia€™ m Brad DeLong. This is the DeLongTODAY Briefing. Thank you for watching.

Recorded 2021-02-18 4182 words 35:11 <https://www.icloud.com/pages/0qiigUKWzJT3-FHnxHh2HH_M8w

<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/delongtoday-konczal-freedom-from-the-market-
2021-02-18.pdl>


Konczal says that America has always agreed with Smith, and that it is only today that a€oeglib 
libertariansa€D purveying a€cefantasiesa€D are trying to make us forget a€oethat free programs and 
keeping things free from the market are as American as apple piea€!a€D One of the best passages in 
the book is where he notes the connection between the Fight for $15 minimum wage campaign and human 
freedom:
Service sector workers demanding a $15 minimum wage and a uniona€! have already won huge victories 
[with] ideas about how low-wage, precarious work is a form of unfreedoma€!. The Rev. William Barber 
noted that a€~it took 400 years from slavery to now to get from zero to $7.25 [an hour]. We cana€™t 
wait another 400 yearsa€™ to get to $15a€!a€D

And as Henry Farrell says in his review of Mike Konczal, he turns the Hayekian system of thought 
against itself:

Hayeka€™ s notion of spontaneous order is supposed to be evolutionary, to provide a more supple 
response to what people (thought of as individuals want). But if there is a need to provide 
collective goods for people that cannot be fulfilled through voluntarism, the Hayekian logic 
becomes a brutal constraint on adaptations^!

Ultimately, if all you can say in response to the ills of society is a€oethe market giveth, the 
market taketh away, blessed be the name of the marketa€!a€D you have very little to say indeed. 
Konczal quotes Oliver Wendell Holmesa€™ s fear and alarm that his fellow justices on the Lochner 
Supreme Court were, in their a€oewillingness to use a very specific understanding of economics to 
override law, writ[ing] a preferential understanding of economics into the
constitution itselfa€!a€D in a fundamentally illegitimate and societally-disruptive way.

But a better maxim is: a€oeThe market was made for man, not man for the marketa€D
Ia€™ m Brad DeLong. This is the DeLongTODAY Briefing. Thank you for watching.

Recorded 2021-02-18 4182 words 35:11 <https://www.icloud.com/pages/0qngUKWzJT3-FHnxHh2HH_M8w

<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/delongtodav-konczal-freedom-from-the-market-
2021-02-18.pdft>

