Subscribe now

FIRST: New York Times Bestselling Book Slouching Towards Utopia


Yes. The launch week debut of Slouching <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> is #6 in Nonfiction:

11 ork Simes

BOOKS BEST SELLERS

Combined Print & E-Book Nonfiction

hlUIIUIV NUNHUHUiN UMILUKLNb MUNIMLYLIbii                                                           
                               September 25, 2022


When you purchase an independently ranked book through our site, we earn an affiliate commission.

5 WEEKS ON THE LIST

I'M GLAD MY MOM DIED

by Jennette McCurdy Simon & Schuster

The actress and filmmaker describes her eating disorders and difficult relationship with her 
mother.

BUY ▼

107 WEEKS ON THE LIST

THE BODY KEEPS THE SCORE

by Bessel van der Kolk Penguin

How trauma affects the body and mind, and innovative treatments for recovery.

When you purchase an independently ranked
book through our site, we earn an affiliate
commission.

BEST SELLERS METHODOLOGY

A version of this list appears in the September
25, 2022 issue of The New York Times Book
Review. Rankings on weekly lists reflect sales
for  the week ending September 10, 2022. Lists
are published early online.

More about our methodology

BEST SELLERS SYMBOL KEY

4s Up in Rank since last week


BUY ▼

Read Review

4/ Down in Rank since last week

If a book is not in a rank since the previous
week, it will not have an arrow. The last few
titles on the list known as the extended list,
never have arrows.


3 WEEKS ON THE LIST

BREAKING HISTORY

by Jared Kushner Broadside

An account of time soent in the Trumn White House bv the former nresident’s son-in-law and senior 
adviser.

* An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are
barely distinguishable from those of the
book above it.


BUY ▼

t A dagger indicates that some retailers
report receiving bulk orders.


NEW THIS WEEK

THE DAUGHTER OF AUSCHWITZ

by Tova Friedman and Malcolm Brabant Hanover Square

A survivor of Auschwitz describes her childhood during the Holocaust, and her time in a Nazi labor 
camp
and the extermination camp known as Auschwitz-Birkenau.

BUY ▼

NEW THIS WEEK

SOLITO

by Javier Zamora Hogarth

The poet describes his journey over two months from El Salvador to the United States to reconnect 
with his
parents who left years earlier.

BUY ▼

Ebe
Nctullork
Simes

Best Seller

Ebe

^cwljork
Eimcs

Best Seller

Follow New York Times Books on Facebook and
Twitter (^nytimesbooks), sign up for our
newsletter or our literary calendar. And listen to
us on the Book Review podcast.

Far beyond my expectations and my hopes.

I would note that the Amazon rankingsa€’’bouncing between 120 and 800, with the Economist review 
associated with a big bump up (thank you, Ryan Avent!)a€’’seem to me inconsistent with a #6 New 
York Times nonfiction bestseller ranking. I read this as indicating that the HBG sales and 
marketing team did an absolutely magnificent job at getting books out to real bookstores before the 
launch, so that people in real bookstores had a chance to pick them up
last week.

Now I am both extremely pleased.
I am also quite scared.


i reaiiy uo not want people WHO uuy me DOOK IO oe uisappointeu. DUI mat uepenus on mem; wnai KIIIU 
01 suo-iurmg imago instantiation 01 my muiu uo mey spin-up num me oiauK squiggles on me page ano 
men run on men wet wnerer uoes n iniunn ano entertain mein, or not/ oo lar my menus seem io HKC n, 
out mey are my menus, wim me weoiog auuienee me unannei is muun more to weign; one nas a unanue to 
revise anu correct ana re-orient oecause it

is, by and large, a recurring audience that one is communicating with.
With a book, there is only one shot.

And now it is out of my hands.
Share

One Audio:

Dan Shipper and Nathan Baschez: Ordinary Astronauts: a€~Is Apple Stuck? Plus: why focus is a lie, 
and a discussion of a good new book called Slouching Towards Utopiaa€\ tech, product building, and 
the psychology of worka€l
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

H Corrosive Irritated " Retweeted

Atrios @Atrios • 47m

How Ron DeSantis Won The Pandemic

J kop mensch @chavarisa • 1h

Florida surpasses New York in COVID deaths »
Show this thread

Cumulative deaths attributed to Covid-19 in New York and Florida

Cumulative deaths (per 100k)

Florida

350                                                                        New York

300

250

200


150

100

50

0

Jan 1 Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep Nov Jan Mar May Jul Sep
2020                                                    2022

Source: Financial Times analysis of data from the Johns Hopkins CSSE.

Data updated September 8 2022 3.09pm BST. Interactive version: ft.com/covidl9

Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Martin Wolf: Globalisation Is Not Dying, Ita€™ s Changing: Trade in goods may be slowing, but 
the potential for technology-enabled trade in services remainsa€l. Industrialisation and the 
revolution in transport generated opportunities for trade in goods. More recently, new information 
technologies allowed a€oetrade in factoriesa€Ua€l. Todaya€l the broadband internet allows a€oetrade 
in officesa€Ua€l

•  Matthew Yglesias: 'Lately Ia€™ ve been reading SLOUCHING TOWARD UTOPIA, the long-awaiting 
economic history opus from DeLong. It is a fascinating, mind-expanding read a€” highly highly 
recommendeda€l

Matthew Yglesias @mattyglesias

Lately Ia€™ ve been reading SLOUCHING TOWARD UTOPIA the long-awaiting economic history opus from 
@delong. It is a fascinating, mind-expanding read a€” highly highly recommended.
basicbooks.comSlouching Towards Utopia by J. Bradford DeLong I Basic Books

3:13 PM r™ Sep 14,2022

69Likes6Retweets

•  Tom Barson: a€~Sharp, well-dimensioned historical vignettes are the many pleasures of DeLonga€™ 
s Slouching Toward Utopia^.}. Full of large and small delights: big themes, piquant details, and a 
range of sensibility and reaction that make reading feel, at times, like a personal conversational

•  The Economist: America still has an inflation problem: 'The release on September 13th showed... 
core prices rose 0.6% during the month, twice the 0.3% forecast.... The S&P 500... dropped by 4.4% 
...

• Jeremiah Johnson & Brad DeLong: a€ZThe Neoliberal Podcast: Slouching Towards Utopia

•  Sarah Caro: a€~Great session with aDiTorsten Bell aP©of the Resolution FoundationaP© talking 
about Slouching Towards Utopia published by aPIBasic Books UKaP© tomorrow (discount available on 
their website) Excellent convo but highlight guest appearance by Brada€™ s dYP* dY’-a€!

•  Slouching Towards Utopia: a€~London School of Economics and Political Science: Monday 10 October 
2022 6:00pm :: Hosted by the Department of Economic History :: J. Bradford DeLong & Patrick 
Wallisa€l

•  The Economist: Joe Bidena€™ s industrial policy is big, bold and fraught with difficulty: 'Until 
now, Americaa€™ s main industrial-policy programmes have been in the Department of Defence.... 
Nothing has been as successful as the defence industrial system, the fount of innovations that have 
spread to civilians, from nuclear power to the building blocks of the internet. The legislation 
passed under Mr Biden draws on that experience...

• Eric Newcomer: What Would Steve Do? (w/Kara Swisher)

•  Matthew Yglesias: Let Joe Manchin have his pipeline: 'Less activist chum, more focus on stuff 
that matters.... NEPA review... you cana€l point to specific situations in which it is used toa€! 
delay things that deserve to bea€l delayed. Buta€l if you want to transform the nationa€™ s energy 
system, then delay is fundamentally not your friend...

•  Frank Fukuyama: Why Ukraine Will Win: a€~The real threat perceived by Putin was in the end not 
to the security of Russia, but to its political model. He has asserted that liberal democracy 
didna€™ t work generally, but was particularly inappropriate in the Slavic world. A free Ukraine 
belied that assertion, and for that reason had to be eliminated...

• Claire Potter: Are Students A Captive Audience?: 'Constructive disagreement and classroom 
politics: a pro vocational

•  Robert B. Hubbell: Thank you, Lindsey Graham!: The mediaa€l incorrectly adopted Grahama€™ s 
characterization of his legislation as a€oebanning abortion .a€Da€ I The legislationa€I 
criminalizesthe procedure in all fifty states.... For statesa€! even more restrictive and punitive 
provisions than Grahama€™ s proposal... those regressive laws will remain in effect...

• Duncan Black: Snoozed: "'GOP snoozed on abortion as a midterm issue, saw nightmare poll numbers. 
Now, theya€™ ve awoken and are racing to redefine themselves xhttps://t.co/zMWWyaYuMq>a€” Jonathan 
Allen". "Republicans achieve their top goal of several decades, oh wow how did this happen when 
they weren't paying attention???. One of the iron laws of DC journalism: Republicans are never 
responsible for the things they
champion...

• The Economist: Americaa€™ s Republicans are not your grandparentsa€™ conservatives: 'Daniel 
Hopkins... and Hans Noel.a€l The difference between the Republican activistsa€™ scores for 
conservative senators and those from DW-NOMINATEa€l might be because loyalty to Mr Trump has become 
a proxy for conservative values, regardless of the policies the senators support...
Give a gift subscription


AJs:

Stephen Greenleaf: Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century: 'An 
outstanding work of narrative history should work like a strong magnet among iron filings, pulling 
diverse pieces (facts) into a coherent pattern without distorting the given shape (reality) of 
those diverse pieces. And this is what DeLong has accomplished.... At the beginning of the book, 
there are facts and figures.  But on the whole, the book is surprisingly

light on figures, tables, charts, and formulas; you know, the stuff youa€™ d expect to see from an 
economist. The flip side (the historian side, if you will) of this is DeLonga€™ s narrative skill 
in recounting the course of events and thinking of this period. DeLonga€™ s prose has a light touch 
that avoids economics jargon and avoids falling into ponderous academic prose.  Ia€™ m impressed 
with DeLong the historian. Not only does he write an engaging and

informed narrative, but he also displays insights into the nature of the historical enterprise...

Adam Gopnik: Cana€™ t We Come Up with Something Better Than Liberal Democracy?: 'The Westa€™ s 
favored form of self-government is looking creaky. A legal scholar and a philosopher propose some 
altemativesa€!. We race back to Athens... a model that a€oeTwo Cheers for Politicsa€D (Basic 
Books), by the political essayist and law professor Jedediah Purdy, keeps in sight.  The dead 
wasteland of a procedural liberalism managed by an A©lite,

Purdy believes, has produced a crisis that only true politicsa€”a popular belief in the 
possibilities of common purposea€”can solvea€!. He is angry at the A©lites.  Harvard gets hit 
particularly hard here: slots at Harvard College, he tells us, are bought and sold, while its 
Crimson meritocrats go on to staff a€oeDemocratic administrations,a€D the Times, and, well, The New 
Yorker. (Purdy was a chaired professor at Columbia Law School when he wrote the

book, and, curiously, Columbia is left out of the complaint, presumably having arrived at a way of 
separating bold freethinkers deserving of their place from those dastardly meritocrats .)a€! 
Purdya€™ s faith in a€oecollective rationalitya€D as the spur to common actiona€! leaves him not 
entirely immune to what could be called the Munchkinland theory of politics. This is the belief 
that although the majority population of any place might be intimidated and
silenced by an oppressive forcea€’’capitalism or special interests or the Churcha€”they would, 
given the chance, sing ding-dong in unison and celebrate their liberation. They just need a house 
dropped on their witcha€!. The evidence suggests, alas, that very often what looks like plutocratic 
manipulation really is the popular will. Many Munchkins like the witch, or at least work for the 
witch out of dislike for some other ascendant group of Munchkins...


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription
Subscribe now


