Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)    The surprising and disappointing slow growth of employment between March and April 
underscores how sick the US labor market still is. We need both better social suppor
networks for those who want to return to work and higher wages in the jobs that people are going to 
be moving to in order to restore the health of the labor market. And, meanwhile,
job displacement will not be without its substantial costs. We are still far from being out of the 
woods:

Kate Bahn & Carmen Sanchez Cumming: The Consequences of Job Displacement for U.S. Workers: 
a€~Unemployment in the United States remains high, and there are 8.4
million fewer jobs than prior to the pandemica€!. Some of those who lost their jobs are 
experiencinga€! job displacement^! their prior positions [will] no longer exist even as the
economy recoversa€!. Job displacement is generally outside of the control of individual workers, 
but it nonetheless can break down career ladders, dissolve valuable worker­
employer relationships, and widen existing racial disparities in labor market outcomesa€!. This 
issue brief reviews the academic literature on job displacement and offers labor
market policies that could help mitigate the negative effects of job displacement^!

LINK: <https://equitablegrowth.org/the-consequences-of-job-displacement-for-u-s-workers/>

2) Equitable Growth has, after its ramp-up period, gotten in the groove with respect to funding 
substantial amounts of truly excellent economic research. If you do not read this, you
almost surely have only a partial view of what we are doing and what we have learned from it:

Equitable Growth: Second Annual Academic Research Report: a€~We place a priority on research that 
is relevant to policy debates, abetting the development of evidence-based
policies. Equitable Growtha€™ s in-house team of more than 40 staff helps bridge the gap between 
researchers and the policy processa€! And we are committed to increasing
diversitya€! to support more Black scholars and to fund more research based on the lived experience 
and legacy of structural racisma€!. Since 2013, Equitable Growth has provided
more  than $6 million in grants to more than 200 researchers. In 2020, we announced a record $1.07 
million in grant funding. The funds went to 19 faculty grants and 12 doctoral
grants supporting Ph.D. student researchers. Separately, we awarded more than $250,000 in grants 
for new research on paid leave, with a focus on medical and caregiving leave and
on employer responses to paid leavea€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/research-paper/equitable-growths-second-annual-academic-research-report
/>

3) I have been trying to think through the questions of the evolution and development of Chinaa€™ s 
economy, and its political economy, over at my weekly videocast. I would not
say that I have it nailed. But I would say that I at least have the major puzzles identified.

Brad DeLong: DeLongTODAY: China I & II: China and the CCPa€! [are] effective and powerful. As long 
as the General Secretary remains minimally corrupt, key personnel
decisions will put people who share the General Secretariate™ s vision in the driversa€™ seats. 
And, as I said before, nobody in China wants China to become more like America
any morea€”COVID, Trump, the Great Recession, and so forth put an end to any such aspirations. But 
I do not think that it is likely to worka€”at least not the way that Xi Jinping
and his faction hope. I see a grave succession problem as the emperor ages. I see the control and 
information problems that always beset overplanninga€”and, no, near-ubiquitous
surveillance will not help. I see a very powerful incentivization problem as well. When power 
controls and can threaten wealth, those who would otherwise be entrepreneurial will
become focused on acquiring power which can protect itself rather than wealth which cannot, and 
growth will slowa€!

LINK: <https://delongtoday.com>

4) Noah Smith and I interview the extremely sharp Cory Doctorow on tech fixes to tech antitrust and 
public-sphere regulation problems:

Cory Doctorow; Noah Smith, & Brad DeLong: PODCAST: Hexapodia XIII: a€oeMandated InteroperabilitydCd 
We Cana€™ t Make It Work, or Can We?

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/podcast-hexapodia-xiii-mandated-interoperabilitv>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Once again, I find myself compelled to deviate out of my lane. This is happening with very 
distressing frequency these days: one should in general stick to one lane, because that
is where one's ability to add value in the sense of providing information and analysis a€oeabove 
replacementa€Da€’’above that that would be provided by whatever else the reader
would be reading if she or he were not reading thisa€”is. Going out of your lane is justifiable 
only when you think that what is in your lane is less important and you need to
redirect                                                                              your 
readersa€™ attention to what is more important. And today I think that it is:

Heather Cox Richardson: May 5, 2021: a€~the former president today attacked Cheneya€! McConnell 
anda€! Pence, whom Trump blamed for refusing to stop Bidena€™ s
election. Far from abandoning the Big Lie, Trump doubled down on it, insisting that the 2020 
election was fraudulent. If only Pence and McConnell had been stronger, he wrote,
a€oewe would have had a far different Presidential result, and our Country would not be turning 
into a socialist nightmare !a€D He ended with words that proved right the concern
that  he will continue to back attacks on our government: a€oeNever give up!a€D he wrote. Pro-Trump 
Republican leadership is now tied to that mess. Cheney and those who might
rally to her side are nota€!. Biden and his administration kept moving forward. When asked about 
his support for Cheney, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell said simply,
a€oeOne-hundred percent of my focus is on stopping this new administration.a€da€l White House Press 
Secretary Jen Psaki said, a€oel guess the contrast for people is 100% of
our     focus is on delivering relief to the people and getting the pandemic under controla€da€l

LINK: <https://heathercoxrichardson.substack.eom/p/may-5-2021>

2) The extent to which American politics and society is still rooted in the collective-utopia 
a€oelarger rafta€D religious attitudes of New England Puritans, and the subsequent
Congregationalist and mainline-Protestant and revivalist developments of those ways of looking at 
the world and at the American people, is massively underestimated. We are all, in
very                                                                            profound ways, 
children of the Pilgrims, of William Bradford and John Winthropa€”even if they would be profoundly 
shocked and appalled at the directions we have taken
their collective-utopian religious impulses:

Noah Smith: Wokeness as Old-Time American Religion: a€~Wokeness is much, much more than Critical 
Race Theory. CRT is simply a nerdy fringe that hovers at the edge of the
movement. At the street level, activists are reading Coates, not Adorno or Marcuse. A few ideas and 
attitudes may make it into their lexicons and worldviews from musty old
European intellectuals, but most of street ideology is spontaneously generated at the street level. 
And for many woke peoplea€’’especially the White people who numerically make
up the bulk of the woke movementa€”that street ideology springs from a very old American tradition. 
It comes from the abolitionist movement, which itself was heavily influenced
by Protestant Christianitya€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/wokeness-as-old-time-american-religion>

3) The past year has made me more and more certain that the in-person crowded university is an 
enormous key to a successful collective educational effort. There are those of us
who do not need a crowd in order to learn and think. But we are those who can take squiggles on a 
page and from them spin-up an imago of the authora€™ s mind and then discuss
things and argue with it. We run that sub-Turing imago and instantiation in a separate sandbox on 
our own wetware, and so even when we are alone we are in a crowd of arguing
voices. As my wife used to say, I used to talk to my dissertation advisors more in the shower than 
in persona€”and they would answer back. But those of us who do not need the
crowded in-person university are relatively few. For most of us, real professors and real peers are 
very, very important:

Nicole Barbaro: EdTech Cana€™ t Forget That Humans Evolved to be Social: a€~Near universal remote 
learning over the previous year, however, has revealed a fundamental
limitation to online and remote learning: students are missing the social experience of 
educationa€!.. The importance of social experiences for students extends beyond
quintessential campus events though: research continues to demonstrate the important role of the 
a€oehuman factora€D in learning processes as well. Students generally learn

better when instnir.tnrs are nresent in online instructional content and online, learning content 
is more effective at hoostina learnina outcomes when it siinnlements human


instruction, rather than replaces it. Teachers arena€™ t the only human factor in learning: peers 
matter for learning, too! Informal friendship networks, like those that are formed on
traditional college campuses through social events, are productive means for academic achievement 
to spread. And even being randomly assigned to study cohorts with highly
persistent peers boots studenta€™ s grades. In essence, a social campus is good for student 
learning Humans are built to learn, and specifically to learn sociallya€!

LINK: <https://nicolebarbaro.substack.eom/p/human>

4) We are now in the middle of an enormous transformation in the nature of work. I am very positive 
about its long-run impacts. And I think Adam Ozimek is correct here in
focusing on the reduced deadweight loss of commuting.

Adam Ozimek: Future Workforce: a€~Companies continue to be remote: Nine months into the pandemic, 
41.8 percent of the American workforce remains fully remote.
Companies say remote work is getting easier, not harder, as time goes on: 68 percent of hiring 
managers say remote work is going more smoothly now than when their company
first   made the shift to at the start of the pandemic. Remote work will continue through 2021: 
Managers believe that 26.7 percent of the workforce will be fully remote in one year
suggesting that individuals will gradually continue to return to the office, but a significant 
share will remain remote in the near future. The number of remote workers in the next
five   years is expected to be nearly double what it was before COVIDa€“19: By 2025,36.2 million 
Americans will be remote, an increase of 16.8 million people from pre-pandemic
rates. Increased productivity and flexibility continue to be key benefits of remote work: Hiring 
managers cite reduction of non-essential meetings, increased schedule flexibility, and
no commute as aspects of remote work that have worked better than expecteda€!

LINK: <https://www.upwork.com/press/releases/economist-report-future-workforce>

5) Nobody in China right now wants China to become more like America in any waya€”COVID, Trump, the 
Great Recession, and so forth put an end to any such aspirations. And
they have reason for this judgment. Joe Biden sees how much trouble America is in, and wants to fix 
it:

Ian Leslie: Biden's Bet: a€~Biden... is... hinting at... a€oel think theya€™re going to write about 
this point in historya€! about whether or not democracy can function in the 21st
century. Not a joke. Whether autocracy is the answea€”these were my debates Ia€™ d have in the many 
times I met with Xi.a€D... Biden believes that technology and science are
moving so fast that they pose an existential challenge to democracy itself. The consensus used to 
be that if China wanted to catch with the West it would have to democratisea€”
become more free, and more diverse, with power less centralised. But Xi has doubled down on 
autocracy and centralisation, partly by deploying new technologies. China is still
growing. For Biden, ita€™ s up to America to show the rest of the world that democracy is still the 
best platforma€!

LINK: <https://ianleslie.substack.eom/p/bidens-bet>

6) Americaa€™ sa€”indeed, the worlda€™ sa€”failure sociologically to do what needed to be done to 
control COVID is extremely sobering, and depressing:

Zeynep Tufekci: Sunday Open Thread for Subscribers: a€~The one big part of the tragedy here is that 
we had most of the science we needed really early ona€!. There was more to
learn, for sure, but the basics were there. There have been very few scientific surprisesa€! 
outside of how vaccinable this (luckily!) turned out to be (we didna€™t know partly
because we didna€™ t really try for the others exactly because we didna€™ t care). But 
sociologically, I am shaken. I knew about all of this, because I teach and study it. The

group-think, the institutional resistance and inertia, the cognitive biases, the social dynamicsa€! 
I know about them all! But Ia€™ ve been truly surprised most is how much stronger
than I thought these dynamics were, even in a crisis. Perhaps because of the crisis. Ia€™ ve 
learned a lot about viruses last year, but I did not really need that much beyond an
introductory textbook to write the policy oriented pieces Ia€™ ve published. I think we need to 
update our social science textbooks and assumptions, though. The dynamics that
have dominated our world arena€™ t novel in the sense that we were new to them, but they are 
clearly so much stronger than we usually acknowledged!

LINK: <https://www.theinsight.Org/p/sunday-open-thread-for-subscribers-d93>

7) A pro-competition tech transition that we, by sheer luck, managed to handle very well:

Peter Temin: The Fall of the Bell System: a€~A Study in Prices and Politics: AT&Ta€™ s divestiture 
was the largest corporate reorganization in history and has had international
repercussions. It was a major development in American economic policy, and a prominent part of the 
deregulation movement of the late 1970sa€! how private and public interests
combined  to shape corporate and public policy in late 20th-century Americaa€! politics, economics, 
business, and lawa€! an accessible narrativea€! [of] divestiture as a great
experiment in public policy, competition, openness, and international policya€! a mix of deliberate 
design and uncontrollable forces whose outcome was not foreseena€!

LINK: <https://www.google.com/books/edition/The Fall of the Bell System/CXNPVjdxfAEC>

8) Cory Doctorow: Adversarial Interoperability: a€~a€oelnteroperabilitya€n is the act of making a 
new product or service work with an existing product or service: modern
civilization depends on the standards and practices that allow you to put any dish into a 
dishwasher or any USB charger into any cara€™ s cigarette lightera€!. For a really
competitive, innovative, dynamic marketplace, you need +adversarial_ interoperability: thata€™ s 
when you create a new product or service that plugs into the existing ones
without   the permission of the companies that make them. Think of third-party printer ink, 
alternative app stores, or independent repair shops that use compatible parts from rival
manufacturers to fix your car or your phone or your tractor. Adversarial interoperability was once 
the driver of techa€™ s dynamic marketplace, where the biggest firms could go
from   top of the heap to scrap metal in an eyeblink, where tiny startups could topple dominant 
companies before they even knew what hit them. But the current crop of Big Tech
companies has secured laws, regulations, and court decisions that have dramatically restricted 
adversarial interoperabilitya€!

LINK: <https://w w w.eff .org/deeplinks/2019/1 Q/adversarial-interoperability>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)
2

