Subscribe now

IDEAS

The Economist Who Knows the Miracle Is Over

An era of remarkable prosperity has ended.

By Annie Lowrey

<https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2022/09/brad-delong-economist-slouching-towards-utopia-bo
ok/671337/>

Erik Carter I The Atlantic; Getty

About the author: Annie Lowrey is a staff writer at The Atlantic.

Brad DeLong felt confident that the story started in 1870.

The polymath economist was writing a book on economic modernitya€”about how humans transitioned 
from eking out an existence on our small planet to building a kind of utopia on ita€”and he saw an 
inflection point centuries after the emergence of capitalism and decades after the advent of
manufacturing at scale. a€oeThe Industrial Revolution is good. The Industrial Revolution is 
huge,a€D he explained to me recently, sitting on the back porch of his wood-clad Colonial Revival 
in Berkeley, California. But a€oeas of 1870, things have not really changed that much for most 
people.a€D Soon

after that, thougha€”after the development of the vertically integrated corporation, the industrial 
research lab, modern communication devices, and modular shipping technologiesa€”a€oee very thing 
changes in a generation, and then changes again, and again, and again, and again.a€D Global growth 
increases
fourfold. The world breaks out of near-universal agrarian poverty. Modernity takes hold.

DeLong had begun working on this story in 1994. He had produced hundreds of thousands of words, 
then hundreds of thousands more, updating the text as academic economics and the world itself 
changed. He kept writing, for years, for decades, for so long that he ended up writing for roughly 
5 percent of
the time capitalism itself has existed. The problem wasna€™ t figuring out how the story started. 
The problem was knowing when it ended.

In time, he decided that the era that had begun in 1870 ended in 2010, shortly after productivity 
growth and GDP growth had collapsed, as inequality was strangling economic vibrancy around the 
world and revanchist political populism was on the rise. With a bit more writing, he finished 
Slouching Towards
Utopia, one of this yeara€™ s most anticipated economics books, to be published on Tuesday. His 
long-gestating examination of what he calls the a€oelong 20th century a€D is sweeping and detailed, 
learned and accessible, familiar and strangea€”a definitive look at how we arrived at such material 
splendor
and how it failed to deliver all that it seemed to promise. His decision to end the story in 2010, 
and thus to finish his book, holds a message for all of us: Despite its problems and iniquities, 
the economic era Americans just lived through was miraculous. And now it is over.


Erik Carter / The Atlantic; Getty

About the author: Annie Lowrey is a staff writer at The Atlantic.

Brad DeLong felt confident that the story started in 1870.

The polymath economist was writing a book on economic modernitya€”about how humans transitioned 
from eking out an existence on our small planet to building a kind of utopia on ita€”and he saw an 
inflection point centuries after the emergence of capitalism and decades after the advent of
manufacturing at scale. a€oeThe Industrial Revolution is good. The Industrial Revolution is 
huge,a€D he explained to me recently, sitting on the back porch of his wood-clad Colonial Revival 
in Berkeley, California. But a€oeas of 1870, things have not really changed that much for most 
people.a€D Soon
after     that, thougha€”after the development of the vertically integrated corporation, the 
industrial research lab, modern communication devices, and modular shipping technologiesa€”a€oee 
very thing changes in a generation, and then changes again, and again, and again, and again.a€D 
Global growth increases
fourfold. The world breaks out of near-universal agrarian poverty. Modernity takes hold.

DeLong had begun working on this story in 1994. He had produced hundreds of thousands of words, 
then hundreds of thousands more, updating the text as academic economics and the world itself 
changed. He kept writing, for years, for decades, for so long that he ended up writing for roughly 
5 percent of
the time capitalism itself has existed. The problem wasna€™ t figuring out how the story started. 
The problem was knowing when it ended.

In time, he decided that the era that had begun in 1870 ended in 2010, shortly after productivity 
growth and GDP growth had collapsed, as inequality was strangling economic vibrancy around the 
world and revanchist political populism was on the rise. With a bit more writing, he finished 
Slouching Towards
Utopia, one of this yeara€™ s most anticipated economics books, to be published on Tuesday. His 
long-gestating examination of what he calls the a€oelong 20th centurya€D is sweeping and detailed, 
learned and accessible, familiar and strangea€”a definitive look at how we arrived at such material 
splendor
and how it failed to deliver all that it seemed to promise. His decision to end the story in 2010, 
and thus to finish his book, holds a message for all of us: Despite its problems and iniquities, 
the economic era Americans just lived through was miraculous. And now it is over.

Derek Thompson: Is this a recession? Wrong question.

As for the story of DeLong himself: He is an economic historian and a macroeconomist at UC 
Berkeley, a liberal policy stalwart, and one of the original econ bloggers, still publishing his 
thoughts almost daily, as he has done since before the word blog was invented in 1999. His story, I 
suppose, really begins
in Washington, D.C., where he grew up as the science-fiction-obsessed, math-whiz son of a lawyer 
and a clinical psychologist. (His mother still sees patients.) He went to Harvard for an 
undergraduate degree and then a Ph.D. in economics, writing papers and forging close friendships 
with a teenage Soviet
refugee named Andre Shleifer (now the second-most-cited economist on Earth) and Larry Summers (the 
former Treasury secretary and Harvard president). a€oeBrad is the person you want to write with if 
you want a collaborator doing something thata€™ s bold, potentially important, possibly wrong, and
unlikely to satisfy pedantic academic referees,a€D Summers told me. a€oela€™m a huge, huge fan of 
the guy.a€D

Along with his academic work, DeLong served in the Clinton administration. He married the legal 
scholar Ann Marie Marciarille, an expert on health-care regulation; they had two kids, now adults. 
And he started blogginga€”the thing for which he is perhaps best known. Since 1999, he has written 
in his
a€oesemi-daily journal,a€D which is funny, erudite, and weird. (Over the years, he has flambA©ed no 
fewer than 11 people as the a€oestupidest man alive,a€D among them former World Bank President Bob 
Zoellick.)

DeLonga€™ s book project preceded the blog. In 1994, he read the socialist historian Eric 
Hobsbawma€™ s The Age of Extremes, on the a€oeshort 20th centurya€D between the assassination of 
Franz Ferdinand, in 1914, and the collapse of the Soviet Union, in 1991. a€oelt makes a grand 
narrative arc, with
communism as the tragic hero of the 20th century, hopelessly marred by the circumstances of its 
birth,a€D DeLong told me. He loved it, and decided to cast his own long arc, with capitalism as the 
tragic hero.

The heroic part is heroic: For the first time in history, DeLong notes, the world managed to create 
enough after 1870. Enough to end subsistence agriculture in much of the world. Enough to reduce the 
global child-mortality rate from nearly 50 percent to less than 5 percent. Enough that many of the 
very
poorest people on Earth have access to cellphones and electricity today. But the tragic part is 
tragic: This modern era also brought with it machine guns and atom bombs and the atrocities of the 
Holocaust, among other genocides. And even as so many economies succeeded, so many governments 
faileda€”to
end racial injustice, to protect the most vulnerable, to ensure that everybody shared in the 
worlda€™ s prosperity, to conserve our common environment.

In his basement, his attic, and his office, DeLong kept assembling his book. He used the 
free-marketeer Friedrich Hayek and the social-protectionist Karl Polanyi as central figures and 
then braided in details about a huge cast of characters: Marx; Henry Ford; Keynes; Hitler; Gandhi; 
his own great-great-uncle,
an economic historian named Abbott Payson Usher.

His editors kept checking in. His friends inquired about the drafts they had read years before. The 
project ballooned in its complexity. a€oel have had editors who were saying [they were] going to 
drop me if I couldna€™t get it down to 150,000 words,a€D DeLong told me. (The book ended up at 
180,000,
plus online notes and appendices.) But he kept learning new things. a€oel can start reading a book, 
and then from it I can spin up in my brain a sub-Turinginstantiation of the authora€™ s mind, which 
I then run on my wetware,a€D he told me. a€oel can ask it questions, and it answers.Describing his

own thought process, he added: a€oea€~A rich inner lifea€™ is one way to put it. Or perhaps a 
slight absence of grip on what is the real world and what is not.a€D

In 1999, he thought the book could end by discussing what Francis Fukuyama called a€oethe end of 
historya€na€”the idea, popularized in a book of the same name, that the fall of communism heralded 
the final triumph of democracy and free-market neoliberal economics. a€oeThere were these huge
ideological struggles, but now wea€™ ve kind of got z7,a€D DeLong said, describing his mindset at 
the turn of the millennium. a€oeTherea€™ s going to be some future alternation between right 
neoliberalism, left neoliberalism, and social democracy.a€D But then came 9/11 and the global War 
on Terror.
a€oePeople seemed to be about to start killing each other in large numbers about religion,a€D 
DeLong said. Moreover, he added, a€oemost of what we Clintonites had actually managed to do in 
terms of whacking economic policy into what we saw as a good state was to enable another round of 
tax cuts for
the   rich and another round of plutocracy.a€D And then came President Barack Obama and the 
a€oeenormous failure to actually implement what I had thought was the standard playbook wea€™ d 
learned in the Great Depression,a€D DeLong said.

In time, DeLong concluded that neoliberalism and social democracy would not be gently taking turns. 
In political terms, the future instead would be about the a€oereturn of something that Madeleine 
Albright called fascism, and who am I to tell her not to,a€D he said. And in economic terms, it 
would be
about high inequality, low productivity, and slow growth. a€oeWe may have solved the problem of 
production,a€D DeLong told me. a€oeWe certainly have not solved the problem of distribution, or of 
utilizing our extraordinary, immense wealth to make us happy and good people.a€D

The story the book tells is compelling, though occasionally overpowering in its detail and 
telescoped in its argument. The global Southa€”where the majority of humanity livesa€”gets cursory 
treatment. DeLong argues that fitting much of its economic history into his book would have been 
too complicated.
And while gesturing to the evidence that colonial empires leeched prosperity from conquered land, 
he asserts that the North a€oecausally leda€D the a€ceadvancesa€D of the South. Yet the book is 
justice-minded and tenderhearted too. a€oeTherea€™ s someone in Bangladesh who would almost surely 
be a
better economics professor than I am and is now behind a water buffalo,a€D he told me. a€oeThe 
market economy gives me and my preferences 200 times the voice and weight of his. If that isna€™ t 
the biggest market failure of all, I dona€™ t know what your definition of market failure could 
possibly
be.a€D

For all its problems, the long 20th century granted enormous prosperity to billions of people: 
cellphones, white-collar jobs, the birth-control pill, penicillin, space exploration, home 
appliances, electric grids, the internet. If, as DeLong claims, a remarkable period of prosperity 
has ended, then governments face
the enormous task of strengthening representative democracy, reallocating the worlda€™ s immense 
resources more equitably, and reigniting productivity growth. As for DeLong, he has a more 
immediate challenge: figuring out what to do with the hundreds of thousands of words he trimmed out 
of Slouching
Towards Utopia. He thinks he might write a history of the economy, full stop. That story might 
start in 6,000 B.C.

Annie Lowrey is a staff writer at The Atlantic.

Subscribe now

