James Madison was not enthusiastic about a democracy:

A common passion or interest will, in almost every case, be felt by a majority... communication and 
concert result from the form of government itself...
nothing... check[s] the... sacrifice [of] the weaker party or an obnoxious individual... 
democracies have ever been spectacles of turbulence and contention...
incompatible with personal security or the rights of property... as short in their lives as... 
volent in their deaths. Theoretic politicians... have erroneously
supposed  that by reducing mankind to a perfect equality in their political rights, they would... 
be perfectly equalized and assimilated in their possessions,
their opinions, and their passionsa€!

James Madison was enthusiastic about a republic.

The people who counted were to choose a small, select group of representatives who had their values 
and well-being at hearta€”but not their passions or their interests. The
representatives would then govern subject the procedural checks-and-balances that produced the 
complex 18th-century orrery that is still the government of the United States. And,
remember,  a state could restrict the franchise as much as it wisheda€”as long as it preserved 
a€oea republican form of government .a€D

James Madison's suspicions were widely shared. In Britain on the eve of World War I less than half 
of adult males could vote. In Germany the legislature in dominant state of
Prussia gave a third of votes to those who held the top third of the national wealth. And the 
United States of America did not attain universal suffrage untila€”well, until the late
1960s, after the passage of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. And even then, Republican political 
operative William Rehnquista€™ s a€oeballot securitya€D efforts in Arizona were
valued enough by Republican Richard Nixon to name him an assistant attorney general, and his 
services as assistant attorney general were valued enough for Richard Nixon to
appoint him to the Supreme Court. And his services as justice were valued enough by Ronald Reagan 
to appoint him Chief Justice.

One person-one vote had not by 1914 (and has not today) become an uncontested value.

Nevertheless, the principle of universal suffrage as the touchstone of political legitimacy did 
make deliberate but massive strides forward in the years up to World War I. But
political democracy with an ever-increasing one man-one vote electorate was advancing not because 
it had many enthusiastic supporters but rather because it was the best, or
perhaps the least-bad, of politically-attainable options.

The socialist fringe and near-fringe on the left wanted more than one person-one vote. They sought 
the abolition of private property and the rational distribution of the social
division of labora€! well, by it was not clear what. But that position was rejected by the bulk of 
political society. However, it was only a fringe that held that that the government
should have a totalizing rolea€”that all questions should be settled and all social life organized 
by a government in which one counted for one. Thus full leveling and full
a€oesocialisma€na€’’whatever that might turn out to meana€”were simply not on the agenda.

The right held the view that existing inequalities of wealth, influence, and political were just 
and holy. There were, however, divisions on the right. Some held that inequalities
driven by inherited unequal ownership of land and inherited marks of status were holy and just: 
they tended to view inequalities emerging from the creative destruction and
accumulation of the market with, at best, suspicion.

Others, however, viewed those same inherited and status inequalities with suspicion: the 
inequalities that were just, this other fraction tended to argue, were social-darwinist
inequalities of wealth that showed that some had demonstrated greater fitness in an economic 
struggle for advantage if not survival. Only a part of the right held that that the
government should play no role in limiting or curbing inequalities that arose out of inheritance 
and the market, but should step back. Within the right, some were eager for the
government to break up inherited wealth. Within the right, others were eager for the government to 
curb entrepreneurial wealth.

Thus it became accepted by the middle of the political spectrum that economic society would be 
primarily a market economy in which wealth was unequally distributed due to
effort, skill, luck and choosing the right parents and in which wealth counted. But it also became 
accepted that wealth should not count for everything.

Thus the political principle that caused the least offense to the greatest number was that 
political society would be a realm in which each (male) individuals™ s preferences
counted equally in choosing the government, and that the government would then curb and control the 
economy in order to limit the influence of those whom Republican President
Theodore Roosevelt called the a€ce malefactors of great wealths US’’without limiting the property 
of or unduly raising the taxes on those who regarded themselves as hard­
working ordinary people..

Thus over time the range of those who could vote, and the importance of the decisions controlled by 
those whom the electorate voted for, crept forward.

France was in one respect the leader. It first saw universal male suffrage in 1792S’’although 
effective suffrage of any kind was gone by the coronation of Napoleon in 1804, and
did not return, save for a brief interval 1848-1851, until 1871. France was in other respects a 
great laggard: female suffrage did not arrive in France until the expulsion of the Vichy
Nazi collaborationist regime in 1944. The first European land to offer universal suffrage was 
Finland in 1906, when it was the Grand Duchy of Finland in a personal union with
Russia, with the Czar of Russia as its Grand Duke.

New Zealand has a somewhat better claim to be the leader in one person-one vote. Universal suffrage 
came to New Zealand in 1893. But even though women could vote you could
not vote for women until they were granted eligibility to serve in New ZealandS™ s parliament in 
1919. And, beforehand, all Maori males over 21 could vote in New Zealand
from 1867a€”but only European-descended males who had property could vote until 1879.

In Great Britain universal manhood suffrage came in 1918, when the suffrage was extended to all men 
and to women over 30. Adult women under 30 had to wait until 1928.1928
thus saw the culmination of the long process that started in 1832 with the passage of the first 
Reform Act.

That Great Reform Act nearly doubled the electorate from one in ten to one in five adult males, and 
eliminated such interesting electoral districts as Old Sarum. Old Sarum had no
permanent-resident votersS”the local landlord, the Earl of Caledon, chose the renters of the five 
houses whose tenants had the right to vote. He had paid A£60,000 pounds for this
Scerotten boroughSD in 1802 when he bought it from the Pitt family.

The 1867 Reform Act doubled the number of voters yet again; 1872 saw the secret ballot; 1883 
imposed campaign spending limits; 1884 expanded the electorate to 3/5 of adult
males; 1885 shifted parliamentary district boundaries in the direction of one man-one vote; and the 
Parliament Act of 1911 removed the power of the British House of Lords to do
more than delay legislations’’all before the Fourth Reform Act of 1918 which enfranchised all men 
over 21 and all women over 30 who owned or were married to men who
owned property.

These expansions of the franchise mattered a lot. The 1846 repeal of the Corn Laws which put high 
tariffs on food imports is impossible to envision without BritainS™ s First
Reform Act. In 1870 it was regarded as a bold leap when Britain established free universal public 
schools for children under ten. The rationale was that of Robert Lowe, First
Viscount Sherbrooke and a member of Lord PalmerstonS™ s cabinet. The effect of the Reform Act of 
1867 had been, he said, to make the richer segment of the working class the
masters of the government, and See we must educate our mastersSnS”not that he liked the Reform Bill 
especially:

This principle of [political and electoral] equality which you have taken to worship is a very 
jealous power; she cannot be worshipped by halves, and like
the Turk in this respect she brooks no rival near the throne. When you get a democratic basis for 
your institutions, you must remember that you cannot look
at that alone but you must look at it in reference to all your other institutions. When you have 
once taught the people to entertain the notion of the
individual rights of every citizen to share in the Government, and the doctrine of popular 
supremacy, you impose on yourselves the task of re-modelling the
whole  of your institutions in reference to the principles that you have set upS!. You must take 
education up the very first question, and you must press it
on without delay for the peace of the countryS!

Once the peopleS”the adult, male, white people that isS”had the vote, what were they going to do 
with it?

The coming of (male) democracy in the North Atlantic was all mixed up with the coming of modern 
industryS”the move out of agriculture and into industrial and service
occupationsS”the coming of the modern city (the move from the farm to someplace more densely 
populated), and the coming of heightened within-nation income inequality.

America in 1776 was, if you were a native-born adult white male, a remarkably egalitarian country. 
The richest one percent of households owned perhaps i-Ofteen percent of the
total wealth in the economy S’’including the Soehuman wealthSD of their slaves in their share of 
property, but not in the aggregate wealth total. (After all, a slave is valuable
property to the slaveowners’’but equally or rather more so unproperty, antiproperty, negative 
property to the slave: a slave society can easily have a minority owning more than
100%                                                                                  of the 
national wealth once this is taken into account.) A top one percent owning only some fifteen 
percent of wealth is a very low value for such a statistic: the United States
today is somewhere north of 40% of wealth owned by the richest one percent of households.

Inequality among white males at least did not grow that much as Americas™ s north began to 
industrialize in the years up through the Civil Wara€”and the Emancipation


Proclamation and the thirteenth amendment gave a substantial equalizing push to the economy. In the 
aftermath of the Civil War the top one percent of households appear to have

held perhaps a quarter of the wealth of the country. By 1900, however, the United States was as 
unequal an economy in relative terms asa€”well, as it is today. The United States
had become the Gilded Age country of industrial princes and immigrants living in tenements of our 
political memory.

On the one hand, Andrew Carnegie built the largest mansion in Newport, Rhode Island with gold water 
faucets. On the other hand, 146 largely-immigrant workers died in the 1911
Triangle Shirtwaist Factory i-Ore in Manhattan because the exits had been locked to keep workers 
from taking fabric out of the building in order to make their own clothes.

Surveys and guesses suggest that in the first decade of the twentieth century the richest one 
percent of U.S. households held something like half percent of national wealth. Attempts
to count the wealth of the merchant princes themselves reinforce the suspicion that the pre-World 
War I U.S. was more unequal than at any time before or since. John D. Rockefeller
was some four times richer relative to the wages of the average American of his day than Elon Musk 
claims to be today. And Rockefellera€™ s enterprise paid dividends out of
operating earnings. (Do not forget: Rockefeller was some ten times richer relative to the total 
size of the U.S. economy.)

This country of immigrants and plutocrats was very different from a country of yeoman farmers 
(among, once again, native-born adult white guys: all the stuff about Americans
pulling together to raise each othersa€™ barns and respect each othersa€™ claims ignore the fact 
that the first rule of property law was that no claim by a Mexican or an
Amerindian need be respecteda€”if they were, then the heir of Mariano Guadalupe Vallejo would be in 
the same position in California today that His Grace Gerald Grosvener, 6th
Duke                                                                                 of Westminster 
is in Britain today.) For at its beginning the United States had been a land of yeoman farmers in 
its Founding Fathersa€™ imaginations, and in large part in
reality.

How would things change when the society ceased to be one with a prosperous working and a broad 
middle class, and an elite made up of hard-working lawyers and merchants on
the one hand and a few plutocratic slaveholders on the other? How would things work when the 
inheritors of land or resources or capital lorded it over everybody elsea€”and
bought politicians for small change? Alexis de Tocqueville, a keen-eyed commentator on American 
society in the i-Orst half of the nineteenth century and author of Democracy in
America, had feared the growth of such a class of plutocrats, such an a€oearistocracy of 
manufacturersa€D:

The territorial aristocracy of past ages was obliged by law, or thought itself obliged by custom, 
to come to the help of its servants and relieve their distress.
But the industrial aristocracy of our day, when it has impoverished and brutalized the men it uses, 
abandons them in time of crisis to public charity to feed
them. Between workman and master there are frequent relations but no true association. I think 
that, generally speaking, the manufacturing aristocracy

which we see rising before our eyes is one of the hardest that have appeared on the earth...

In the United States the rising concentration of wealth during the pre-World War I era provoked a 
widespread feeling that something, somewhere had gone wrong with the country's
development. Abraham Lincoln had thought he lived, and for the most part had lived, in an America 
in which:

the prudent, penniless beginner in the world labors for wages awhile, saves a surplus with which to 
buy tools or land for himself, then labors on his own
account another while, and at length hires another new beginner to help hima€!

Since the outcome in Lincolna€™ s day was a largely middle-class society, Lincoln and his era:

[took] it that it is best for all to leave each man free to acquire property as fast as he can. 
Some will get wealthy. I dona€™ t believe in a law to prevent a
man from getting rich; it would do more harm than good. So while we do not propose any war on 
capital, we do wish to allow the humblest man an equal
chance to get rich with everybody elsea€!

As historian Ray Ginger writes:

Lincolna€! stood for an open society in which all men would have an equal chancea€!. a€oel am a 
living witness,a€D he told a regiment of soldiers,
a€oethat any one of your children may look to come here as my fathera€™ s child has.a€Da€! From the 
Civil War to 1900, Abraham Lincoln dominated
the visions of the good society which were being projected to exonerate the successful and to 
inspire the younga€!. But during those very decadesa€! the
social realities that had shaped the Lincoln ideal were being chipped awaya€!

And he quotes a Chicago laborer:

aCceLand of opportunity,a€D you say. You know well my children will be where I ama€”that is, if I 
can keep them out of the guttera€!

Many of the prosperous (and many of the native-born not-so-prosperous) blamed foreigners for what 
was going wrong with America in the late nineteenth century: aliens born in
China, Japan, Italy, Spain, Poland, and Russia who were incapable of speaking English, or 
understanding American values, or contributing to American society. And were probably
genetically feeble-minded too, with children incapable of ever becoming smart and well-educated 
enough to be full partners in American civilizationa€’’especially the Chinese and
the  Jews. Dona€™ t laugha€”thata€™ s what they argued, and that was one reason that if you were 
French or British you had an easy time fleeing Europe for America in the late
1930s                                                                              on the eve of 
World War II, but the gates were in all likelihood shut against you if you were Russo- or Polish- 
or even German-Jewish.

Many of the middle class, especially the farmers, blamed the rich, the easterners, and the bankers 
for what was going wrong with late nineteenth-century America. The Populists of
the 1890s blamed the eastern bankers and the gold standard. The Progressives sought reforms to try 
to diminish the power of what they saw as a wealthy-would be aristocracy: the
a€oemalefactors of great wealtha€D in Theodore Roosevelta€™ s words. But the Populists and the 
Progressives remained minority political currents in America until the coming
of     the Great Depression. In the meantime, the voters continued to narrowly elect Republican 
presidentsa€”or that triangulating bastard Grover Clevelanda€”who were more-or-
less satisfied with American economic and social developments, and who believed that a€oethe 
business of America is business.a€D

The Democrats who sought a more equal distribution of income and more action by the government to 
put its thumb on the scales of the market in the interest of greater equality
failed to wield political power even though they had a solid lock on the votes of the south after 
the disenfranchisement of the 1870s and a pretty solid lock on the votes of
immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. The populist and progressive eras failed to make much 
of an impact on American policy before World War Ia€”but the availability
of   the Populist and Progressive agendas made the shift in American politics in response to the 
Great Depression a generation later rapid and substantial. Every left-of-center
initiative that had been proposed between 1885 and 1914 was dusted off and given a try in Franklin 
Delano Roosevelta€™ s New Deal.

