Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|      Subscribe

CONDITION: 70F & Sunny:


Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!
Share

First: The Unqualified-to-Opine-on-Anything John Cochrane

Sigh. It looks like it is time for some more intellectual garbage cleanup with respect to 
well-qualified (and extremely sharp) Fed Governor nominee-designate Lisa Cook, whom a bunch of 
Republicans have decided is a soft target. Because Blacka€!

Jadrian Wooten @Wootenomics



Claudia Sahm @ Claudia Sahm

Here it is. The hit job on Lisa Cook from the Chris Brunet at the Daily Caller. For years I've seen 
attacks on Lisa for years on Economic Job Market Rumors forum. They attack any economist from an 
under-represented group who has any success. I know, https ://t.co/z8XYgYd6D4
2:40 PM r™ Jan 22,2022

36Likes3Retweets

Damned if I can see why somebody who in November 2008 thought a€oewe should have a recession. 
People who spend their lives pounding nails in Nevada need something else to doa€!a€D is qualified 
to opine on Federal Reseve personnel, or indeed on anything else.

For one thing, he was then under the false illusion that housing construction was then in some 
sense above trend, and we needed to shift labor out of construction to rebalance the economy. The 
structural adjustment had already been carried out over the previous 2 1/2 years, as construction 
spending had stood down and domestic consumer and equipment manufacturing had stood up, and has 
labor had flowed out of construction and into other sectors:

Managing the Collapse of the Housing Bubble

FRED     Private Residential Fixed Investment/Nominal Potential Gross Domest
Gross private domestic investment: Domestic business/Nominal Poter

Exports of Goods and Services/Nominal Potential Gross Domestic Pro*
Government Consumption Expenditures and Gross Investment/Nomin


2010          201S

Housing sits down: from its peak to late 2007, residential investment falls by 3.0%-points of 
potential output. Exports and
business investment stand up, by 2.5%-points and 1.0%-point of potential output, respectively. The 
economy remains near
full employment.

For another, he was then under the false illusion that structural adjustment is accomplished by 
pushing people out of low-social-value occupations into the zero-social-value occupation that is 
Soebeing unemployeds□. It is not. Structural adjustment is accomplished by pulling people into 
high-social-value occupations.
For a third, he has never, ever taken even small steps to attempt to mark any of his beliefs to 
market.

I have written about this before. Time to hoist it again:

Apropos of John CochraneS™ s late-2008 declarations ”SQWe should have a recession. People who spend 
their lives pounding nails in Nevada need something else to doSiSQ. It was made at a time when the 
share of the U.S. labor force in construction was below its long-run average, and had been below 
its long-run average for fifteen months. It was made at a moment when the structural-adjustment 
climb-down from the housing boom had already taken place. And it was made with no recognition at 
all that
structural adjustment takes place by pulling people into high-value jobs, not by pushing them out 
of low-value jobs into zero-value non-job


Cochrane a€™ s remark was reported by John Lippert of Bloomberg. Cochrane took great exception:

I did not write this. It is an attribution, taken out of context, from a <http://bloomberg.com> 
article, written by a reporter with whom I spent about 10 hours patiently trying to explain some 
basics, and who also turned out only to be on a hunt for embarrassing quotes. Nevertheless, I was 
trying to explain how sectoral shifts contribute to unemployment. I never asserted that a€~it takes 
mass unemployment across the whole nation to get carpenters to move out of Nevadaa€™ a€!

Paul Krugmana€™ s glossed on this as a€oe[Cochrane claims] it takes mass unemployment across the 
whole nation to get carpenters to move out of Nevadaa€!a€D That, to me, seems an eminently fair 
gloss on Cochranea€™ s a€DWe should have a recession. People who spend their lives pounding nails 
in Nevada need something else to doa€!a€D What else, in this context, could a€oeWe should have a 
recessiona€!a€D possibly mean?
Yet, for Cochrane, being accurately quoted was some kind of vicious personal attack:

The level of personal attack in [Paul Krugmana€™ s] New York Times article, and the fudging of the 
facts to achieve it, is simply amazing. As one little example, take my quotation about carpenters 
in Nevada. Krugman writes: a€~And Cochrane declares that high unemployment is actually gooda€!. You 
cannot even dredge up an out-of-context quote for that monstrously made-up opinion
Leta€™ s consider Cochranea€™ s claim that Bloomberg reporter John Lippert a€oeturned out only to 
be on a hunt for embarrassing quotesa€d, that Cochrane a€oespent about 10 hours patiently trying to 
explain some basicsa€D, and that Cochrane a€oedid not write this. It is an attribution, taken out 
of contexta€D. And Cochrane implies the context was him patiently explaining things to a reporter.

Cochranea€™ s implication is false. It was not in a private conversation with a reporter. It was 
the thesis of Cochranea€™ s 2008 CRISP Forum Keynote Address. Scott Gosnell reports:

I was there. I may even have a recording down in the archives and may have sprained my eyes I 
rolled them so harda€!. I went to all of those econ talks at Gleacher while I lived in Chicago. The 
noticeable thing about Cochrane was that he was very good at financial economics, but fell apart 
when he tried to jump to macro. But of course faculty could say all kinds of things without getting 
much skepticism. Being a Mellon-style liquidationist was sort of edgy and cool among the Republican­
leaning economists at the timea€!. Where before, Austrian economics would get you a glance askance, 
in 2008, it would get you a $300+ bottle of wine at dinner with Paul Ryan.

The kind and gracious John Lippert tells a very different story than Cochrane about where the quote 
came from, and asserts that it is in context, and is a direct quotation, not a€oean attributiona€D, 
whatever that might mean:
Hi Professor DeLong:

Thanks for your note. Professor Cochranea€™ s complaint [about my story] is something of which I 
became aware several months after we published our story in 2008....

The bottom line is that Bloomberg did not respond to Cochranea€™ s comments. He never sent them to 
us, despite my request that he do so. When we became aware of his complaint, we saw no reason to 
make a correction. Cochrane made the a€~pounding nailsa€™ comment at a Chicago Booth forum at the 
Gleacher Center in downtown Chicago in November 2008. It was part of an ongoing lecture series, as 
I recall. It was kind of a big event, with a couple hundred people. So they may
have a recording that you can access.

Good luck with your inquiries.
Tks,

John Lippert

I have been unable to get a copy of the recording from the Gleacher Center at the University of 
Chicagoa€!


READING: John Lippert on AMe Idiocy of AMe Chicago School in Late 2008

a€!Cochranea€™ s declarationa€”made at a time when the share of the U.S, labor force in 
construction was below its long-run average and had been below its long-run average for fifteen 
monthsa€”that: a€oewe shoula€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 2 likes A- 2 comments A- Brad DeLong




One Picture:

Michael A. Arouet @MichaelAArouet • 3h
2/2 Accurate ht @CShadegg

Socialists living in capitalism:


Socialists living in socialism:

Very Briefly Noted:


• Matthew Yglesias: Can America Get to Yes on a New Reactor Design?-. a€~Everyone says they want 
the NRC to approve advanced nuclear reactors, but it keeps not happeninga€! LINK:


Can America get to yes on a new reactor design?

Slow Boring

Back in November, I wrote about Oklo, a California-based company that was midway through the 
process of (hopefully) getting the first-ever license to operate a commercial nuclear microreactor. 
Unfortunately, what happened instead is that the Nuclear Regulatory Commission denied their 
applicationa€l
Read more

a year ago A- 59 likes A- 52 comments A- Matthew Yglesias


•  Michael Harriot: MLK Is Revered Today but the Real King Would Make White People Uncomfortable'. 
a€~Martin Luther King Jr was a walking, talking example of everything this country despises about 
the quest for Black liberationa€! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2022/jan/17/mlk-is-revered-today-but-the-real-king-would-
make-white-people-uncomfortable>

•  Jason Zweig: How a Flood of Money Swamped Cathie Wooda€™ s ARK: a€~The ARK Innovation ETF posted 
big returns, and big money followed. Now ita€™ s the latest example of what happens when a fund 
becomes too large for its own gooda€l <https://www.wsj 
.com/articles/cathie-wood-ark-innovation-performance-11642175833>

•  Lauren Goode: iMessage Is the Glue that Keeps Me Stuck to the iPhone: a€~The accidental social 
networka€l 
<https://www.theverge.com/2016/10/10/13225514/apple-iphone-cant-switch-pixel-android-imessage-addict
ion>

From Twitter:

•  Brad DeLong: a€™ Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century". Forthcoming 
from Basic Books on September 6,2022. 68th Sentence <https://t.co/bRKJD7ruJy>: "So throughout the 
long twentieth century, communities and people looked at what the market economy was delivering to 
them and said: a€™ Did we order that?a€™ a€D. That last reference is to Nobel Prize-winning 
physicist LI. Rabia€™ s quip in response to the identification of the muona€”an elementary
particle that seemed then to be nothing other than a much heavier version of the electrona€!

"Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century". Forthcoming from Basic Books 
on September 6,2022. 68th Sentence <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>: "So throughout the long twentieth century, 
communities and people looked at what the market... 233-slouching/




bit .ly Slouching Towards UtopiaFrom one of the worlda€™ s leading economists, a grand narrative of 
the century that made us richer than ever, yet left us u...
10:29 PM r™ Jan 22,2022

•  Brad DeLong: a€™Massachusetts-style American nationalism is this: We have come from all the 
corners of the earth to this New World to build, together, a Godly utopia, of which all fleeing the 
troubles and oppressions of the Old World can have their share, and we will be as a City Upon a 
Hill, a Light Unto the Nations. Kentucky-style American nationalism isa€!

**Massachusetts-style** American nationalism is this: We have come from all the corners of the 
earth to this New World to build, together, a Godly utopia, of which all fleeing the troubles and 
oppressions of the Old World can have their share, and we will be as a City... 1/
1:44 AM a'™ Jan 21,2022

23Likes5Retweets

•  Brad DeLong: a€™ Yes. Keynesa€™s peroration in his 1938 letter is quite something. Addressed to 
FDR: "Private and personal: Dear Mr. PresidentaC!. Finally, the railroadsa€l potential sources of 
substantial demand for new capital expenditure, Whether hereafter they area€! <

@besttrousers Yes. Keynes's peroration in his 1938 letter is quite something. Addressed to FDR: 
"Private and personal: Dear Mr. President.... Finally, the railroads... potential sources of 
substantial demand for new capital expenditure, Whether hereafter they are... 1/
2:41 PMr™ Jan 21,2022

•  Brad DeLong: a€™ The bottom line: the later you abandon the Gold Standard, and the less 
enthusiastic you are about a real New Deala€”having the government print money and borrow and buy 
stuffa€”the worse you do in the Great Depression. 13/END" I Twitter_: a€~The earlier you abandon 
the Gold Standard and start your New Deala€”and the more comprehensive and aggressive your New Deal 
is in terms of the government printing money and borrowing and buying stuffa€”the better. In Japan,
Takahashi Korikiyu threw the Gold Standard over thea€!

@CausabonT The bottom line: the later you abandon the Gold Standard, and the less enthusiastic you 
are about a real New Deala€”having the government print money and borrow and buy stuffa€”the worse 
you do in the Great Depression. 13/END
3:19 PM r™ Jan 21,2022

•  Brad DeLong: a€™ The next 7.5 months until my book comes out are going to be very, very, very 
hard for mea€! If Al Smith & FDR had won the presidency in 1928, they would have been thrown out in 
1932 by Americans outraged at how the Democrats botched the economya€!



Brad DeLong dY— dY’%o @delong

@markyzaguirre @BorisVeytsman @daicing @gaodawei The next 7.5 months until my book comes out are 
going to be very, very, very hard for me... If Al Smith & FDR had won the presidency in 1928, they 
would have

And, indeed, the cards were thrown into the center, picked
up, and redealt. Franklin Roosevelt meant what he said about a
“New Deal.” In the United States, by striking contrast with so
much  else of the global north, the Great Depression did not em­
power reaction, but rather far-reaching liberal and social democrat­
ic experimentation.

thrown out in 1932 by Americans outraged at how the Democrats botched the economy... 1/ 
<bit.ly/3pP3Krk>

This is somewhat of a surprise: Why did the Great Depres­
sion not push the United States to the right, into reaction, or pXQtPr

or fascism, as it did in so many other countries, but in­
stead to the left? My guess is that it was sheer luck—Herbert
Hoover  and the Republicans were in power when the Great De­
pression started, and they were thrown out of office in 1932. That
Franklin Roosevelt was center-left rather than center-right, that the
length of the Great Depression meant that institutions were shaped
by   it in a durable sense, and that the United States was the world’s
rising superpower, and the only major power not crippled to some
degree by World War II—all these factors made a huge difference.
After World War II, the United States had the power and the will to
shape the world outside the Iron Curtain. It did so. And that meant
much of the world was to be reshaped in a New Deal rather than a
reactionary or fascist mode.

3:32 PM r™ Jan 21,2022

!Like2Re tweets

• Brad DeLong: d€™ Ummmmd€\ Automobiles? Only Elon Musk has been out there trying to pay money to 
buy more chips and figure out how to use them to make cars? Everyone else has been sitting on their 
                ;, saying: we are missing a $10 part, so we cannot make a $40,000 car! Smells very 
much like concentration-enabled cartel action to mea€!. Paul Krugman: "True, few economists believe 
that monopoly power has been a big cause of recent inflationa€!


Brad DeLong dY— dY’%o @delong

@paulkrugman Ummmma€! Automobiles? Only Elon Musk has been out there trying to pay money to buy 
more chips and figure out how to use them to make cars? Everyone else has been sitting on their 
hands, saying: we are missing a $10 part, so we cannot make a $40,000 car! Smells very much likea€! 
1/
4:46 PM r™ Jan 21,2022

•  Brad DeLong: a€™ That isa€\ not right. If you had an idea that seemed half-plausible that might 
help cure the Great Depression, FDR would listen to it, try it, and then attempt to reinforce 
success and cut short failure. Since those he listened to were his fellow progressives, and 
sincea€! 1/" / Twitter_: a€~That isa€! not right. If you had an idea that seemed half-plausible 
that might help cure the Great Depression, FDR would listen to it, try it, and then attempt to 
reinforce success and cut short failurea€!

That is... not right. If you had an idea that seemed half-plausible that might help cure the Great 
Depression, FDR would listen to it, try it, and then attempt to reinforce success and cut short 
failure. Since those he listened to were his fellow progressives, and since... 1/
2:21 PMr™ Jan 21,2022

13Likes2Retweets

•  Brad DeLong: a€™a€ceSlouching Towards Utopiaa€Ck€\. Forthcoming from Basic Books on September 
6,2022. 65tha€“67th Sentences https://t.co/bRKJD7ruJy: "But people think they have other rights 
[than property rightsa€!

"Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century". Forthcoming from Basic Books 
on September 6,2022. 65th-67th Sentences < bit.ly/3pP3Krk>: "But people think they have other 
rights [than property rights, which are themselves only... 220-slouching/




bit .ly Slouching Towards UtopiaFrom one of the worlda€™ s leading economists, a grand narrative of 
the century that made us richer than ever, yet left us u...
1:54 PM a'™ Jan 21,2022

1 Like 1 Retweet

Paragraphs:

Ben Thompson: The Intel Split: a€~One of my favorite quotes from Michael Malonea€™ s The Intel 
Trinity is about how a€oeMoorea€™ s Lawa€Da€! was not a law, but a choice: a€oea€!a social compact, 
an agreement between the semiconductor industry and the rest of the world that the former will 
continue to strive to maintain the trajectory of the law as long as possible, and the latter will 
pay for the fruits of this breakneck pace. Moorea€™ s Law has worked not because it is intrinsic to 
semiconductor
technology. On the contrary, if tomorrow morning the worlda€™ s great chip companies were to agree 
to stop advancing the technology, Moorea€™ s Law would be repealed by tomorrow evening, leaving the 
next few decades with the task of mopping up all of its implications .a€D Moore made that 
observation in 1965, and for the next 50 years that choice fell to Intel to make. One of the chief 
decision-makers was a young man in his 20s named Patrick Gelsinger. Gelsinger joined Intel straight 
out of high school, and
worked  on the team developing the 286 processor while studying electrical engineering at Stanford; 
he was the 4th lead for the 386 while completing his Masters. After he graduated Gelsinger became 
the lead of the 486 project; he was only 25a€!

LINK: <https://stratechery.com/2022/the-intel-split/>

Debby Wu: Chipmakers Are Outspending Governments: a€~In early January, Florida unveiled a $9.7 
million program to boost state infrastructure and train future semiconductor engineers in the hope 
of attracting chip manufacturers to the Sunshine State. The laudable initiative was off by a few 
orders of magnitude in its estimation of the costa€!. Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing Co. is set 
to spend over $40 billion on capex this year alone. Intela€! more than $25 billion in 2022a€!. 
Samsunga€! is on a
multiyear spending spree totaling more than $100 billiona€!. TSMCa€™ s $12 billion fab under 
development in Arizona got a boost from Phoenix authorities, which agreed to provide about $200 
million to develop roads, sewers and other infrastructure. Samsunga€™ s $17 billion Texas plant is 
also likely to win some U.S. federal incentives that may net it billions. If Florida really wants 
in on that hotly contested action, ita€™ 11 have to be significantly more generousa€!. Japan is 
offering $6.8 billion in incentives to
lure global chipmakers to the country and India is allocating $10 billion over six years for the 
development of a local semiconductor industry. The U.S. may be prepared to come up with a more 
bountiful $52 billion to bolster its domestic chip industry, but the Biden administration is still 
struggling to get that approved, and that amount is expected to be split among several companies. 
And none of these countries are buying the very latest and best technology with their proposed 
subsidies and support. At least 70% of
TSMCa€™ s massive spending in 2022 is devoted to cutting-edge fabrication and capacity, meaning the 
majority of the budget will be used to improve facilities at home in Taiwan, where the company 
still makes the most advanced chipsa€!

LINK: <https 
://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-01-18/chipmakers-are-outspending-governments-fully-charge
d?cmpid=BBD011822 TECH>

JA©rA©mie Cohen-Setton & al.: Supply-Side Policies in the Depression: Evidence from France: a€~The 
effects of supply-side policies in depressed economies are controversial. We shed light on this 
debate using evidence from France in the 1930s. In 1936, France departed from the gold standard and 
implemented large-scale mandatory wage increases and hours restrictions. This quickly ended 
deflation, but output stagnated. We present time-series and cross-sectional evidence that the 
supply-side policies, in
particular the 40-hour law, contributed to French stagflation. These results are inconsistent both 
with the standard one-sector new Keynesian model and with a two-sector model calibrated to match 
our cross-sectional estimates. We propose an alternative, disequilibrium model consistent with 
expansionary effects of lower real interest rates and contractionary effects of higher real wages. 
This model and our empirical evidence suggest that without supply-side problems, France would have 
recovered rapidly after leaving
the  gold standarda€!

LINK: <http://www-personal.umich.edu/~hausmani/Cohen Setton Hausman. Wieland.pdf>

Josh Barro: Today in the Mayonnaise Clinic: How to Have Useful Conversations: a€~Ita€™ s my job, so 
let me tell you how I approach ita€L The show is a success if it informs or persuades. To inform or 
persuade, the guests have to have disagreements with each other and the audience, they have to 
understand where the other side is coming from, and they have to approach that gap in good 
faitha€l. You need to have a disagreement over an issue that mattersa€!. You need to discuss the 
actual nexus of the
disagreement in good faith. Unfortunately, during the Trump era, it was very challenging to achieve 
both this bullet and the prior one. Trump took the Republican Party with him but got a surprisingly 
small fraction of the conservative commentariat. The anti-Trump rump has gotten airtime vastly 
disproportionate to its influence, but most of the pro-Trump pundits are full of shit. Ita€™ s a 
huge problem for the discussion format (and it has been for seven years)a€!. Choose topics and 
panelists that allow you to achieve
both    of these goalsa€!. Pick panelists who have something interesting to say about the topics 
youa€™ ve chosena€!. Remember youa€™re at work and the show is a work producta€!. Dona€™t book 
assholesa€!

LINK:

SFR


Today in the Mayonnaise Clinic: how to have useful conversations

Dear readers: Usually, Ia€™ m going to provide short-ish answers to several letters each week. But 
reader Travis Donnell wrote in with a question that invites a long answer, and wea€™ ve heard 
versions of this question from other readers too. Herea€™ s what he askeda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 22 Ekes A- 8 comments A- Josh Barro
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^ ”1 really would like to collect enough from it to 
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|      Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

One of the highest-subscription a€~Stacks is:

Tipping Point Quick Hits'. a€~Israel prepares for Iran, NASA considers alien contact, and a Temple 
dye is restoreda€!. The incoming commander of the Israel Air Force (IAF) told The Jerusalem Post 
that Israel was prepareda€’’right nowa€”to strike Irana€™ s nuclear program. Major-General Tomer 
Bar will officially take command of the IAF in Aprila€!. When asked if he thinks Israel can 
successfully destroy Irana€™ s nuclear facilities, Bar stressed that a€oethere is no way that we 
will
operate there, one thousand kilometers from here, and I will return home without being able to say 
a€~I completed the mission.a€™ a€D Ita€™ s noteworthy that Israela€™ s military leaders are now 
referring to the potential of a strike at any moment, and assuming that it will happen soon. I have 
written before, of course, that a preemptive strike from Israel could be the match that sparks the 
Gog-Magog War. Interestingly, Bar seems to indicate that he understands hitting Iran wona€™ t be
the  end of a solitary nation-to-nation conflict, but the beginning of a broader one involving 
multiple groupsa€!

LINK:

Tipping Point Prophecy Update

Tipping Point Quick Hits (1.13.22)

Israel Air Force Commander Prepared for Iran Strike In an interview published in late December, the 
incoming commander of the Israel Air Force (IAF) told The Jerusalem Post that Israel was 
prepareda€’’right nowa€”to strike Irana€™ s nuclear program. Major-General Tomer Bar will 
officially take command of the IAF in Aprila€!

Read more

a year ago A- 227 likes A- 72 comments

Back in Genesis 10 there is a guy named Magog. He is the author of a tribe of people, and thus, 
eventually, a nation, Magog, for it is standard in the Hebrew Bible to refer to peoples by the name 
of their eponymous ancestor.
By the time Ezekiel is prophesying, in Ezekiel 38, Magog is a land, and Gog is the Prince of Magog:

Son of man, direct your face against Gog, of the land of Magog, the prince, leader of Meshech and 
Tubal, and prophesy concerning him. Say: Thus said the Lord: Behold, I am against you, Gog, the 
prince, leader of Meshech and Tubal...

But later writers do not appear to have copies of the Book of Ezekiel handy. They relied on their 
memory, which played them false. They turned a€oeGog from Magoga€D to a€oeGog and MagogaCO. And so 
we have John the Theologian on the island of Patmos:
When the thousand years are over, Satan will be released from his prison and will go out to deceive 
the nations in the four corners of the Eartha€”Gog and Magoga€”and to gather them for battle. In 
number they are like the sand on the seashorea€!

Ronald Reagan appears to have been one of those who thought a€oeleader of Meshecha€D in 
Hebrewa€”rosh Mesheka€”was a€oeRussia MoscowaCC. And French leaks report the rumor that George W. 
Bush told Jacques Chirac about Gog and Magog back before he launched the attack on Iraq back in 
2003.

Yet somehow confidence in prophecy is not dented by the fact that somewhere on the line there was 
static: either the divinely inspired Ezekiel misheard the message, and transformed the nation of 
Gog into a person a€oeof the land of Magog, the prince, leader of Meshech and Tubala€!a€D or John 
of Patmos and his posse simply did not have a good enough memory to accurately recall the Ezekiel 
verses they were adapting for their own address to the Seven Congregations of Asia Minor, the 
message of which is:
a€oeHunker down! Dona€™ t try to smite our enemies! For soon God will smite our enemies in a way 
that will gladden your heart beyond your wildest imaginings!a€D

The theology of that message, of course, does not sound very Christian to me. But the most deeply 
disturbing thing is people eager for a war that will kill hundreds of thousands or more, because 
they think God has willed it, based on two written-down propheciesa€! at least one of which has to 
be wrong.


Today in the Mayonnaise Clinic: how to have useful conversations

Dear readers: Usually, Ia€™ m going to provide short-ish answers to several letters each week. But 
reader Travis Donnell wrote in with a question that invites a long answer, and wea€™ ve heard 
versions of this question from other readers too. Herea€™ s what he askeda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 22 Ekes A- 8 comments A- Josh Barro
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^ ”1 really would like to collect enough from it to 
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|      Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

One of the highest-subscription a€~Stacks is:

Tipping Point Quick Hits'. a€~Israel prepares for Iran, NASA considers alien contact, and a Temple 
dye is restoreda€!. The incoming commander of the Israel Air Force (IAF) told The Jerusalem Post 
that Israel was prepareda€’’right nowa€”to strike Irana€™ s nuclear program. Major-General Tomer 
Bar will officially take command of the IAF in Aprila€!. When asked if he thinks Israel can 
successfully destroy Irana€™ s nuclear facilities, Bar stressed that a€oethere is no way that we 
will
operate there, one thousand kilometers from here, and I will return home without being able to say 
a€~I completed the mission.a€™ a€D Ita€™ s noteworthy that Israela€™ s military leaders are now 
referring to the potential of a strike at any moment, and assuming that it will happen soon. I have 
written before, of course, that a preemptive strike from Israel could be the match that sparks the 
Gog-Magog War. Interestingly, Bar seems to indicate that he understands hitting Iran wona€™ t be
the  end of a solitary nation-to-nation conflict, but the beginning of a broader one involving 
multiple groupsa€!

LINK:

Tipping Point Prophecy Update

Tipping Point Quick Hits (1.13.22)

Israel Air Force Commander Prepared for Iran Strike In an interview published in late December, the 
incoming commander of the Israel Air Force (IAF) told The Jerusalem Post that Israel was 
prepareda€’’right nowa€”to strike Irana€™ s nuclear program. Major-General Tomer Bar will 
officially take command of the IAF in Aprila€!

Read more

a year ago A- 227 likes A- 72 comments

Back in Genesis 10 there is a guy named Magog. He is the author of a tribe of people, and thus, 
eventually, a nation, Magog, for it is standard in the Hebrew Bible to refer to peoples by the name 
of their eponymous ancestor.
By the time Ezekiel is prophesying, in Ezekiel 38, Magog is a land, and Gog is the Prince of Magog:

Son of man, direct your face against Gog, of the land of Magog, the prince, leader of Meshech and 
Tubal, and prophesy concerning him. Say: Thus said the Lord: Behold, I am against you, Gog, the 
prince, leader of Meshech and Tubal...

But later writers do not appear to have copies of the Book of Ezekiel handy. They relied on their 
memory, which played them false. They turned a€oeGog from Magoga€D to a€oeGog and MagogaCO. And so 
we have John the Theologian on the island of Patmos:
When the thousand years are over, Satan will be released from his prison and will go out to deceive 
the nations in the four corners of the Eartha€”Gog and Magoga€”and to gather them for battle. In 
number they are like the sand on the seashorea€!

Ronald Reagan appears to have been one of those who thought a€oeleader of Meshecha€D in 
Hebrewa€”rosh Mesheka€”was a€oeRussia MoscowaCC. And French leaks report the rumor that George W. 
Bush told Jacques Chirac about Gog and Magog back before he launched the attack on Iraq back in 
2003.

Yet somehow confidence in prophecy is not dented by the fact that somewhere on the line there was 
static: either the divinely inspired Ezekiel misheard the message, and transformed the nation of 
Gog into a person a€oeof the land of Magog, the prince, leader of Meshech and Tubala€!a€D or John 
of Patmos and his posse simply did not have a good enough memory to accurately recall the Ezekiel 
verses they were adapting for their own address to the Seven Congregations of Asia Minor, the 
message of which is:
a€oeHunker down! Dona€™ t try to smite our enemies! For soon God will smite our enemies in a way 
that will gladden your heart beyond your wildest imaginings!a€D

The theology of that message, of course, does not sound very Christian to me. But the most deeply 
disturbing thing is people eager for a war that will kill hundreds of thousands or more, because 
they think God has willed it, based on two written-down propheciesa€! at least one of which has to 
be wrong.


