Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) This is an excellent choice. This will be great fun. And we really do have a shot at changing 
the world, albeit in a small way:

Equitable Growth: Names Economist Michelle Holder as New CEO'. a€~Holder will take the reins at 
7-year-old nonprofit research and grantmaking
organization dedicated to accelerating research on how economic inequality affects economic growth 
and stabilitya€!. Holder is an assistant professor of
economics  at John Jay College, City University of New York. Her research focuses on the Black 
community and women of color in the U.S. labor market.
Holder will succeed former President and CEO and co-founder Heather Boushey, who currently serves 
as a member of the White House Council of
Economic Advisers. a€oel am thrilled to join Equitable Growth as its new president and CEO,a€D 
Holder said. a€oeAs a labor economist focused on race,
class, and gender, I know how critical Equitable Growtha€™ s mission is, especially funding and 
examining research to show how economic inequality
affects growth. Now more than ever, in this new governing moment, we have a chance to advance 
evidence-backed policies to promote equitable economic
growth.a€Da€! Named one of 19 Black economists to watch by Fortune magazine in June 2020a€! Holder 
will officially start as president and CEO in
SeptemberaCI

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/press/equitable-growth-names-economist-michelle-holder-as-new-ceo/>

2) It is crucial now to start doing the work so that we are prepared to deal with the next economic 
downturn, when it comes:

Alix Gould-Werth: New Report Lays Out the Path Forward for Faltering U.S. Unemployment Insurance 
System: a€~The Unemployment

Insurance program has been plagued by serious problems for decades. It is underfinanced, which 
leads to benefit amounts that are too low, benefit durations
that are too short, and enrollment processes that are confusing and cumbersome. The eligibility 
criteria do not reflect the realities of todaya€™ s labor
marketa€!. States are now taking unprecedented action that further erodes the strength of the 
program. More than 25 governors have announced that they
will prematurely cut off workers in their states from the federal pandemic unemployment programs 
that extended benefit length, increased its amount, and
made it available to workers who are outside the scope of the traditional program-eligibility 
guidelinesa€! resting on unproven claims that providing
support  to unemployed workers hurts labor market recoverya€!. Todaya€™ s report provides a roadmap 
to developing a nationally uniform UI program
with benefit levels and durations that are responsive to economic conditionsa€! to prevent 
policymakers from continuing to rely on Band-Aid programs in
moments of economic crisisa€!. The new report also offers a path to ensuring that all members of 
the contemporary workforce who lose work through no
fault                                                                       of their own are 
eligible for benefits. And perhaps most exciting, it lays out a blueprint for fixing the financing 
problemsa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/a-new-report-lavs-out-the-path-forward-for-faltering-u-s-unemplovment-i
nsurance-svstem/>

3) A truly marvelous interview of Equitable Growtha€™ s own Betsey Stevenson:

Ezra Klein : Interviews Betsey Stevenson: a€™ "We got three months left of these extra $300 
payments. I dona€™ t think anybody is sitting at home and
thinking, aw, I just am going to five high on the hog on these unemployment insurance payments. I 
think theya€™ re thinking, my job is miserable and
Ia€™   m going to take this nice time for a break. And Ia€™ m going to look right now while I can 
for something better. And I guarantee you that we could
get rid of all of unemployment insurance tomorrow, and we wouldna€™ t put 7.5 million people back 
to work overnighta€!. It might even be OKa€!
appreciate the fact that people have had a really hard year. People who have white collar jobs with 
good incomes feel like theya€™ ve had a hard yeara€!.
Well,   if youa€™re barely putting food on the table, your job became enormously more miserable, 
and then you turn on the news and you see people
yelling  at you because youa€™re not getting back to work fast enough. Thata€™ s just a lack of 
appreciation of the humanity of lower wage workersa€! If
UI  is having an effect, ita€™ s smalla€!. Do we really need to deny benefits to millions of people 
because wea€™ re worried about whether we might have
had a few thousand more jobs?a€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes 
.com/2021/06/18/podcasts/transcript-ezra-klein-interviews-betsey-stevenson.html>

4) From 2017, but still the best panel I have participated in on globalizationa€™ s current 
vicissitudes:

Gillian Tett, Steven Ciobo, J. Bradford DeLong, John Hagel, Alejandro Ramirez MagaA±a, & Stephen 
Schwarzman (2017): Globalization in the
Crosshairs: a€~In the 20 years leading up to the financial crisis, international trade grew at 
twice the rate of global output. Since then, trade has struggled
to  recover. Recent data is more worrying still, suggesting that tradea€™ s share of global GDP is 
falling. With mainstream political support for multilateral
trade deals diminishing and populist movements on the rise in the U.S. and Europe, it is time to 
examine the future of globalization. Panelists will consider
the following questions: Has international tradea€”and globalization more broadly a€’’entered a 
period of stagnation or even reversal? Once unleashed, can
globalization ever reverse or are we just seeing a slowdown in a normal cycle? What are the 
implications for the global economy and the international
economic order?a€!

LINK: <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fPDH_R2Chbk&list=PLwJK8JzK8C_fTlczQseSmwiIGWEeE7TgL>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)What do we mean when we say that a€oethe plague years will pack between one and two decades of 
digital transformation into a very short timea€D? We need to figure this out,
because it is going to be very important not just for productivity but for distribution, as a 
substantial part of white-collar work undergoes a Christensenian disruption, and that
ramifies:

Steven Sinofsky: Disruption at Work: Ita€™ s More than just WFH: a€~The structure and design of 
corporations are rooted in everything that happened
after WWII from an influx of labor, growth in housing, rise of computing, and even the militarya€!. 
The disruption that took place was a€cescalea€Da€”
corporations brought capabilities to make and distribute things globallya€!. The first 25 years of 
interneta€!. Walmart took computers and software and
turned    the elaborate processes of selecting merchandise, distributing it, monitoring sales, and 
so on and automated it per store. Amazon built one giant store
with everythinga€!. That is what disruption looks likea€!. The pandemic pulled forward a decade or 
more of a€oedigital transformation^Da€! the
equivalent of what WWII did to the corporation^!. The question is not a€oework remotelya€D, but 
what is the very structure of getting things done? We
cana€™  t see it nowa€!. It happens slowly at first, then very quickly. It seems impossible to 
imagine a different way to do things, then wea€™re doing
things   in a different waya€!

LINK: <https://al 6z .com/2021/06/12/disruption-at-work-its-more-than-iust-wfh/>

2) This strikes me as rather important. But do note that Biden has consistently portrayed his major 
initiatives as sensible and common sense. It is the Republicans who are
pretending that they are radical-left initiatives, and making them of partisan salience. All 
Democrats can do is to beg McCarthy, McConnell, Murdoch, and the other grifters to limit
their culture war grifting to unimportant symbolic issues, and let the business of government 
operate as the business of government should. But experience tells us that does not
work. ObamaCare is RomneyCare, after all. But, yes, instead of making everything a culture-war 
battlefield, today not everything is a culture-war battlefield. Perhaps McCarthy
and McConnell have told Murdoch and company to cool it on normal business? It is not clear to me 
what is going on:

Matthew Yglesias: The Rise & Importance of Secret Congress: a€~On highly salient issuesa€! 
polarization is high and compromise is rare. Congress is
prone to gridlocka€!. Members of the minority (rightly) think that any popular, well-known bill 
that passes on a bipartisan basis is going to help the


theya€™ d rather have members that fight the other party than help their own state, ita€™ s 
extremely risky for a member of Congress to let an opposite­
party president be seen as successfula€!. Buta€! no Republican congressman is going to be primaried 
for voting for the low-salience Endless Frontiers Act,
because it doesna€™ t count as a€oegiving Biden a wina€Da€l. The most important implication is that 
if you dona€™ t have the votes to steamroll the
opposition, avoid making your issue coded as highly partisan. Dona€™ t frame your issue as a 
a€cewina€D for your party; talk about it as a common­
sense reforma€!. The energy bill that passed late last year is a very significant injection of 
funding into zero-carbon energy research and deployment. But it
wasna€™ t coded as a a€oeclimate bill,a€D and ita€™ s certainly not the a€oeGreen New Deala€Da€!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring.com/pZthe-rise-and-importance-of-secret>

3) The step-away from high-tech industrial policy that happened in the late-1970s here in the 
United States is still something that is grossly understudied. How did America forget
so much of its Hamiltonian history that the Democratic establishment^™ s position in 1984 could 
have been one of opposition to a€oeindustrial policya€Da€”that we should let
the market pick our leading sectors, because the market was really good at figuring out where major 
externality spillovers were and at directing resources toward them? That was,
frankly, insane. Yet that was what I was taught. The underlying, rarely voiced argument was that 
America was so sclerotic and prone to rent-seeking that we did not dare even think
about what Alexander Hamilton had thought about, because it would encourage the rent-seekers and 
give them another tool to use to justify their actions. But they did not need
another one. They had plenty. And we needed faster economic growth:

Robert Farley: With Focus on China, US Senate Passes Major Industrial Policy Bill: a€™ If the bill 
ultimately passes both houses of Congress, it will
represent a major shift in how the United States government manages its relations with the tech 
sectora€!. The bill is intended to foster the reinvigoration
of   the manufacturing side of the U.S. technology sectora€!. The Senate version faces criticism 
regarding the lack of significant oversight of the technology
companies that will benefit from the bill. However, the extent of bipartisan support in the Senate 
suggests a big enough coalition to survive negotiations
between  the House and Senate versionsa€!. Both Republican and Democrats displayed an allergy to 
industrial policy after the 1970s; that both now seem
interested in government intervention is a huge change from the long-standing consensusa€!. Whether 
this amounts to a new a€oeCold War Consensusa€D
is altogether uncertain, but the fact that concern over China can bridge one of the most poisonous 
political divides in U.S. history should probably cause
some concern in Beijinga€!

LINK: 
<https://thediplomat.com/2021/06/with-focus-on-china-us-senate-passes-major-industrial-policy-bill/>


4) With very low interest rates, blue-sky projects will swing massively in value, and the economy 
will be rife with bubbles, and skilled, charismatic salesmen touting fantastical
castles in the air can become very very rich indeed. But those low interest rates are a reflection 
of a perceived reality, and eliminating them produces mass unemployment. My view
is what is needed is much stronger restrictions on leverage accompanied by even lower interest 
rates and higher trend inflation, but I seem to be in a small minority of economists
here:

Tim Oa€™ Reilly: Two Economies. Two Sets of Rules: a€~Elon Musk isna€™ t superman. He does have 
supermoney. At one point early this year, Elon
Musk briefly became the richest person in the world. After a 750% increase in Teslaa€™ s stock 
market value added over $180 billion to his fortune, he
briefly had a net worth of over $200 billion. Ita€™ s now back down to a€ceonlya€D $155 billion. 
Understanding how our economy produced a result like
thisa€”what is good about it and what is dangerousa€”is crucial to any effort to address the wild 
inequality that threatens to tear our society aparta€!

LINK: <https://www.oreillv.com/radar/whv-elon-musk-is-so-rich/>

5) P-hacking is nearly everywhere in studies that report marginal significance levels above 0.001. 
There is a reason that CERN uses five-sigma: p = 0.0000001:

Julia Rohrer: The Uncanny Mountain: P-Values Between .01 & .10 Are Still a Problem: a€~Study 1: In 
line with our hypothesis, a€! p = .03. Study 2: As
expected, a€! p = .O2.Study 3: Replicating Study 2, a€! p = .06. Study 4: a€!qualified by the 
predicted interaction, a€! p = .01. Study 5: Again, a€! p = .01.
Welcome to the uncanny [1] p-mountains, one of the most scenic accumulations of p-values between 
.01 and .10 in the world !a€! if We apply the
conventional alpha-threshold, 5 p-values that pass are extremely unlikely if the null is true (.055 
= .0000003125)a€!. The data are not compatible with the
null hypothesis! However, here comes the bad news: They a€™ re not compatible with the alternative 
hypothesis eithera€!. [If you] achieve a statistical
power of 80%a€! you have an 80% chance to get a p-value between 0 and .05. However, zooming in on 
the p-values between 0 and .05, it is actually three
times more likely to get a p-value between 0 and .01 (about 60%) than to get a p-value between .01 
and .05. The chances of running five
a€oeadequatelya€n powered studies and always landing in that sweet .01 to .10 range are again 
rather small, or 0.2%. This should happen once in a blue
moon, but probably not twice in one journal issue, and certainly not routinely across whole fields 
of researcha€!

LINK: <http://www.the 100 .ci/2018/02/15/the-uncanny-mountain-p-values-between-01 -and-10-are- 
still-a-problem/>

6) America as non-overlapping, disparate social communities that do not ever, really, get to know 
one another:

Noah Smith: Social Class in America: a€~And so we wander through our country as if in parallel 
realities. We walk through teeming, crowded cities
where only a few other people really exista€”the other residents of our tiny stratum. Our class 
equals are real to us, manifesting in living colora€’’people
we might laugh with, do deals with, make love with, confess our frustrations to. The members of 
adjacent classes are a bit less reala€”washed-out
caricatures we deal with using simple heuristics. And the members of distant classes are mere 
shadows to usa€’’moving objects to be avoided on the street,
automated kiosks to service our economic needs, statistics in our daily news. The Walgreens 
cashier, the BART conductora€”who could they ever be to
you?                                                                       And who could you ever 
be to them?a€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/social-class-in-america>

7) 80% of those over 18 in the United Kingdom have had at least one vaccine dose. 55% have had the 
full course for their vaccine. And yet delta variant cases in mid-Junea€ ”6000
a daya€”were eight times what they had been in mid-May. Other virus cases? From 1000 a day in 
mid-May to 200 a day in mid-June. As anti-spreading measures ebb across the
United States, maybe some non-vaccinated people in highly vaccinated areas will avoid catching the 
COVID-19 plague. But it is now looking as though the overwhelming
proportion                                                                                 of the 
non-vaccinated will catch it this summer and fall: if R-nought for the original virus was 2.5, 
R-nought for the delta variant is 6. Delta is already the 1/3 of the U.S.
casesa€”3000/day. And the U.S. is currently running at 300 deaths/day, which is 1.3% of cases 
diagnosed three weeks ago. With only 2/3 of U.S. adults vaccinated, that leaves up
to a million more deaths coming. And that is if the virus off in India and elsewhere does not 
further explore its genetic space:

Gaetan Burgio: a€~7b illustrate the issue that Sydney area is facing with delta variant #COVID19 
outbreak, here isa€! how quickly this variant has spread
in UK. It is very quick ! <https://t.co/Q3Lca2MELJ>a€!

LINK: <https://twitter.com/GaetanBurgio/status/1407649334913507333>

8) Out of my lane again, but I do think that this is important. SARS-COVID-19 is so virulent that 
the way to bet is that it entered Wuhan very close to where and when we first see it
rapidly spreading.

There were 30 cases of COVID-19 reported before January 1,2020; there were 1500 cases reported in 
Wuhan on January 20,2021. The natural log of 15 is 7. If we were to assume
the virus took its virulent form in one spreading case on December 20, then the first plague 
version had a doubling time of 4 days. If we were to assume the virus took its virulent
form in one spreading case on December 20, then the first plague version had a doubling time of 8 
days. Given that lab workers are in social contact with each other, the odds seem
to me at least 9-to-l that the plague would have ripped through the lab staff early if it had come 
from a lab leak. But what do we have? 3 serious flu-like cases from lab workers in
November.

Thus if you had thought that there was a 50-50 chance it was a lab leak, the fact that it did not 
rip through lab staff in a very obvious and visible way in November and December,
and thus come to our notice much earlier than it did, should drive your confidence that it was a 
lab leak down to 17%. If you had thought that there was a 90-10 chance it was a lab
leak, then the absence of its ripping through lab staff in 2019 should drive your confidence that 
it was a lab leak down to 50%.


The way to bet is always that the virus came from the places were we saw it spreading rapidly. We 
did not see it spreading rapidly among people on the lab staff, or those in contact
with them. We did see it spreading rapidly among people unlucky enough to come in contact with the 
guy who visited the seafood market. Only if you had been damned near certain
that it was a lab leak should you think a lab leak is more likely than not:

Zeynep Tufekci: Where Did the Coronavirus Come From? What We Already Know Is Troubling'. a€~The 
H1N1 influenza pandemic of 1977a€“78a€!
killed an estimated 700,000 peoplea€! almost exclusively affected people in their mida€“20s or 
youngeraCI virtually identical to a strain that circulated in
the 1950s. People born before that had immunity that protected them, and younger people didna€™ t. 
But how on earth had it remained so steady
genetically, since viruses continually mutate? Scientists guessed that it had been frozen in a 
laba€L It was only in 2004 that a prominent virologist, Peter
Palese, wrote that Chi-Ming Chu, a respected virologist and a former member of the Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, told him that a€cethe introduction of
this 1977 H1N1 virusa€D was indeed thought to be due to vaccine trials involving a€cethe challenge 
of several thousand military recruits with live H1N1
virus.a€Da€! Science itself seemed to have caused a pandemic while trying to prepare for it. Now, 
for the second time in 50 years, there are questions
about  whether we are dealing with a pandemic caused by scientific researcha€!.

Troubling safety practices persisteda€!. Even if the coronavirus jumped from animal to human 
without the involvement of research activities, the
groundwork                                                                     for a potential 
disaster had been laid for years, and learning its lessons is essential to preventing othersa€!. 
Nearly every SARS case since the
original epidemic has been due to lab leaksa€”six incidents in three countries, including twice in 
a single month from a lab in Beijing. In one instance, the
mother of a lab worker died. In 2007, foot-and-mouth disease, which can devastate livestock and 
caused a massive crisis in Britain in 2001, escaped from a
drainage pipe leak at an English lab with the highest biosafety rating, BSLa€“4. Even the last 
known person who died of smallpox was someone infected
because of a lab incident in Britain in 1978a€!. Ina€! 2014, the C.D.C. contaminated a benign flu 
virus sample with deadly A(H5N1) but didna€™ t
discover the danger until months latera€!. It [also] mistakenly sent improperly deactivated anthrax 
bacteria to labs, potentially exposing at least 62 C.D.C.
employees who worked with the samples without protective geara€!.

Secrecy and the cover-ups have led to some frantic theoriesa€”for example, that the virus leaked 
from a bioweapons lab, which makes little sense, since,
for one thing, bio weapons usually involve more lethal pathogens with a known cure or vaccine, to 
protect those who employ thema€!. Bernard Roizman,
an emeritus virologist at the University of Chicago with four honorary professorships from Chinese 
universities, said he was leaning toward believing there
was a lab accident. a€oela€™ m convinced that what happened is that the virus was brought to a lab, 
they started to work with it,a€D he said, a€ceand
some sloppy individual brought it out.a€D He added, a€oeThey cana€™t admit they did something so 
stupid.a€Ua€!

Ita€™ sa€! plausible that an outbreak could have started someplace else and was detected in Wuhan 
simply because it was a big city. Testing blood banks
from across Chinaa€! would help, buta€! the Chinese government has not carried out such 
researcha€”or allowed the sharing of the results if it has. With
so much evidence withheld, ita€™ s hard to say anything about Covida€“19a€™ s origins with 
certainty, and even a genuine investigation would face
challenges. Some outbreaks have never been traced to their origin. But even if we are denied 
answers, we can still learn lessonsa€!.

A better path forward is one of true global cooperation based on mutual benefit and reciprocity. 
Despite the current dissembling, we should assume that the
Chinese government also doesna€™t want to go through this againa€’’especially given that SARS, too, 
started there. This means putting the public
interest before personal ambitions and acknowledging that despite the wonders of its power, 
biomedical research also holds dangers. To do this,
government officials and scientists need to look at the big picture: Seek comity and truth instead 
of just avoiding embarrassmentaCI

LINK: chttps ://www.nytimes .com/2021706/25/opinion/coronavirus-lab .html>

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

