SLOUCHING TOWARDS UTOPIA

J. BRADFORD DELONG

PREORDER NOW • ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

The printed endnotes in my Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century 
<https: //bit .ly/3pP3Krk>, forthcoming September 6,2022, from Basic, are minimal, minimal. They 
are (1) direct quotes plus (2) places where I am following one particular source plus (3) places 
where there is an obvious next thing to read.
The problem is that the subject deserves much more in the way of notes. Here they are, 
paragraph-by-paragraph

Subscribe now

Introduction: My Grand Narrative[a]

What I call the a€oelong twentieth centurya€D started with the watershed-crossing events of around 
1870a€”the triple emergence of globalization, the industrial research lab[l][b], and the modern 
corporation [2] a€’’which ushered in changes that began to pull the world out of the dire poverty 
that had been humanitya€™ s lot for the previous ten thousand years, since the discovery of 
agriculture. And what I call the a€oelong twentieth centurya€D ended in
2010,[c] with the worlda€™ s leading economic edge, the countries of the North Atlantic, still 
reeling from the Great Recession that had begun in 2008, and thereafter unable to resume economic 
growth at anything near the average pace that had been the rule since 1870. The years following 
2010 were to bring large system-destabilizing waves of political and cultural anger from masses of 
citizens, all upset in different ways and for different reasons at the failure
of  the system of the twentieth century to work for them as they thought that it should.

Share

Printed Endnotes:

[1] Steven Usselman, a€oeResearch and Development in the United States since 1900: An Interpretive 
Historya€D, Economic History Workshop, Yale University, November 11,2013 
https://economics.yale.edu/sites/default/files/usselman_paper.pdf; Thomas P. Hughes, American 
Genesis; A Century of Invention and Technological Enthusiasm, 1870-1970, Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 2004.

[2j Alfred Chandler, The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American Business, Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 1977.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Longer Notes:

Most of the extra notes I could add to this first paragraph have a better place further down the 
pages, sometimes much further down the pages. But I do want to add four things:

[a] I think I stole the title from Simon Auerbach from an article he wrote back in 1993: a€oeMrs. 
Thatchera€™ s Labor Laws: Slouching Towards Utopia?a€D <https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111 
/ j. 1467-923X.1993.tbOO312.x>. And the extremely insightful George Scialabba grabbed it for a talk 
title <http://georgescialabba.net/mtgs/2018/03/slouching-toward-utopia.html> four years ago. And, 
of course, Joan Didion

<https://archive.org/details/isbn 0679640866>. And, of course, the most plundered poem of the 
entire twentieth century William Butler Yeatsa€™ s The Second Coming 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/43290/the-second-coming>:

Turning and turning in the widening gyre
The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.

The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere


The best lack all conviction, while the worst
Are full of passionate intensity.

Surely some revelation is at hand;
Surely the Second Coming is at hand.

The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out
When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi

Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert
A shape with lion body and the head of a man,

A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun,

Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it
Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds.

The darkness drops again; but now I know
That twenty centuries of stony sleep

Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle,

And what rough beast, its hour come round at last,
Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?

[b] Bill Janeway sends me a quote from late-1800s Scottish-American steelmaster Andrew Carnegie on 
the birth of the IRL, and the application of science to technology and engineering:

Bill Janeway: Doing Capitalism in the Innovation Economy, 2nd ed. (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2018) <https://www.amazon.com/dp/1108471277>, p. 253: By World War I, a new institution was 
emerging to serve as the nexus of technological innovation: the industrial research laboratory. The 
relevance of science to industry had been discovered by that most entrepreneurial of capitalists, 
Andrew Carnegie, who reflected
on the economic benefits of systematic assays of iron ore by a trained chemist: a€oeWhat fools we 
had been! But then there was this consolation: we were not as great fools as our competitorsa€!.. 
Years after we had taken chemistry to guide us, [they] said they could not afford to employ a 
chemist. Had they known the truth then, they would have known they could not afford to be without 
onea€![37] Quoted in David Mowery &
Nathan Rosenberg: Technology and the Pursuit of Economic Growth (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989) <https: //ww w.amazon .com/dp/0521380332>, p. 30.

Janeway is worth quoting, both in his own voice and quoting Alfred Chandler, on this at greater 
length:

The more general recognition, a generation later, of science-based research and development as a 
source of competitive advantage may be read as an indirect impact of the railroads in the context 
of the American version of laissez-fairea€!. A national marketa€! the radical decline in 
manufacturing costs as companies exploited the a€oeeconomies of scale and scopea€D analyzed by 
Alfred Chandlera€!.

Companies ha[d] a need and an opportunity to rationalize a€oethe facilities and skills of the 
constituent companies by making concentrated investments in manufacturing, marketing and 
management, the mergers and corporate reorganizations of the late nineteenth and early twentieth 
centuries hastened the growth of industrial researcha€! In firms such as American Telephone and 
Telegraph, General Electric, U.S. Steel or Du Pont, the
development of a strong central office was closely associated with the establishment or significant 
expansion of a central research facilitya€!a€D

Thus the great corporations moved into a space that previously had been haphazardly funded, 
principally by wealthy individuals guided by motives that combined curiosity and philanthropya€! 
[with] utter lack of interest in economic or financial returna€!

And Fred Block writes from U.C. Davis that the decline of Industrial Research Laboratories in 
American oligopolistic corporations in the age of neoliberalism bears some responsibility for the 
slowdown in growth that is one of the signposts of the end of the long twentieth century:

You are right to emphasize the world-changing importance of the corporate research laboratory. 
However, I think there is a lot of evidence that the corporate research labs have declined 
dramatically in significance over the last half century. Some of this is short-termism where 
corporations dona€™ t want to spend on anything that will not improve the bottom line in the next 
two or three quarters. But far more significant is the greater
technological complexity of current innovation. Developing new products or new processes now 
requires five, six, seven, or more different scientific specialties. Not even the big monopolies 
can afford to create career lines for technologists in more than three or four fields.

So the current pattern is that they have experts in two or three fields and they link up with 
outside experts either at federal laboratories or universities or the new larger research 
institutes that the government is busy creatinga€”such as the advanced manufacturing institutes. 
Moreover, the public sites are the place where the actual innovating occurs rather than back home 
at the corporate lab that probably lacks all the high tech equipment
that the public sector provides. Nobody talks about this because it undermines the case for 
privatizing the profits rather than gainsharing that acknowledges the federal contribution.

As you imagined, I am skeptical of your reliance on the Gordon/TFP numbers, but it does not make 
too much difference in terms of your argument whether or not there was some economic improvement in 
the 90a€™ s and early 2000a€™ s. The basic point is that the neoliberals did not solve the problems 
that they claimed to solve and with rising inequality and the failure to deal with climate change, 
the economy became more fragile.
(personal communication)

[c] 1870 as the starting date is, to my mind, incontestable. The pace of technological progress 
deployed and diffused worldwide jumps up discontinuously by a factor of more than four around 1870. 
That transforms humanity from a civilization still under the dire poverty-generating harrow of 
Malthus to one that is on the way of solving the problem of producing enoughd^”of producing a big 
enough economic pie that there is a real sense that the economic
problem is no longer among the most serious problems of the human race, and that what comes to the 
forefront are the problems of distribution and utilizationa€’’slicing the pie semi-equitably, and 
tastinga€”enjoyinga€”the pie so that we can make ourselves healthy, safe, secure, and happy.

While 1870 is the starting point, there is lots of room for debate and argument about the ending 
point of the long 20th century. Did it end at the turn of 2000-2001, when George W, Bush got 
himself elected to the presidency by a 5-4 Supreme Court vote, and the possibility of renewing 
American economic exceptionalism as an exemplar of rapid and equitable growth melted away? Did it 
end in September, 2001, with the boiling over of a new round of
catastrophes that threatened to become wars of religion? Did it end in the spring of 2003, when 
George W. Bush and Richard Cheney broke the western alliance and abandoned the U.S.a€™ s mammoth 
soft-power advantage of being able to portray itself as a benevolent hegemonl Did it end in 
2007-2008, when it became very clear that the neoliberal order had no clue how to regulate 
financial markets for stable prosperity? Did it end in 2009-2011, when it was
only                                                                                                
                                                                                                    
        by the skin of our teeth that we avoided a second Great Depression, and it became clear 
that restoring high employment was not a high priority among the ruling A©lite? Was it 2016, and 
the rise of Donald Trumpa€”and the failure of Americaa€™ s Republican Party to stand up for itself? 
Was it in the 2010s in general, with a worldwide rise of movements that Madeleine Albright called 
a€cefascista€D (and who am I to argue with her?)? Was it 2020, and
the failure to competently manage the coronavirus plague as a public health challenge?

I very much hope that people will argue about this. But for now let me bracket it, and delay 
discussion until we approach the end of the book.

Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

