Subscribe now

Mark Elvin: The Pattern of the Chinese Past: The Mercantile-Malthusian High-Level Equilibrium 
Trap'. a€~Reading in the literature of China two or three centuries before the modern age, there 
are moments when it is hard to believe that an industrial revolution had not begun. The phrases of 
Wang Shih-maoa€™ s description of Ching-te-chen, the great porcelain-making centre in Kiangsi 
province, instantly summon up such a vision:
Tens of thousands of pestles shake the ground with their noise. The heavens are alight with the 
glare from the fires, so that one cannot sleep at night. The place has been called in jest "The 
Town of Year Round Thunder and Lightninga€™.!

So too does Yen Ju-yAU^™ s account of the ironworkers of the Hupei/ Shensi Szechwan borders:

Their iron furnaces are seventeen or eighteen feet in height and fenced about on all sides with 
yuan trees. They are square in shape and solidly constructed of clay, with an opening at the top to 
allow the smoke to escape. Charcoal is put in at the bottom and ore in the middie. For every so 
many hundred catties of ore a certain number of catties of charcoal have to be used, a precise 
quantity which may not be increased or decreased.
At the side more than ten persons will take it in turns to work the bellows.

The fire is not put out either by day or by night. The liquid metal and the slag flow out from 
separate ducts at the bottom of the furnace, the liquid metal turning into iron which is cast in 
slabs. Every furnace has an artisan who determines the timing of the fire and who can distinguish 
the appearance of iron in different stages of completeness. More than ten artisans are hired to 
serve each furnace. The largest numbers of men are
needed for transporting timber and building the (charcoal] kilns in the Black Hills, and for 
opening up the seams and extracting ore from the Red Hills.


The distances which the ore and charcoal have to be taken vary, but over a hundred men are required 
for each furnace. Thus six or seven furnaces will give employment to not less than a thousand men. 
Once the iron has been cast into slabs it is sometimes manufactured locally into pots and farm 
tools. A thousand and several hundreds of men are also required for this work and for the transport 
[of the goods]. Thus the larger iron
works in Szechwan and the other provinces regularly have two thousand to three thousand persons, 
and the smaller ones with but three or four furnaces well over a thousand.

In Kwangtung we read of water-driven hammers for pounding incense "without any expenditure of 
[human] muscular efforts™ . In Kiangsi, according to a provincial gazetteer, similar hammers were 
used for husking rice:

They are mostly found at present at important fords and places where merchants gather. Over a 
hundred of the machines may be installed in a line of buildings to supply the grain boats which 
come and go selling rice. Since prosperous farmers make use of much rice, it is particularly 
suitable that they should instal them.

In Fukien, paddle wheels were fixed to the sides of boats anchored in fast-flowing streams and used 
to turn hammers for the manufacture of paper, so that S~the sound of pounding was like the whirr of 
wingsS™ . Out of so widespread a mastery of the pre-modern mechanical arts it seems strange that no 
further technological progress should have comeS!.

The problem is a difficult one. Throughout the Ming and the ChS™ing the Chinese showed 
resourcefulness in all the activities normally associated with invention. The adoption and 
diffusion of Western technology was in many respects considerable. New World crops were grown: 
maize, peanuts, sweet and white potatoes, and tobacco. The simpler kinds of Western cannon, 
handguns, clocks, telescopes and microscopes were successfully imitated, a
fact which speaks for the high quality of the best Chinese craftsmanship. Small but significant 
improvements were made in a range of familiar indigenous techniques. Multi-colour woodblock 
printing was perfected; the smelting of zinc mastered. The ships sailing in northern waters learned 
to sail closer into the wind, which made them much safer.

There was a continual refinement of the adaptation of agriculture to local ecological 
peculiarities. The introduction in the north of underground cellars to create the moist atmosphere 
needed for cotton-spinning is an example of a parallel ecological adaptation of industry. The best 
Chinese techniques spread steadily over the country. Cotton, for instance, replaced hemp and ramie 
as the main clothing fibre. There was a greater use of wells (first encouraged
by the Mongol dynasty) for providing water for fields in the north. And of course there were a 
handful of Chinese inventions: the merry-go-round windpump with its gybing sails, the bulletproof 
vest used by the troops of Li Tzu-chS™ eng, soybean cake and other new fertilizers. Wang Cheng 
(1571S“1644), working under the influence of the Jesuits, devised improved tools for use on his own 
farm and wrote a book about them. Clearly, the term
S'technological stagnations™ is misleadingly oversimple description of this period.

There were also organizational changes. Most of these we have already touched upon: the growth of 
money-shops and remittance banks, the guilds of merchants engaged in inter-regional trade, the 
decline in serf-like conditions of tenure for much of the peasantry, the growing density of the 
local market network. There were others, such as the attempt to use organizational means to combat 
insect pests. These developments further contributed to economic
productivity.

Nor was entrepreneurship absent. Here is an account of how the price of fuel in Ching-yang county 
in Shensi was reduced:

County magistrate Lu Chen-fei submitted this memorial in 1629:1 would observe that south of 
Ching-yang lies the Ching River, providing direct access to the Wei, on which there is a continuous 
flow of merchant shipping.

Ching-yang, however, relies on the damming of waterways and loads are not carried by boat, the 
people being unaware of the advantages conferred on them by nature. Leaving aside the question of 
whether grain might be transported or timber floated in the form of rafts, this is even true of 
coal. Ching-yang is densely populated and hasnothing to burn as firewood.The people depend on 
carriers and carts to supply them with fuel
for cooking; and the effort used up in transport is a source of distress. A picul of coal never 
costs less than 0.4 of an ounce of silver, and may rise above 0.5 or 0.7 of an ounce. It is not 
always a lack of food-grains which prevents people from lighting a fire in wet or snowy weather.

After having become aware of this, every time I went to the banks of the Ching River I would stand 
overlooking the current and gauge the depth. When I asked the boatmen about it they said: S~The 
Ching River is quick-rushing, with numerous rocks, and is of varying depth. Merchant ships do not 
dare to travel on it.S™ I sent my officials to inspect it, on foot along the riverside together 
with some boatmen. They reported that
even in the shallowest places, if the water were only a foot or so deeper, it would take even a 
war-junk. I was delighted and declared it suitable for shipping. Even so, the people were 
apprehensive that accidental difficulties might arise. They grudged a small outlay, and so barred 
the way to subsequent profit.

I therefore had a long, narrow boat constructed, and told sailors to pilot it to Ming-chiao-kS™ ou 
in Lin-tS™ung county and fetch coal from there. They made the round trip [of perhaps 50 miles] and 
had the coal unloaded in a mere three days. The transport cost was only seventy per cent of that 
needed for carriers and carts. I  furtherordered Ma Shou-tsS™ ang and other boat men from the 
foodboats at the variousferry­
crossings to join with the above-mentioned boat and make several trips, giving them their wages in 
advance. Every picul of coal used to cost 0.4 of an ounce of silver, Now it is only 0.25 of an 
ounce. When the snow falls, the roads are muddy, and wheels and hooves unable to proceed, the 
benefit will be twice that in ordinary times.

Economic enterprise would thus seem to have been alive in late traditional China. There was 
certainly a keen awareness of comparative costs, and this could demonstrably have its effects upon 
the kind of technology used - as the cost of fuel changed the pattern of salt-making in ChS™ 
AUan-chou in Ming times:

Salt may be produced either by boiling or by evaporation. From before the Sung and Yuan dynasties 
both of these methods were used. Nowadays only the evaporation technique is employed. The boiling 
technique used the salt left by the two highest monthly tides. When the tide went out, the salt 
soaked into the ground; and if there was a strong sun it would form white crystals. These were 
gathered and used to form salt-mounds,
which were further sprinkled with brine.

The S~salt-moundS™ was a hole in the ground under which there was a dripping pool, to which it was 
connected by a number of apertures fitted with reed tubes to draw off the brine. The water soaked 
through the salt-mound, ran down the tubes and dripped into the pool. The readiness of the brine 
for use was gauged by throwing in a henS™ s egg or a peach-kernel to see if it would float. The 
brine was then drained into an
earthenware container by the side of the stove; and a tube was used to draw it into a pan for 
boiling. The pan was made of bamboos plaited into the shape of a pan and smeared with a cement made 
from clamshells. Large pans could boil two hundred catties of salt in a day and a night; the small 
ones half of that.

The evaporation technique in like fashion involves gathering the saltiest parts of the ground and 
drying them in the sun until they are extremely dry. They are then put into a dripping-mound and 
[brine] is soaked through them into a dripping-pool. The water is taken from the pool and poured 
over the mound twice before it is fit for use. The evaporating pans are made of stone slabs very 
tightly fitted. It is the wind which reduces
the water content, and so the salt is only a few feet thick.

One man can also get two hundred catties a day by this method. In the Sung a catty of salt cost ten 
cash, and when dear, twice this. These days the price is never more than two cash._ This is because 
the evaportion technique needs no expenditure for firewood._

It is therefore reasonable to assume that perfectly rational short-run considerations lay behind 
many or most choices of technique. This being so, we have to ask how the availability of resources, 
capital and labour may have affected the decisions of Chinese entrepreneurs in the late traditional 
period.

Clearly the shortage of many resources grew more severe. In many areas there was a lack of wood for 
building houses and ships, and indeed machinery. There was a shortage of fuels, most obviously in 
the coastal regions where the reed-swamps which had once provided plenty of combustible material 
were now being turned into paddy-fields. There was a shortage of clothing fibres (though this was 
mitigated by the introduction of cotton, which yielded
much more fibre per acre than hemp or ramie). Land which could be used for growing cotton was often 
needed for growing food. There was a shortage of draught animals, and possibly therefore of animal 
manures, as northern grazing-lands were turned into fields. Metals were in short supply, 
particularly copper before the opening of the Yunnan mines in the eighteenth century, but also iron 
and silver. Above all, there was a shortage of good farmland: the
quality of the new land brought under the plough in this period fell sharply. A major cause of 
these shortages was of course the continuing growth of the population under conditions of relative 
technological standstill.

One consequence of this lack of resources was that the cost of building even simple wooden machines 
might often be beyond the reach of many peasants. This is suggested by a passage in a gazetteer for 
Yung-pS™ing prefecture (an area in present-day Hopei) describing a project for agri cultural 
improvement undertaken by the Mongol government in the late thirteenth century:
Where the land is so high that the water cannot be brought up to it, the officials should order the 
peasants to build water-pumps. To those who are too poor to be able to afford to do so they shall 
make a gift of the materials, and after the autumn harvest inspect those families using the water 
so that they may pay off the price in equitable fashion.

The high cost of metal may have been the reason why the Western cylinder and piston pump, known in 
China since the seventeenth century, was not used in spite of its potential value to farming areas 
dependent on wells for water. According to the Comprehensive Examination of Seasonal Practices, 
compiled in 1742:

In upland areas which I have seen where wells are used to irrigate the fields, the people either 
use the windlass and bucket or the well-sweep. Although these appear to be convenient, one may look 
up and down all day long without managing to water all of a mou of land. I have heard that in Shans 
and Honan the people work extremely hard to irrigate fields with water drawn from wells. In a year 
of drought, eight people toiling
day and night can only manage several mou. In other areas it is the custom to be lazier.

Having seen the difficulties involved, people no longer enquire into the method of watering fields 
from wells. If the machine shown here is made, there is no need for a well-rope, bucket, windlass 
or well-sweep, and one man using it can do the work of several men. Used for irrigating fields, it 
can save about four-fifths of the labour needed.

Unfortunately the pump had to be made in copper - solid money in a Chinese peasants™ s eyes - and 
was presumably too expensive, copper being in very short supply, for returns to justify investment. 
Merchant capital was of course available, and merchants did sometimes invest in the means of 
agricultural production. The irrigation system built outside Pao-tS™ ou early in the nineteenth 
century, in which S~water sharesS™ were bought and sold
independently of land, is an example. We can only guess that investing in a pump would not have 
paid as well as other possible investments.

Another example of knowledge not used is the Archimedean screw or SoedragonS™ s tail pumpSD, to 
give it its Chinese name. The screw was brought to China by the Jesuits; and the Comprehensive 
Examination is emphatic that it was more efficient than the traditional square-pallet chain-pump. 
The screw consisted of a helical pathway formed by a partition wall that rose in a spiral in the 
space between a central axle and an outer cylindrical casing.
The whole cylinder was inclined at an angle of about twenty-five degrees, with the lower end just 
under the water. When it was rotated, the water entered at the bottom and then rose up the pathway 
until it poured out the top. Considerable inventiveness was shown by the Chinese in devising ways 
of building up the partition wall with out using metal. One method, reminiscent of modern plastics 
technology, was to weave hemp or ramie fibres, or else
splints, between vertical struts like a screen and then to waterproof them with a mixture of pitch/ 
wax tS™ ung oil lacquer and stone lime/ pottery dust, according to what was available. Another 
method, which fancy might compare to the modern use of hydrocarbons, was to build up superimposed 
layers of mulberry or hibiscus bark held together with pitch or wax.

Why this pumping device was little used is a mystery. Perhaps power transfer was a problem. When 
the screw was cranked by hand, it is unlikely to have surpassed the treadle-driven pallet pump, and 
the use of foot-power required wooden gear wheels, which was not the case with the simpler pallet 
pump. Practical experiment might yield interesting evidence on the balance of comparative 
advantage. Without this evidence, we can only conclude that there
is no definite indication that the use of the screw would have significantly raised Chinese 
agricultural productivity.

One area where there was obvious room for improvement was land transport. The observations of an 
anonymous traveller who passed, disguised as a Chinese, through the south-eastern silk and tea 
districts in 1845, are to the point here:

The roads of central China are better than a stranger would expect to find them; considering that 
they are not made for the passage of two- wheeled carriages, and only for foot-passengers, with 
occasionally a wheel-barrow, and a few animals, the pathways are on the whole exceedingly good. In 
some places they were found fifteen feet wide paved with flagstones in the middle, and with 
well-laid pebbles on each side. For hundreds
of miles, the traveller may be assured of meeting with good stone roads, at least three feet wide, 
formed of slabs of granite, mica, slate, sandstone or lime, according to the nature of the adjacent 
rocks, and the supply of stone in the neighbourhood. Over mountain passes, one or two thousand feet 
in height, roads are to be seen, cut into steps, six or eight feet wide, and laid with great care 
and exactness, for the convenience of
passengers.

At the distance of a mile from each other sheds are to be seen, built over the road, and provided 
with seats, where the weary traveller may refresh himself by a little rest, and prepare for further 
exertions. These roads and sheds, together with the bridges and canals, are, as far as can be 
ascertained, all the product of voluntary and benevolent effort.
Another benevolent provision is the lighting of lamps along frequented roads, and near to dangerous 
bridges; these are made of thin layers of oyster-shells, fitted into a wooden framework, and either 
suspended from a lamp- post or fixed in a recess in a stone pillar; the light they afford is of 
course dim, but it serves to show where the bridge or road is.

Why, then, was vehicular traffic so little developed? One plausible explanation is that, given the 
scarcity of grazing-lands and fodder for animals, and human overpopulation, men were often the 
cheapest form of transport. There is also another possibility which deserves consideration: that it 
was inhibited by the efficiency of traditional water transport. The carriage provided by ChinaS™ s 
extensive system of waterways was so much cheaper than by land
routes that the level of development in areas without water transport was usually far below that of 
those areas which had water transport. The difference was so pronounced that we can regard it as a 
case of pre-modern economic dualism.

Illustrative evidence for this is provided by materials on Hunan province in the eighteenth 
century. In 1709 Chao Shen-chS™ iao observed:

The three counties of Cha€™ ang-sha, Shan-hua and Hsiang-yin in Cha€™ ang-sha prefecture, the 
county of Heng-shan in Heng-chou prefecture, the two counties of Pa-ling and Li-chou in Yo-chou 
prefec- ture, and the two counties of Wu-ling and Ta€™ ao-yuan in Cha€™ ang-te prefecture are all 
on the banks of large rivers or have access to water routes. They likewise have places where rice 
is bought and sold [on a large
scale].

But,

On account of shoals and the dangers of its waters, the prefecture of Yung-chou is entirely without 
[large-scale] merchants. That is to say it does have the petty commerce which commoners carry on 
between themselves. Everyone takes goods by cart to Heng-yang to sell.

Regulations issued in 1752 concerning the purchase of grain for the government made these 
observations on Cha€™ ang-sha prefecture:

The six counties of Cha€™ ang-sha, Shan-hua, Hsiang-yin, Hsiang-ta€™ an, I-yang and Hsiang-hsiang 
are all close to the watera€™ s edge. The governments™ s instructions should be followed, and 
purchases of rice for the [government] granaries should be made in the markets of the county 
capitals and in the market towns, and at the various riverine ports. Although the counties of Yu, 
Liu-yang and Cha€™ a-ling are on


iiavigaoie water routes, tnese are euner nut streams or eisejutt oj aangerous muaoanKS, wntcn 
maK.es transportation atjjicuii. isone oj tnem nave marKets wnere [govermmentj purcnases can oe 
maae. n is necessary at Harvest time to oruer me local oiiiciais to senu silver to lamines WHO nave 
a surplus 01 gram, aim to ouy it irom mem at current pncesa^i. rurinermore, /\n-iiua county is in a 
remote location among numerous inns.

Boats cannot get to ita€!. Although Li-ling county contains the market town of Lu-ka€™ ou, which is 
beside a large river, the latter is ninety li from the county capital. There is only this one 
navigable river, and it has shoals and treacherous places. It is very hard to haul the grain. Apart 
from the above-mentioned places, there are no riverine ports or places near rivers which produce 
grain.

The dualism, depending on the availability or absence of water transport, is clear, at least as 
regards the degree of commercialization,

To the extent that this is a fair picture of the facts - and obviously it is not adequate to meet 
the full range of regional diversity - certain consequences follow. Even substantial improvements 
in land transportation techniques, along the lines of those made in eighteenth- century Britain, 
would not have brought costs down to the level of water transport. Adam Smith recognized this 
clearly when he wrote in The Wealth of Nations'. a€oeThrough the greater
part of Europe the expense of land-carriage increases very much both the real and nominal price of 
most manufacturesa€!. In China and Indostan the extent and variety of inland navigation save the 
greater part of this labour, and thereby reduce still lower both the real and the nominal price of 
the greater part of their manufactures .a€D

In China, even in the early decades of the present century, railways and steamships made possible 
only modest cost reductions as compared to the traditional junk, and sometimes only a gain in speed 
and reliability. It was therefore difficult, by improving traditional land transport techniques, to 
make goods produced in the backward areas competitive far away from home with comparable goods 
produced in advanced areas with access to water transport.
The general economic incentive to search for improvements in land transport was therefore reduced, 
although it is possible to imagine exceptional cases in which they would have been attractive. 
Presumably, too, the water-based system with its lower costs, greater concentration of capital and 
customers, and its denser labour-force, to some extent attracted entrepreneurial interest away from 
the land transport areas.

There must have been ways in which the water transport system could have been improved on the basis 
of existing Chinese technical knowledge. But big advances by simple means, such as that 
accomplished by the Erie Canal in the United States in 1825, were no longer possible in China. They 
had, as it were, already been used up. Chinese water transport was faced with something of a 
technological discontinuity: probably only a large jump forward
into the world of steampower would have meant a significant gain. This discontinuity made any new 
dynamic shift in the economy through reduced transport costs exceedingly difficult.

There was another technological discontinuity, that in agriculture. Yields per acre were very 
nearly as high as was possible without the use of advanced industrial-scientific inputs such as 
selected seeds, chemical fertilizers and pesticides, machinery and pumps powered by the internal 
combustion engine or electricity, concrete and so on. Furthermore, there was not enough suitable 
land to raise the yields per worker for the Chinese farm labour force as a
whole by using either eighteenth-century British techniques, which depended critically on the 
interdependence of crop-raising and animal husbandry, or nineteenth-century American techniques of 
extensive, low per-acre yield, mechanized cultivation. Traditional inputs, whether in the form of 
irrigation works, fertilizer or labour, were also nearly as high as they could be without running 
into sharply diminishing, or even negative, returns.

That the last is not merely theoretical fancy is shown by the numerous cases where new irrigation 
works seriously reduced the supply of water to existing systems or, in some instances, imperilled 
them by crowding low-lying lands, subject to periodic floods, with too many polders. Often, where 
there was in principle the possibility of improving per-acre yields, this was ruled out in practice 
by resource shortages. An example is the dry farming of Hope
and Shantung. Investigations in the 1930s suggest that it could with profit have used more animal 
manure; but the supply of manure was inadequate because of the shortage of grazing land, which in 
turn reflected the need of a dense population to turn pasture into arable.

It is not easy to give substantive proof that (i) improvements in late traditional agricultural 
technology, (ii) increases in both investment and the provision of recurring inputs in farm 
production on the basis of this technology, and also (ji) the use of new resources (notably land) 
still available at this technological level, had all reached a point of sharply diminishing returns 
by the later eighteenth century. The diversity of the Chinese agricultural scene across
both space and time makes aggregate measures of output poor indicators of the level of technology. 
The farm economy in Ming and Cha€™ ing times consisted of two widely different sectors: a 
high-yielding rice sector and a lower- yielding wheat and millet sector. The relative share of the 
latter rose significantly with the passing of time.

Likewise, as demographic pressure forced the Chinese to bring poorer and poorer land into 
cultivation, the relative share of marginal soils in both sectors increased. This may have been of 
considerable significance. Surveys in the 1920s showed that in the north the yields of wheat grown 
on irrigated land were over two- thirds again higher than those of wheat grown on non-irrigated 
land Under these conditions, a level of average per-acre output
unchanged over time may conceal a marked increase in skill in working more favoured lands, or less 
favoured lands, or both.

If, therefore, we compare per-acre yields in 1400 with those in 185o we are not necessarily talking 
about otherwise comparable agricultural systems. Differences in crops, soil fertility, rainfall and 
temperatures make comparisons of per-acre yields between China and other countries even more 
potentially misleading as regards the level of the technology used.

After these cautionary remarks, we can consider a few statistics. The data presented in Professor 
D. H. Perkinsa€™ quantitative survey of Chinese agriculture since 1368 suggest that productivity 
per mo rose steeply from under 140 catties of grain to about 224 catties in 1600. It then fell to a 
little above 200 catties in the 1770s, after which it rose again, modestly surpassing its previous 
best at a little over 240 catties by the middle of the nineteenth century.
Much of the early rise must be attributed to recovery from the devastation of the Mongol period 
though we have no means at present of saying how much. The pattern, which suggests only a small 
overall rise in output per mou between 1600 and 1850, depends largely upon the high figure for 
1600; and this could be lowered on the quite plausible assumption that more land was in fact being 
farmed at this time than Perkins allows for. The late Ming period
was notorious for the concealment of arable, and later increases look suspiciously fast. Quite 
properly, Perkins tends not to use the 1600 data as a base for his conclusions. For the moment, we 
can simply say that if we accept them they lend support to our view that increasing the 
productivity of land was harder during the last few centuries of traditional China than it had been 
for some time previously.

Second, the per-acre yields of unmodernized Chinese agriculture in the 1920s, the first date when 
we have reasonably reliable figures, were substantially above those in most of Europe on the eve of 
the industrial revolution. Thus Chinese wheat yields at this time were in the region of fourteen 
bushels per acre, whereas in France, under somewhat comparable conditions of peasant smallholder 
agriculture, wheat yields at the end of the eighteenth century
were only about 9.5 bushels, rising to around thirteen by 1850. Chinese rice yields in the 192os 
were about fifty-six bushels per acre.

Third, the attempt made by the Chinese Communists between 1956 and 1959 to increase agricultural 
output largely by the use of an intensified traditional technology and organizational changes does 
not seem to have raised either yield per acre or yield per farm worker. A policy of increasing 
industrial-scientific inputs, notably chemical fertilizers, was adopted shortly afterwards, and 
almost certainly for this reason.

Qualitative assessments by late traditional Chinese observers give further support to the view that 
agricultural output was near its pre-modern limits. Some time around 1740, Chu Lun-han wrote that: 
a€oeTo use the limited acreage of farmland to feed an ever-expanding population is a means which 
leaves us little further leeway.a€D The government became officially concerned over what it saw as 
a new problem: the continuing rise in grain prices even
in years of good harvest. By the 1750s it was understood that this was due to population pressure. 
As Chu Yun-chin remarked a little later: a€oeThere are no further benefits to be had from the land, 
yet population grows more numerous This is why millet and rice cost more, and the prices of 
everything have gone up.a€D

The state encouraged the opening of new land by allowing the cultivator to become its legal owner 
once he had paid taxes on it. Land in the north-west and north was opened to migrants from China 
Proper, though their number was not large. Merchants were encouraged to import rice from abroad; 
and official degrees were offered to those who did outstandingly well. Maize and sweet potatoes, 
previously found mainly in Kwangtung and Fukien, were
officially promoted. Pessimism was, however, the order of the day. Hung Liang-chi, whose gloomy 
views have earned him the title of the a€~Chinese Malthusa€™, believed that population growth was 
bound in the nature of things to outstrip production, that natural checks could not contain it, and 
that government remedial measures could never hope to be adequate. The only important dissenting 
voice seems to have been that of Pao Shih-cha€™ en
early   in the nineteenth century. aCceThe land of the empirea€D, he wrote, a€oeis the chief source 
of provision for the empirea€™ s people. It there are more people there will be more producers. A 
large population is the basis of wealth. How could it on the contrary cause poverty? There is not 
much unused land in the empire, but productivity does not conform to any such restraints.a€D He saw 
the failure to raise productivity as the fault of the scholars:
a€oeThey despise anything to do with farming, and do not research into it.a€D

The views of Western agronomists who observed late traditional Chinese farming at close quarters 
also suggest a system working near the limit of what was possible by pre-modern means. This is most 
evident in F. H. Kinga€™ s Farmers of Forty Centuries (1927). J. L. Bucka€™ s classic Land 
Utilization in China (1937) is not so unreservedly enthusiastic about the Chinese rural economy, 
but characterizes it as a€~one of efficient use of thelanda€™
in international terms. More importantly, Buck shows the output per farm worker increasing steadily 
with the size of the farm, fewer workers per acre the larger the farm, and yields per acre 
approximately constant whatever the farm size. This suggests that the optimum ratio of population 
to farmland for pre-modern technology had long since been exceeded.

Furthermore, apart from organizational reforms, the few proposals he makes for raising per-acre 
yields without recourse at some point to modern technology are not without practical difficulties. 
For example, his advice that the straw, stalks and grasses often used for fuel (with the ash then 
serving as a fertilizer) be fed direct to animals for manure bypasses the problem of finding cheap 
alternative fuels.

The hypothesis that only inputs created by a fairly advanced stage of an industrial-scientific 
revolution (one that had not of course taken place in late traditional China) could have saved her 
agriculture from sharply diminishing returns to new methods, new investment, extra inputs and new 
use of resources, thus seems more plausible than the view that there was ample potential for 
progress within the terms of the old system.Acceptingthis, then, we are
left with the question of why the population kept growing, and the pattern of its growth. For it 
was the expansion of the population which produced that combination of high-level farming and 
transportation technology with a low per capita income which perceptive economists since Adam Smith 
have recognized as the distinctive characteristic of China in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuriesa€!

LINK: chttps://archive .org/details/patternofchines00elvi/page/316/mode/1 up?view=theater>
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

