First, why the weblogging Renaissance under the guise of SubStacking?:

What Does SubStack Say That Its Mission Is?:

Hamish McKenzie: Welcome, Facebook and Twitter. Seriously: [When] we started Substacka€! we were 
concerned abouta€! the attention economya€!. Our addiction to social media is having negative 
effects on both individual and collective thoughta€! doomscrollinga€! rage-monstersa€!
conspiracy theory-addled mob[s]a€! poisoned information supplya€!. We have set out to show that 
platforms that put writers and readers in charge are just better. Substacka€! a calm space that 
encourages reflectiona€! free of advertising or any other distractiona€! no addiction-maximizing
feeds, autoplaying videos, or retweetable quote-retweets to suck you into a psychological space you 
never asked to be ina€!. Informational put into your brain based ona€! writers [who] reward your 
trust, nota€! a dopamine hita€! performative posturinga€!. Calmnessa€! is the real killer
featurea€!

LINK: <https://blog.substack.eom/p/welcome-facebook-and-twitter-seriously>
SubStack isa€! classical weblogginga€”but. What is the a€oebuta€D? The a€oebuta€D is:

1. A very aggressive push of the post to the email inbox of the recipient, rather than waiting for 
the recipient to come surfing by, with perhaps an rss-flag tickler to remind readers to come by. A 
subscription email with a website attached, rather than a website with a push RSS feed attached.

2. A very, very aggressive focus on what used to be called the tip jar, which hath now fed upon 
that meat upon which CAisar doth feed and grown great, and morphed into a paywall.

3. A focus on longer-forma€”a newsletter rather than a log of readings and reactions. (That, 
however, may not turn out to be the stable form of whatever medium it turns into: Adrian Hona€™ s 
<http://mssv.net> used to have three columnsa€’’links with a phrase or a sentence, paragraphs, and 
essays.)

SubStack isa€”like Medium <http://medium.com> before ita€”at one level an explicit reaction to the 
consumption and destruction of what appeared to be a growing weblog-based public sphere by 
Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and companya€’’each of which consumed part of the space, and each of 
which succeeded
in generating superior dopamine-hit random-reinforcement engagement, which turned what I at least 
regarded as a functional and improving intellectual ecosystem into: the Net of a Million Lies.

It was not called the Net of a Million Lies for
nothing.

few te - QUOTESTM3.COM

I guess the game is to return Facebook to its role of posting updates for family and friends; to 
turn Twitter into SubStacka€™ s comment section, and to, as Hamish writes up top, provide a€oea 
calm space that encourages reflectiona€! free of advertising or any other distractiona€! no 
addiction-maximizing feeds,
autoplaying videos, or retweetable quote-retweets to suck you into a psychological space you never 
asked to be ina€!a€D

Will it work? Probably not. Can it be worse than Zuckerberga€™ s or Dorseya€™ s firehoses of 
fear-generating misinformation? Almost surely not. Thus it is, I think, worth trying. As Noah Smith 
said on the inaugural edition of our Hexapodia podcast 
<https://braddelong.substack.com/p/hexapodia-is-the-key-
insight-i-relief> <https://api.substack.com/feed/podcast/47874,rss>, we have already tried 
everything else, with less persistent success than Sisyphus.



M. Wright & M. Vicentini: Virtual Reconstruction of the Antikythera Mechanism

Seven Paragraphs:

Erik Loomis: The Bankruptcy of Right Populism'. a€~Daniel Luban has a good piece in Dissent about 
the total bankruptcy of so-called a€oeright populisma€Da€!. a€™ To no great surprisea€! instead of 
an infrastructure bill, there was a massive corporate tax cut; instead of a family leave plan, 
there was a failed
attempt to strip healthcare from tens of millions of peoplea€!. a familiar cast of industry shills 
set to work dismantling labor rights and environmental protections. Trumpa€™ s most durable 
accomplishment was the rubber-stamping of scores of Federalist Society judges, each one a devoted 
steward of the interests of
capitala€! LINK: <https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2021/02/the-bankruptcv-of-right-populism>

Dani Rodrik: Poor Countriesa€™ Technology Dilemma'. a€~Africaa€™ s manufacturing renaissancea€! 
[but] few good jobs have been created in the more modern, formal, and productive manufacturing 
branchesa€!. The bulk of the increase in manufacturing employment coming from small, informal 
enterprises.
This experience stands in stark contrast with that of the rapid industrializers of East Asiaa€!. 
Large firms in the manufacturing sectors of Tanzania and Ethiopia to be significantly more 
capital-intensive than these countriesa€™ income levels or factor endowments would suggesta€! as 
capital-intensive as firms in the
Czech Republican. African economies [are] in a bind. Their manufacturing firms can either become 
more productive and competitive, or they can generate more jobs. Doing both at the same time seems 
very difficult, if not impossiblea€!. This is yet another reason for a public debate on the 
direction of technological
change and the tools that governments have to reorient ita€! LINK: <https://www.project-svndicate 
.org/commentarv/poor-countries-technologv-dilemma-bv-dani-rodrik-2021 -02>

Noah Smith: Larry Summersa€™ Misplaced Stimulus Anxiety: a€~Moderates are worried for instinctive 
reasonsa€”the debt just sorta seems Really Biga€!. Cutting Bidena€™ s relief package in half 
wouldna€™ta€! change thata€!. Republicansa€! are a€ceworrieda€D for political reasonsa€! quick 
enough to
support deficits when the President is a Republican. Then, like clockwork, they flipa€!. Cutting 
Bidena€™ s relief package in half wouldna€™ t alter thisa€!. Put lots more investment in the relief 
bill. Therea€™ s no reason we cana€™ t do thisa€”in fact, we already did it in the December COVID 
bill! Yes,
pandemic relief comes first, but we can start scheduling investment projects for a year or two 
years from nowa€!. Ita€! seems unlikely that we can increase the chances of getting a big 
investment package passed later by slashing the size of COVID relief today. Instead, this seems 
like just another example of the kind
of self-defeating preemptive concession-making that hobbled Obamaa€™s first term.a€! LINK: 
https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/larrv-summers-misplaced-stimulus

Patrick Wyman: Mesopotamia and the Dawn of History: a€~Cities, writing, and statesa€! didna€™t 
actually appear in the Fertile Crescent proper, where the cultivated grasses grew under the steady 
and predictable rainfall and domesticated animals had plenty of forage. Instead, they showed up 
some way to the
south of that pleasant zonea€! at the edges of the great marshesa€! the richest spot in the 
landscapea€! full of fish, waterfowl, and edible plantsa€! reedsa€! for boats, houses, and a 
variety of other purposesa€!. Eridua€! was soon joined by others. Uruka€! had tens of thousands of 
inhabitants, trade routes that
stretched as far as the Eurasian steppe, and enormous collections of temples and palaces. That was 
where writing and maybe the state were borna€! LINK: 
<https://patrickwvman.substack.eom/p/mesopotamia-and-the-dawn-of-historv>

Paul Krugman: Fighting Covid Is Like Fighting a Wars: a€~The pandemic slump isna€™t a conventional 
recessionaCI more like a natural disastera€! the appropriate policya€! isa€! disaster reliefa€!. 
WinningaCI meansaCI a huge vaccination programa€! limiting the economic misery of families whose
breadwinners cana€™ t worka€! avoiding gratuitous cuts in public servicesa€!. And thata€™ s what 
the American Rescue Plan mostly involvesa€!. Medical spending, school aid, aid to the unemployed, 
and help for state and local governments dominate the plan. And therea€™ s a good case for those 
checks, too;
more  about that latera€!.

Emergency spending may not be intended as stimulus, but it nonetheless has a stimulative effect. 
And wartime surges in spending have often been accompanied by bursts of inflation.a€! So is that 
something that might happen this time? Yes, it might. But we dona€™ t know for sure that it will. 
And to the extent that
inflation is a risk, thata€™ s an argument for seeking ways to limit that risk, not for skimping on 
Covid relief.

How big is the inflation risk?a€! There area€! three reasons not to get too worked up about the 
package-gap comparisona€!. Nobody knows how big the output gap really isa€!. The Biden plan isa€! 
less stimulative than the topline numbera€!. The Federal Reserve can tighten monetary policya€!. 
There is a faint but
disturbing echo here of the debate over austerity a decade ago, when advocates of fiscal tightening 
despite high unemployment kept inventing new theories on the fly to justify their positiona€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/02/07/opinion/covid-biden-economy-stimulus.html>

Alvaro Calderon, Vasiliki Fouka, & Marco Tabellini: Racial Diversity, Electoral Preferences, & the 
Supply of Policy: a€~The 1940a€“1970 Great Migration of African Americansa€!. How resulting changes 
in the racial composition of local constituencies affected votersa€™ preferences and politicians a€™
behavioura€!. Democrats and union members supported blacksa€™ struggle for racial equality, but 
that backlash against civil rights erupted among Republicans and among whites who more exposed to 
racial mixinga€!. Politicians largely responded to demands of their constituencies^!. Under certain 
conditions,
cross-race coalitionsa€!. Changes in the composition of the electorate can polarise both voters and 
politiciansa€! LINK: 
https://voxeu.org/article/racial-diversitv-electoral-preferences-and-supply-policv

Peloton InfoSec Analyst (Incident Response): a€™ The claim that the presidenta€™ s words could not 
be reasonably seen as a call to violence is kind of refuted by the fact that, you know, it was. 
there was violence, he said the thing, and then they did the thing. Ita€™ s literally what 
happeneda€! LINK:

Peloton InfoSec Analyst (Incident Response) @CalmSporting

the claim that the president's words could not be reasonably seen as a call to violence is kind of 
refuted by the fact that, you know, it was, there was violence, he said the thing, and then they 
did the thing, it's literally what happened.
6:05 PM a~™ Feb 8,2021

30Likes8Retweets


Paul Krugman: Fighting Covid Is Like Fighting a Wars: a€~The pandemic slump isna€™t a conventional 
recessiona€! more like a natural disastera€! the appropriate policya€! isa€! disaster reliefa€!. 
Winninga€! meansa€! a huge vaccination programa€! limiting the economic misery of families whose

breadwinners cana€™ t worka€! avoiding gratuitous cuts in public servicesa€!. And thata€™ s what 
the American Rescue Plan mostly involvesa€!. Medical spending, school aid, aid to the unemployed, 
and help for state and local governments dominate the plan. And therea€™ s a good case for those 
checks, too;
more about that latera€!.

Emergency spending may not be intended as stimulus, but it nonetheless has a stimulative effect. 
And wartime surges in spending have often been accompanied by bursts of inflation.a€! So is that 
something that might happen this time? Yes, it might. But we dona€™ t know for sure that it will. 
And to the extent that
inflation is a risk, thata€™ s an argument for seeking ways to limit that risk, not for skimping on 
Covid relief.

How big is the inflation risk?a€! There area€! three reasons not to get too worked up about the 
package-gap comparisona€!. Nobody knows how big the output gap really isa€!. The Biden plan isa€! 
less stimulative than the topline numbera€i. The Federal Reserve can tighten monetary policya€!. 
There is a faint but
disturbing echo here of the debate over austerity a decade ago, when advocates of fiscal tightening 
despite high unemployment kept inventing new theories on the fly to justify their positiona€!

LINK: <https://www.nvtimes.com/2021/02/07/opinion/covid-biden-economy-stimulus.html>

Alvaro Calderon, Vasiliki Fouka, & Marco Tabellini: Racial Diversity, Electoral Preferences, & the 
Supply of Policy. a€~The 1940a€“1970 Great Migration of African Americansa€!. How resulting changes 
in the racial composition of local constituencies affected votersa€™ preferences and politicians a€™
behavioura€!. Democrats and union members supported blacksa€™ struggle for racial equality, but 
that backlash against civil rights erupted among Republicans and among whites who more exposed to 
racial mixingaC!. Politicians largely responded to demands of their constituencies^!. Under certain 
conditions,
cross-race coalitionsa€!. Changes in the composition of the electorate can polarise both voters and 
politiciansa€! LINK: 
https://voxeu.org/article/racial-diversity-electoral-preferences-and-supplv-policv

Peloton InfoSec Analyst (Incident Response): a€™ The claim that the presidenta€™ s words could not 
be reasonably seen as a call to violence is kind of refuted by the fact that, you know, it was. 
there was violence, he said the thing, and then they did the thing. Ita€™ s literally what 
happeneda€! LINK:

Peloton InfoSec Analyst (Incident Response) @CalmSporting

the claim that the president's words could not be reasonably seen as a call to violence is kind of 
refuted by the fact that, you know, it was, there was violence, he said the thing, and then they 
did the thing, it's literally what happened.
6:05 PM r™ Feb 8,2021

30Likes8Retweets

Hoisted from the Archives:

We Know Little About the Origins of High Patriarchy and the Extinction of Most Y-Chromosome 
Lineages ca. 5000 Years Ago, Buta€\: a€~I do not see textiles as the problem. Yes, in the Odyssey 
Penelope, Kalypso, the 50 maidservants of Alkinous, Kirke, and the nymphs who are called Naiads are 
all spoken of as at
their looms. Yes, the mother of Nausikaa, the 50 maidservants of Alkinous (again), Penelope 
(again), and the maidservants of Odysseus are all spoken of as at their spindles. Yes, in the Iliad 
Khryseis, Helen, Andromakhe, a€oea womana€D are all spoken of as at their looms, yes, Andromakhe 
(again), a€oethe fair
spinstera€D, and Kryseis are all spoken of as at their spindles. Textile work is (or does not have 
to be) not drudgerya€”it is (or can be) a very social activity, for to an experienced seamstress or 
spinner of weaver the cognitive load of the task is not large enough to discourage conversation.

Instead, I blame the Yamnaya: the Aryans, the Indo-Europeans, the Masters of the sword, the wheel, 
and the bow, who spread fire and sword and the chariot and the steed from Gibraltar and Cape 
Finisterre to the Deccan and even to the upper reaches of the Yellow Rivera€!
LINK: 
https://www.bradford-delong.eom/2018/07/we-know-little-about-the-origins-of-high-patriarchv-and-the-
extinction-of-most-v-chromosome-lineages-ca-5000-vears-ago-but.html

