Subscribe now

CONDITION: A Very Nice Review of Slouching from John Quiggin!

John Quiggin: The slow demise of neoliberalism: a€~How the all-conquering movement contained the 
seeds of its own destruction^!

Order Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>! (If you have not already done so. If you have 
already done so, please email me to tell me what I got BigTime wrong in the book.)

Slouching Towards Utopia


“A magisterial history”—Paul Krugman

An instant New York Times bestseller
ca. 26,000 copies sold, all formats

<bit.lv/3pP3Krk>

“Asks the right questions and
teaches us a lot of crucial history
along the way...” —Paul Krugman

“I’ve been waiting for Brad’s opus
for a long time now...” —Ezra Klein

“Unmissable...”—Diane Coyle

“To follow the conversation, check
out Slouching Towards Utopia...”

—Adam Tooze

“Masterfully sweeping, a joy to
read...”—Liaquat Ahamed

“A masterpiece...” —Zachary
Carter

Nov 25, 2022

Nov 26, 2022

Nov 27, 2022

Nov 28, 2022

Nov 29, 2022

Nov 30, 2022

Dec 1,2022

Dec 2, 2022

Dec 3, 2022

Dec 4, 2022

Dec 5, 2022

Dec 6, 2022

25013

25072

25150

25205

25250

25307

25353

25393

25443

25498

25552

25630


Dec 7, 2022            25703

Share

FOCUS: Aze Washington Post Decides Azt It No Longer Has to Fear A%e Blogosphere. Do Hijinks Ensue?


Fear of the Blogosphere, by Stable Diffusion via NightCafe

Dan Drezner of The Monkey Cage returns and dips his toe into the newsletter-weblogging pool with a 
bang!

Dan Drezner: Back to Old School Blogging?: An awful lot of forces seem to be pushing folks back to 
blogging. Is it 2002 all over again?: a€~John Scalzi wants a return to the a€oeartisan, 
hand-crafted weba€D that was the old-time blogosphere.,,, DeLong likes the idea but notes that it 
ignores good old-fashioned incentivesa€!. a€oewe need to have an accurate theory of what caused the 
Fall of the Blogosphere in the first place. Why
did the audiencea€”and, yes, the creators tooa€”succumb to the Siren song, and wind up 
doomscrolling through clickbait so that their glued-to-the-screen eyeballs could be sold to 
advertisers convincing them that the worse is actually the better product as they sell their fake 
diabetes cures and crypto grifts? When I talk to people, they shrug and say a€~attention economya€™ 
and a€~human rapid, response, dopamine loopsa€la€d.

This already feels like a first-generation blog post, so Ia€™m going to fall back into old habits 
and disagree vehemently with DeLong! [God, this feels so good, so right!a€”eds. Dona€™t start.] The 
incentive structure might be shifting back to blogging! Three things killed the old blogosphere 
good and deada€! moneya€! [as] bloggers were willing toa€! work for more established media 
outletsa€! Twittera€! a far superior focal point
for finding quick links, reactions, and responsesa€! the smartphonea€! [as] the verticala€! screen 
made normal-sized paragraphs look like tedious blocks of unindented texta€!.

Each of these trends has now been partially reverseda€!. Mainstream media outlets that had 
previously embraced blogs are now spurning them. I left the Washington Post because the Post 
didna€™t want to renew my contracta€! part of a larger trend to focus on news and investigations^!. 
Substack phenomenon has enabled some to earn an incomea€!. As for Twitter, wella€!. Finally, 
Substacka€™ s subscription-based distribution has
also conquered the phone problem. Folks read blogs as newsletter emails straight to their phonea€!. 
So in conclusion, DeLong might be wrong!a€! [But] for the old-time blogosphere to be revived, the 
superstars will have to endure, and I dona€™ t know if that is possible in such a polarized 
political climatea€! developinga€!

I disagree that Twitter was a far superior focal point for "finding quick links, reactions, and 
responses".
RSS was the One True Protocol.

Admittedly, RSS had a problem amalgamating in presenting a combination of micro, blocking and 
longer form. But it always seemed to me that hashtags and feed-filtering could easily take care of 
that: #Microblog, #BlogPost, #Longform—those tags could have done the job. But then Google killed 
Google reader, and Twitter was there, and became the clown car that stumbled into a gold mine.
So perhaps, now we have another chance?

Do remember that the original aspiration for vox.com was to take the energy of the blogosphere and 
expand it out into an organization that would make money and transform the public sphere:

Matt Yglesias: What I learned co-founding Vox: a€~Our vision for Voxa€! revolved around 
embracinga€! digitala€! covering] a wide range of topics with more depth and more speed, taking 
advantage of digital tools but also the timelessness of the web. The founding group included a 
tight-knit group of very talented digital journalistsa€!. And we thought this was scalablea€”that 
it would be relatively easy to hire a lot more people
and train them based on this vision and our methods. This was basically wrong. We did launch right 
out the gate with some fantastic high-volume writers and video visionaries, and over time Vox has 
continued to add amazing peoplea€!. [But] it turned out we didna€™t have any a€oesecret saucea€D 
methodology we could reliably impart to new journalists to make them do work that was 
Ezra-esquea€!.

The other gaping conceptual problem is that while I believe there was and is an audience for the 
kind of broad explanatory journalism we wanted to do, there werena€™ t customers for it. 
Journalists like to think of our audience as the customers, and one thing I love about Slow Boring 
is that here that really is true. But Voxa€™ s readers werena€™ t customers; Vox was an ad sales 
businessa€!

When I read this by Matt, I want to say: No, Matt! Talent is not scarce! There are huge numbers of 
people out there who could do Ezra-quality work! But you did not have the mechanisms to find them, 
bring them in, and pay them $$$$$.

And perhaps the real kicker comes in the second of the paragraphs I quote: You cana€™ t do 
explainer journalism and still be a money-making subcontractor for Google and FaceBook ads unless 
you already have Ezraa€™ s audience and reputation at hand. I noted an anguished cry from Timothy 
B. Lee:

FULL
STACK
ECON

Timothy B. Lee @binarybits

Oh man as a former Vox writer with relatively few left-wing opinions I really feel this paragraph. 
slowboring.com/p/what-i-learna€!

But this platform dependence made product innovation
essentially impossible. It was also editorially constraining. I
think    it's very under-appreciated by people in the technology
industry that most of the media trends they deplore are direct
consequences of Facebooks influence over journalism in the
mid-2010s. The huge shift in media sensibility that happened



Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

• Henry Simons: A Positive Program for Laissez-Fairea€.\

•  Noah Smith: The dream of bringing back Bell Labs: a€~Was America's most famous corporate lab a 
product of its time, or something that can be reproduced?a€!

• Adam Gurri: The Case Against Dictatorship: a€~Chinaa€™ s system, rather than a monarchy or the 
fascist state, which stands as the alternative to liberal democracya€!. Now, however, China has 
failed to vaccinate their vulnerable elderly population to any great degree, while those who have 
been vaccinated have received a markedly inferior product. Their lockdowns have grown more and more 
intense as the contagiousness of COVID has
increased by leaps and bounds; for this and other reasons, US GDP will actually grow more in 
percentage terms this year than China for the first time in my lifetimeaCI

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Rrad DeLonp's Grasninp Realitv in the Snhstack ann


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

