Home base for this: <https://equitablegrowth.org/insights-expertise/value-added/>

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)My friends among the Biden plan doubtersa€”they do not seem to have internalized exactly hoq 
devastating the slow recovery of the 2010a€™ s was. They do not seem to
recognize how great the uncertainty about the economya€™ s likely trajectory is. Those factors 
militate very strongly in favor of taking steps to make sure that you do not repeat
that decade by making the same mistake. On the other side, I see little in the way of argument save 
what I regard as an unwarranted suspicion that the federal reserve will not do its
proper joba€’’plus a fear that the financial system could not cope without a crisis with an even 
moderate revaluation of the asset price structure. Austin Clemens is here, trying to
focus attention where it should be focused:

Austin Clemens: New Great Recession Data Suggest Congress Should Go Big 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/new-great-recession-data-suggest-congress-should-go-big-to-spur-a-
broad-based-sustained-u-s-economic-recovery/>: a€~Joe Bidena€™ s proposed $1.9 trillion American 
Rescue Plan, critics now argue that it will a€ceovershoota€Da€l.

Undershooting the policy response would be a far more dangerous prospect and could lead to a repeat 
of the slow and inequitable economic growth that followed the previous U.S.
recessiona€!. A new data series from the U.S. Department of Commercea€™ s Bureau of Economic 
Analysisa€”its Distribution of Personal Income seriesa€’’shows just how
devastating this pattern was for most U.S. workers and their familiesa€!. In the bottom 50 
percenta€! because disposable personal income incorporates transfers from the federal
government to households, so losses in this group were partially compensated for by rising 
Unemployment Insurance payments, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program
benefits, and other government benefits. But this group then became mired in years of stagnant, or 
even declining, income as these benefits ended amid a still-tepid economic
recovery, and did not experience substantial income gains until 2015. By comparison, households in 
the top 10 percent of income recovered almost immediately after the end of the
Great Recession and ended 2018 up 22 percent compared to 2007a€!

2) Under the Trump administration, taking care that the laws be faithfully executed appears to have 
been among their very last priorities. Here David Mitchell has a very good list of
things that Biden and his staff could do to start to turn that around:

David Mitchell: Executive Action To-Do List for Achieving Strong, Stable, And Broad-Based U.S. 
Economic GrowZh<https://equitablegrowth.org/executive-action-to-do-list-for-
achieving-strong-stable-and-broad-based-u-s-economic-growth/>: a€™ Executive action to coordinate 
federal countercyclical regulatory policya€!. Executive action to combat
wage                     thefta€!. Executive action to coordinate antitrust and competition 
policiesa€!. Executive action to reform the cost-benefit analysis of U.S. tax regulationsa€!. 
Executive action
to improve U.S. economic measurementsa€!

3) I want to highlight two things that I have done this week. The first is my attempt to understand 
what is really worrying my friends among the new inflation hawks. For reasons I
do not understand, they let what I think are their real concerns stay submerged in subtext. They do 
not stress that they do not trust the Federal Reserve. They do not stress that they
worry that the financial web is on the point of another crisis and would collapse in response to 
even moderate shifts in the asset price structure. Yet their worries and their focus
make                                                                               no sense to me, 
unless such considerations are in the very forefront of their minds:

Brad DeLong: PROJECT SYNDICATE: What Are the New Inflation Hawks Thinking? 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/american-rescue-plan-inflation-critics-fear-
monetarv-policv-normalcv-bv-j-bradford-delong-2021-03>: a€~These warningsa€! all reflect a fear 
that the Fed might have to hike the federal funds rate and return it to the range
we                 used to consider normal. I say a€cemighta€D because, as the aforementioned 
critics acknowledge, any inflationary pressures generated by the $1.9 trillion package remain
merely a possibility, not a certainty. It is equally likely that the new spending will end up 
filling holes in aggregate demand. In any case, if the past 15 years of debates about
a€oesecular stagnationa€D and a€oeglobal savings glutsa€D have taught us anything, it is that we 
should want to create the conditions in which a higher federal funds rate is
warranteda€!

4) Let us be very optimistic about the long run. Yes, global warming will be catastrophic for tens 
of millions and deadly for millions. But it is unlikely to shake our civilization to
bits. We are likely to avoid bombing ourselves back to the Stone Age with our weapons of war. And 
we remain an inventive anthology intelligence, with lots left to discover,
develop, and deploy. Thus the long run future for humanity a€~s economy looks very bright:

Brad DeLong: DeLongTODAY VIDEOCAST: Looking Forward to 2525a€\ <https://www.delongtoday.com/>: Let 
us look at our great- and great2-grandchildren and what are
their economic possibilities in 2100, then our great5-grandchildren in 2200, and then all the way 
out to the year 2525: our great 15-grandchildren. That is not that far out. Yesterday
Amazon drop-shipped me a book about one of my ancestors back in the 1500s: Thomas Wyatt the 
Younger, executed on Tower Hill on orders of Bloody Mary for being an unwise
catspaw for nobles who wondered if they could persuade Parliament to take control over the Queena€™ 
s marriage, to prevent the accession of a Spanish King who would bring the
Inquisition to England. The answer was no: they could not persuade Parliament to mobilize the 
military force to threaten convincingly. We are connected to him, and there are those
in                                                                                2525 who stand in 
a similar connection to usa€!

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)Ronald Reagan convinced enough of the center of the American electorate that it was a€oemorning 
in Americaa€D back in 1984 to set America on a much, much worse
trajectory than it might have attained. Clinton in 1994 and Obama in 2010 were unable to convince 
the center that they needed another two years of congressional support to have
even   a chance of turning things around. Now the -Financial Times_ editorial board hopes the 
policies will work well enough and the center of the American electorate will be wise
enough to give Biden a full four-year chance. As it is, the combination of Reagan, the Bushes, and 
Trump have lost America a generation of societal progress and have accelerated
by  a generation the shift from an America- to an other-centered world. This may turn out to be an 
even faster loss of economic and geopolitical paramouncy than that experienced
by the British Empire in the first half of the 1900s:

Financial Times Editorial Board: Stimulus Could Change the Biden Presidency 
<https://www.ft.com/content/6e392ae6-4384-4070-a0d8-d4bacc3af06Q>: a€~The US has softened
the economic costs of the virus with all the skill that it failed to bring to its actual 
containmenta€!. If Biden gets his bill (Democrats want it signed by March 14) he will have
something bold to show for his early efforts. It could also shape the rest of his time in office. 
The previous two Democratic presidents lost Congress at their first midterm
electionsa€! healthcare reforma€!. If Bidena€™ s stimulus aids the economy without overheating it, 
he can hope to buck the trend of prematurely neutered Democratsa€!. Last
Saturday,   not one Republican voted for the Biden bill as it cleared the House of Representatives. 
This was despite public supermajorities in its favour, including plenty of
conservative  voters. a€oela€™ m coming from a state where people are saying we need some help,a€D 
reports Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, one of the reddest places in the
nation.   She is almost alone among Republicans in her openness to the bill. As fair as some of its 
quibbles are, the party must ask itself if it wants to go into 2022 with no credit at all
for  a hugely popular law. The Democratic midterm campaign would more or less write itselfa€!

2) Consider the ideology of utopia and economic growth that grew up on both sides of the year 1800. 
It hoped for the proper tuning of sociology to technology for the enlargement
of the human empire in a strongly positivea€’’indeed a utopiana€’’direction. We are once again 
undergoing the same intellectual cycle. We once again do not have big enough
brains to understand well enough how technology and society interact. So we cannot even plan for 
how we might get to a a utopian future. Kieran Healy provides some tips for how
we can think better about this:

Kieran Healy (2016): SASE Panel on The Moral Economy of Technology 
<https://kieranhealv.org/blog/archives/2016/06/28/sase-panel-on-the-moral-economv-of-technologv/>:
a€~Silicon Valleya€! evangelizes social progress through technological disruptiona€!. The 
precursors of modern social science were a€oeideologues of progressa€n, in Krishan
Kumara€™ s (1986) phrase. They had vivid ideas about what the future would look like; they insisted 
on the connection between social change and moral progress; and they had
strong  views about the role of science in this processa€! the Scottish Enlightenmenta€! the 
philosophes&C\ Turgot, and Condorcet, and especially Henri Saint-Simon. They coined
words like a€ceindividualisma€D, a€oeindustrialisma€n, a€oesocialisma€n, a€oethe organization of 
labora€D, stages of development, or used them in their modern sense for
the  first timea€!. The Saint-Simonian vision became what Hayek called a€oethe religion of the 
engineersa€D, full of faith in the power of rational expertise. That religion is very
much still with usa€!. Does the thing Really Work? In his book, The Sneetches (1961), Dr Seuss 
discusses the disruptive entrepreneur Sylvester McMonkey McBean, a pioneer in
the development of smart devices that satisfy the needs of socially connected groups with strong 
community valuesa€!. McBeana€™ s device was a pernicious technology of social
classification. But I think ita€™ s important to keep in mind that, as Seuss points out, the thing 
really worked. It really did put stars on the bellies of the Sneetches who had none
upon   thars, and they loved it. If it hadna€™ t really worked it would have been pernicious as 
well, just in a different waya€!. Social theorists consistently underestimate the value of
technologya€™ s delightful aspects. When it works, people really love it. They pay money for it. 
Theorists tend to react by assuming there must be something wrong with people
who     have that feelinga€!. The same theorists also consistently overestimate how often software 
and hardware actually works properlya€l. It matters which technologies are going to
work, and which ones are just going to be billion dollar cargo-cultsa€!. A future where individual 
tastes and and potentials are accurately and predictably sifted from gigantic
datasets  in an ongoing flow of profitable mutual co-ordination and anticipation. If it doesna€™t 
really worka€! technologies area€! a€oemoney laundering for biasa€D, or
ritualized applications of nonsensical or procrustean methodsa€!


3) Jason Furman and William Powell once more try to keep people from looking at the official 
unemployment rate and taking it as a reliable guide to any dimension of the economic
situation. Please listen to them:

Jason Furman & Wilson Powell: US Unemployment Remains Worse 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/us-unemployment-remains-worse-it-seems-
millions-still-out-laboi>: a€~Throughout the pandemic the official unemployment rate has been kept 
down by a misclassification error and the unusually large withdrawal of
millions                                                                                    of 
people from the workforce. Our estimate of the realistic unemployment rate for February was 8.2 
percenta€!. Another concept, the fixed participation rate
unemployment rate, cited by Federal Reserve Chair Jay Powell and Treasury Secretary Janet Yellen, 
was 9.5 percent; the comparable concept peaked at 11.8 percent in the financial
crisis. The headline unemployment rate was 6.2 percent in February, down slightly from 6.3 percent 
in January. This concept works well in normal times but has had some
deficiencies in the context of the pandemica€!

4) A very good employment day summary from the Biden Council of Economic Advisers headed by Ceci 
Rouse:

Cecilia Rouse: The Employment Situation in February 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/blog/2021/Q3/Q5/the-employment-situation-in-february/>: 
a€~The economy
remains down 9.5 million jobs from February 2020 and will require more than two years of job growth 
at Februarya€™ s pace just to get back to pre-pandemic levelsa€!.

Accounting for labor force dropouts and misclassification issues related to BLSa€™ s survey 
questions would result in an unemployment rate around 9.5 percent. This is not to say
the headline unemployment rate is wrong, simply that in a pandemic, getting a full view of the 
economy requires looking at the data in multiple waysa€!. The labor force
participation rate for women 20 years and over is down 2.2 percentage points relative to February 
2020, compared to a decline of 2.0 percentage points for men. The overall male­
female difference in labor force participation changes masks wide variation by race. White men and 
women have declines in labor force participation rates that are relatively similar
(2.0 percentage points for white men and 1.9 for white women). On the other hand, the labor force 
participation rate is down 1.8 percentage points for Black men, but 4.2
percentage points for Black womena€!. Black women were only 14 percent of the female labor force in 
February 2020, but have accounted for a disproportionate 26 percent of
female  labor force dropouts since thena€!

5) Republican senators grandstand to try to delay the legislative process. Out of their incompetent 
lack of organization, they fail to do so. And most of the journalistic community
and all of the Republican base simply does not notice. As Nicholas Grossman says, this is, in 
capsule form, the quintessence of Trumpianism:

Nicholas Grossman: a€™ How perfectly Trumpian 
<https:lltwitter.com/NGrossman81/status/1367856772128636933>. Be a jerk in a showy way, get that 
covered on TV, but be
too lazy or ignorant to follow through in Congress, so the original action ends up having no 
practical effect, just some coverage on friendly outlets that you were a jerk to people
they dona€™t like: Jim Sciutto: "Dems seem to have outplayed GOP on the Covid delay. After the 
all-night reading, Chris Van Hollen simply got up, proposed shortening the
debate from 20 hours to 3 and no Republican including Ron Johnson was around to contest. In the 
end, the dramatic Bill reading delayed nothinga€!

6) As Janet Yellen pointed out four years ago, economic policymakers and policy advisors have 
absolutely no business today recommending policies that run a substantial risk of
generating a low-pressure economy that could not then be rapidly heated up with our available 
policy tools. No business at all:

Janet Yellen (2016): The Influence of Demand on Aggregate Supply 
<https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/yellen2016 IQ 14a.htm>: a€™ Prior to the Great 
Recession,
most economists would probably have answereda€! a qualified a€ceno.a€da€l Aggregate demanda€! was 
seen as explaining shorter-term fluctuations around the mostly

exogenous supply-determined longer-run trend. 1 This conclusion deserves to be reconsidered in 
light of the failure of the level of economic activity to return to its pre-recession
trend in most advanced economiesa€!. If we assume that hysteresis is in fact present to some degree 
after deep recessions, the natural next question is to ask whether it might be
possible to reverse these adverse supply-side effects by temporarily running a a€oehigh-pressure 
economy,a€D with robust aggregate demand and a tight labor marketa€!.

Hysteresis would seem to make it even more important for policymakers to act quickly and 
aggressively in response to a recession, because doing so would help to reduce the depth
and persistence of the downturn, thereby limiting the supply-side damage that might otherwise 
ensue. In addition, if strong economic conditions can partially reverse supply-side
damage after it has occurred, then policymakers may want to aim at being more accommodative during 
recoveries than would be called for under the traditional view that supply is
largely independent of demanda€!

7) Running a substantial chunk of our hi-tech economy on the financial flows obtained from selling 
ads to glued eyeballs is a huge societal mistake along many dimensions. The fact
that Googlea€™ s search engine today is substantially inferior to what it was when Google started 
out is just one such dimension. I had naA“vely imagined, back when I thought
about this two decades ago, that by now Google would be able to provide me with a good index to the 
collective online library of humanity. It cannot. It does not seem to have any
desire to do so:

John Gruber: Googlea€™ s Search Results Have Gotten Worse <https://daringfireball.net/linked/2Q21 
/Q3/04/fowler-google-search>: a€~Googlea€™ s biggest weakness in search
isa€! Googlea€™ s own search results have clearly gotten worsea€!. Ita€™ s been a slow boil from 
the Google of old to today, but if you took a Google search user from 2005 and
showed them Google search today, theya€™ d think it was halfway to Idiocracya€!

8) Eric Alterman observes, once again, that the internal culture of the _New York Times_ appears to 
take people who were once good reporters and focus them on doing things
other than working for their readers:

Eric Alterman: Times Scoop! Republicans Dona€™ t a€~Advance Working Peoplea€™ s Economic 
Interestsa€™ <http://americanprospect.activehosted.com/index.php?
action=social&chash=15de21c670ae7c3f6f3flf37029303c9.604&s=5c0f20f039bcl03aad05cec590c71835>: 
a€~When the New York Times publishes articles with headlines that
read like this one in Thursdaya€™ s editiona€”a€oeRepublicans Won Blue-Collar Votes. Theya€™re Not 
Offering Much in Returna€Da€”they are missing quite a few points
simultaneously. This subheda€”a€oeParty leaders want to capitalize on Donald Trumpa€™ s appeal to 
the white working class. But in recent weeks, theya€™ ve offered very little
to advance working peoplea€™ s economic interestsa€Da€”deserves a Golden Globe award in the 
category of cluelessness. At what point in history, pre- or post-Donald Trump,
did the modern Republican Party a€oeadvance working peoplea€™ s economic interestsa€D? Have the 
Times journalists, their editors, headline (or subhed) writers ever heard of

Ronald Reagan, George W. Bush, George H.W. Bush, or Trump himself? Good God, as far as working 
peoplea€™ s economic interests go, it has been the party of a€oeLet them eat
rhetoric,a€D one that unashamedly enriches the rich and impoverishes tens of millions. Whata€™ s 
changed primarily is the brazenness on both ends of this bad bargain, as with
Trumpa€™ s trillion-dollar giveaway to the wealthy coupled with his ratcheting up of the hate that 
his party and its proponents in the media sell as a sop to the suckers. Everyone at
the Times presumably knows this, but they publish this crap to try to protect themselves from 
working-the-ref-style attacks from the right. It never works, but it never stops just the
samea€!

