24:10

<https ://ooo .mmhmm .app/zqFy pOnW QmnxzEG WVj 5C7

<https://www.icloud.com/keynote/0884cf80irPPW24iwYQHoqYKw

<https://www.icloud.com/iclouddrive/01cECe9P7 
3plRkRd3-QZkdNQ#2022-06-17-slouching-first-talk-(davis-script).pptx>

2022 06 17 Slouching First Talk (davis Script)

27.1MB a"™ PDF File
Download

Download
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

Davis Script:

2022-06-17 Fr Davis Script Slouching Talk
I am Brad DeLong

I am here to talk about my forthcoming book, Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 
Long 20th Century, forthcoming on September 6 from Basic/Hachette. I oscillate between thinking it 
is the best work I
have ever done, truly not a careerist or ticket-punching piece for the moment but rather a treasure 
for all time; and thinking that it is wholly inadequate to the subjecta€”which is to tell the main 
thread of the story as to how
we got here, with an eye toward understanding where we are.

Leta€™ s start with the metaphor of the a€oeeconomic piea€D. If you want to create a utopia, first 
you have to bake a big-enough pie; then you have to slice it equitably, so that everyone has 
enough; then people have to taste
ita€”enjoy ita€”use their wealth, their power to manipulate nature and to command the attention and 
assistance of others (for that is what wealth is) to live lives in which they are healthy, safe, 
secure, and happy.

Before 1870 we humans simply could not bake a big-enough pie. By 2010 we could. That solving of the 
problem of baking ought, according to the thinking of those living in earlier ages, to have solved 
the big problem in
building utopia.

Most of the non-utopian features of previous human societies had, after all, been a consequence of 
there not being enough for everyone; to have enough for yourself, therefore, meant figuring out a 
way to dominate others and


appropriate their work. That would be so, said Aristotlea€”and hence the chief field of economics 
had to be how to boss your slavesa€’’because we did not have a€oethe [robot] statues of Daedalus, 
or the [self-propelled
catering-cart] tripods of Hephaestus... the shuttlea€! weav[ing] and the plectrum touch[ing] the 
lyre without a hand to guide them."

Well, now we do.

With the coming of a big-enough pie, all of that ought to vanish.

Yet it turned out that slicing and tasting were problems that were intractable: they were not easy 
or straightforward to solve.

Thus from one perspective my Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the 20th Century is 
about how we solved the problem of baking the piea€”and how we fumbled the solution to the problems 
of slicing and
tasting. That is one reading of its big narrative sweep, admittedly with lots of subthreads, 
digressions, and anecdotes along the way.

Why start in 1870, rather than in 1917,1914,1780,1712,1688,1649,1492,1346,1122, 800, or, indeed, 
Octaviana€™ s Second Settlement of -23? Three reasons:

The first reason is that my cliometric heritage requires me to have a time series. I assert that 
the level of a€cetechnologya€Da€”the value of the stock of useful human ideas about how to 
manipulate nature and productively
organize ourselvesa€”is proportional to the average level of real income per capita times the 
square-root of population. And I assert that we have to hand good enough guesses of world 
population, and of average world real
income per capita. What does this time series tell us? It tells us that in the Industrial 
Revolution century 1770-1870 the proportional rate of growth of a€oetechnologya€n deployed and 
diffused into the world economy was
0.45%/year, worldwide. That is slow enough that a population growth rate of 0.9%/year would 
neutralize any impact of better technology on average incomes. And a poor world population could 
easily grow at 0.9%/yeara€:
doubling every three generationsa€”at a stagnant level, and thus never get rich enough to trigger 
the fertility decline and the demographic transition.

The second reason is that the 0.45%/year rate of growth of technology in the Industrial Revolution 
century was not necessarily stable. You can only concentrate the manufacturing of the world in the 
most efficient industrial
districts once. You can only mine the really-cheap surface coal where the last round of glaciers 
had scraped all the post-Permian rock off once. It is possible to envision a 
counterfactuala€’’William Stanley Jevons in his 1865
The Coal Question certainly dida€”in which post-1870 technological progress slows because its 
continuation along previous lines requires a favorable coal abundance and cheapness that is no 
longer there. A slowdown of,
say, 1/3 in technological progress post-1870 compared to pre-1870 would have given us in 2010 the 
technology level we actually reached in 1890, but with a much bigger population than the world had 
in 1890. Such a
persistent-steampunk world is imaginable, but it is not ours.

The third reason is a quote I ran across from the final post-1870 edition of John Stuart Milla€™ s 
Principles of Political Economy:

> Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the day's 
toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery 
and imprisonment, and an
increased number of manufacturers and others to make fortunesa€! [and] increased the comforts of 
the middle classesa€!

John Stuart Mill did not think that the problem of enougha€”of baking a big-enough piea€”was on the 
way to being solved in 1870, not with the economic and social institutions and patterns of that 
day.

But we did get a big shift, a crossing of a watershed boundary, around 1870: the coming of the 
industrial research lab, the modern corporation, and full globalization with the global build-out 
of the railroad and the telegraph
network, and the iron-hulled screw-propellered ocean-going steamship. In terms of our time series, 
the average rate of growth of technology deployed and diffused worldwide rapidly jumped up from 
0.45%/year to 2.1%/year,
where it stayed at least until 2010. From a doubling time of 160 years to a doubling time of 34. 
Malthusian population growth could not keep up, and the world became rich enough for the 
demographic transition to take hold,
and take hold it did relatively rapidly as such things go.

After 1870 the problem of baking a big-enough pie was on track to being solved. And its solution 
was straightforward: Just let the market economy rip. Let the industrial research labs and the 
corporations do their thing in the
context of the world market economy produced by full globalization. Industrial research labs, 
modern corporations, globalization, and the market economy a€’’which, as that genius Friedrich von 
Hayek most keen-sightedly
observed, is tremendously effective at crowdsourcing solutionsa€’’proved keys to the lock that had 
kept humanity in its desperately poor iron cage, with the only comfortable ones being the thugs 
with spears who took from
the near-subsistence farmers, and those with whom they shared their extractions.

Previously unimaginable economic growth revolutionized human life over and over, generation by 
generation, in not just one episode of Schumpeterian creative destruction but in repeated, 
never-ceasing episodes: five, if not
more.

And so humanity should have been able to turn to deal with the problems of slicing, and tasting. 
Certainly it had resources to deal with these problems on a scale that was previously unthinkable.

How should we answer our predecessors? They would look at the extraordinary and amazing 
technological power of our civilization, in which each of us is arguably richer than Nathan Meyer 
Rothschild along the dimension
that counts, for even though he was the richest man in the world in the first half of the 1800s, he 
died of an infected abscess in his butt because he was not rich enough to afford penicillin.

They would say: why have you not created a utopia, since you have solved the problem of enough and 
thus also removed all of the additional causes of strife that arise because people fight when there 
isna€™ t enough? They
would be very surprised to see that the problems of slicing and tasting have flummoxed us.

What happened? This, I think, my book has nailed. Letting the market economy rip to solve the 
problem of making enough had consequences. The repeated, sequential, Schumpeterian 
creative-destruction economic
revolutions meant that all was solid melted into aira€”all established patterns and orders were 
steamed awaya€”and while men (and women) were not compelled to face with sober senses their real 
conditions of life and
relations with one another, they did have to try to build new institutions to manage the problems 
and opportunities of production, distribution, and utilization that the onrushing technological 
cornucopia brought.

That idiot Friedrich von Hayek thought the unleashed market would do the whole job, The market 
would produce enough. True, it could not produce a€oesocial justicea€U, but we should not ask for 
social justice. Why not?
Because attempting to achieve it would undermine the market economya€™ s ability to do what it 
could do, and put us on, well, The Road to Serfdom. a€oeThe market giveth, the market taketh away: 
blessed be the name of
the marketa€D had to be our only gospel.

But, as that genius Karl Polanyi put it in his book The Great Transformation, the a€oestark 
utopiaa€D of von Hayek's catallaxy was unsustainable. People will not stand for being told that 
there are no rights but property
rights. They instead insist that a€oethe market was made for man, not man for the marketa€D. The 
marketa€™ s treating those whom society saw as equals unequally, or unequals equally, brought 
social explosion after
explosion, blocking the road to utopia. People saw themselves as deserving communities, incomes, 
and stability. They needed their Polanyian rightsa€”to economic security, to an income level 
proportional to what they
deserved, that other people should have income levels proportional to what they deserved too, in a 
connected society that gave them respect and placea€”plus that you should have some power in 
society even if you had no
wealth. Trying to bring about the stark utopia of market society would thus face explosions, and be 
overwhelmed by social-political movements that sought social justicea€”which might be a very 
inegalitarian kind of social
justice, because it would give people not equal shares but rather what those making the rules 
deserved.

Thus the book wound up with a Polanyi-Left Neoliberal grand narrative.

Since 1870 humansa€’’Theodore Roosevelt, John Maynard Keynes, Benito Mussolini, Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt, Vladimir Lenin, Margaret Thatcher, Deng Xiaoping, and othersa€” tried to think up 
solutions. They
dissented from a€oethe market givetha€la€D constructively and destructively. They demanded that the 
market do less, or different, and other institutions do more. Keynes whimpered that if only 
governments allowed his


That idiot Friedrich von Hayek thought the unleashed market would do the whole job, The market 
would produce enough. True, it could not produce a€oesocial justicea€U, but we should not ask for 
social justice. Why not?
Because attempting to achieve it would undermine the market economya€™ s ability to do what it 
could do, and put us on, well, The Road to Serfdom. a€oeThe market giveth, the market taketh away: 
blessed be the name of
the marketa€D had to be our only gospel.

But, as that genius Karl Polanyi put it in his book The Great Transformation, the a€oestark 
utopiaa€D of von Hayek's catallaxy was unsustainable. People will not stand for being told that 
there are no rights but property
rights. They instead insist that a€cethe market was made for man, not man for the marketa€D. The 
marketaC™ s treating those whom society saw as equals unequally, or unequals equally, brought 
social explosion after
explosion, blocking the road to utopia. People saw themselves as deserving communities, incomes, 
and stability. They needed their Polanyian rightsa€”to economic security, to an income level 
proportional to what they
deserved, that other people should have income levels proportional to what they deserved too, in a 
connected society that gave them respect and placea€”plus that you should have some power in 
society even if you had no
wealth. Trying to bring about the stark utopia of market society would thus face explosions, and be 
overwhelmed by social-political movements that sought social justicea€”which might be a very 
inegalitarian kind of social
justice, because it would give people not equal shares but rather what those making the rules 
deserved.

Thus the book wound up with a Polanyi-Left Neoliberal grand narrative.

Since 1870 humansa€’’Theodore Roosevelt, John Maynard Keynes, Benito Mussolini, Franklin Delano 
Roosevelt, Vladimir Lenin, Margaret Thatcher, Deng Xiaoping, and othersa€” tried to think up 
solutions. They
dissented from aCcethe market givetha€la€D constructively and destructively. They demanded that the 
market do less, or different, and other institutions do more. Keynes whimpered that if only 
governments allowed his
technocratic students to conduct a sensible monetary policy along with a "somewhat comprehensive" 
socialization of investment, that everyone would have a job and technology plus compound interest 
would wreak marvels
and rock-bottom interest rates would "euthanize" the rentiersa€”so that they could use their money 
social power only at the cost of spending down their capital, and so relinquishing it. Thus in the 
not-very-long-run,
Keynesian technocrats could solve the problems of production and distribution, leaving humanity to 
grapple with its real problem: that of utilization of our wealth to create a truly human world.

Perhaps humanity, did indeed come close to an institutional-societal setup to tackle the problems 
of slicing and tasting. Post-WWII "social democracy" in the rich countries was a good try. 
Keynesian focus on full employment
(and low interest rates to make amortizing the WWII-era debt easy), Beveridgian 
equality-through-redistribution (and public provision), plus a little Pigovian 
externality-compensation produced the Thirty Glorious Years.

But somehow social democracy failed its sustainability test, and was replaced by neoliberalism, 
which stubbornly persists in spite of its failure to fulfill any of its promises except that it 
would make the rich much richer with
much more social power. Society may not know what "social justice" is, but it knows that it 
manifestly does not consist of giving benefits to and making life easy for those it assesses as 
"undeserving".

And so the wheel turned. Here we are. Why are not the good people of the global north happier and 
more satisfied with the techno-utopian marvels that have been delivered to them? Why has great 
wealth in historical
perspective produced not reduced but increased economic anxiety? And how does that economic anxiety 
get transformed into ethno-nationalist fear and rage? And how is it that the neoliberal ordering of 
society still survives,
given that it has fulfilled exactly none of the promises made by its original salesmen, save for 
making the rich richer and society more economically unequal? Our current situation: in the rich 
countries there is enough by any
reasonable standard, and yet we are all unhappy, all earnestly seeking to discover who the enemies 
are who have somehow stolen our rich birthright and fed us unappetizing lentil stew instead.

What do we do next? This my book punts. That is for a younger generation than my failed one to 
decide. Global warming. Ethno-national terrorism on all scales from the individual AR-15 to the 
Combined Arms Army.
Revived fascism. Technokleptocracy. I do quail.

As John Maynard Keynes wrote back in 1924:

> [That] assumes... a plan exists.... [But] we lack more than usual a coherent scheme of progress, 
a tangible ideal. All the political parties alike have their origins in past ideas and not in new 
ideas.  No one has a gospel. The

next move is with the head...

Now I could have written a very different book.

After all, only one of the many threads that were the warp of the ideal book I first wrote in my 
minda€™ s eye survives as the booka€™ s Grand Narrative.

In the beginning, the book was going to have a number of important threads. It was to be a 
science-and-technology booka€”a Michael Polanyi book. It was going to be an 
engineers-and-entrepreneurs booka€”a David
Landes. It was going to be a Schumpeterian creative-destruction-and-finance-and-industry book. It 
was going to be a Keynesian macro-and-moral-philosophy book. And it was going to be a 
reacting-to-a€oeRed-Viennaa€D
booka€”a Karl Polanyi-and-friends book. Of all of these Grand Narratives that I had originally 
hoped to thread throughout the book, only the last of thesea€”the Karl Polanyi Grand 
Narrativea€’’survived the writing and
editing process.

That means that my aspirations for the book have shrunk: my hope now is that my book will do for 
Karl Polanyi something like what Charlie Kindlebergera€™ s Manias, Panics, and Crashes did for 
Hyman Minskya€”that is,
make him comprehensible, arresting, immediate, and important, by providing lots of narrative 
examples for which the underlying theory can serve as a thematic lens.

And I do confess that right now I am most interested in what people can convince me that I have 
gotten very wrong here. The book does havre an overly-simplistic stripped-down pseudo-Polanyiesque 
Grand Narrative at its
heart. And while that may have been (but probably was not) adequate for a 1940s-era understanding 
of the dynamic of fascism, really-existing socialism, and classical (or, rather, semi-classical 
pseudo-) liberalism then
midway through the Long 20th Century; it is wholly inadequate for grasping the political-economy 
dilemmas of the world today!

Thank you very much for listening. Please read the book: I really do think you will find it 
rewarding.
Subscribe now

