Subscribe now

FIRST: These People Have Jobs?: Law & Twitter Department


Stable Diffusion via Night Cafe: right-wing juggalo convention at the University of Chicago 
Rockefeller Chapel

One of the great challenges in understanding just what Ms. Market has been thinking this year was 
the magnitude of the drop in the equity value of Twitter between May 6 and May 16, when its market 
price dropped from $50 to $37 a sharea€”essentially giving back 80% of the premium that had been 
baked into it when Elon Musk decided to contract to buy Twitter at $54.20:

53.70 USD                                                      - Follow

+11.04 (25.88%) + year to date

Closed: Oct 27, 7:59 PM EDT • Disclaimer
After hours 53.86 +0.16 (0.30%)

1D     5D     1M    6M    YTD     1Y     5Y    Max

I



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: The Chief Twit:

It is more likely that Elon Musk is a highly carnivorous shapeshifting-lizard than are some of the 
things Musk gives positive credence to

emptywheel

@emptywheel

In case anyone needs a copy of Elmo's deleted
conspiracy theory tweet.

Elon Musk 9

@elonmusk

Replying to @HillaryClinton


There is a             y there
might be more to this story than

^Advertisers

ID XKMcF wTO ”

to th: -cod. J 73* /c

0H»«e«K


rrut’w ‘nnw tw«« “rt*ih» tJMrfv

rq^w' u ’JlrilTOa

ul Pelosi

She* th a lh«Mi                      Was Drunk Again, And In a ...

& smobserved.com

HirmMrt K. L>ilnn +         K’h

inn a             F:u

®c csi one Un: in SF y.:f :o:rr<nM to

12:15pm • 30 Oct 2022 • Twitter for iPhone

12:16 PM • Oct 30, 2022 • TweetDeck


i-jvaw a wiiuiivni

OA34er Things Azt Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Matthew Winkler: California Poised to Overtake Germany as Worlda€™ s No. 4 Economy: a€~The 
Golden State has proven resilient, outperforming its US and global peersa€!

•  John Burn-Murdoch: Britain and Americaa€™ s electoral geographies are broken: a€~Why would 
Labour stalk the Tories on immigration, you ask? Because Britaina€™ s skewed electoral geography, 
in which progressives are packed into highly inefficient super-majoritiesa€!. Britain and America 
like to see themselves as the standard bearers of liberal democracy, but on the evidence presented, 
there is still some way to goa€!

•  Jason Stanley: One Hundred Years of Fascism: a€~For fascist parties and politicians to win 
elections, they usually must attract support from people who, if asked, would loudly reject the 
fascist label. But this need not be so difficult: voters merely have to be persuaded that democracy 
is no longer serving their interestsa€!

•  Bucco Capital: a€~Facebook threw up such a bad quarter it made Jim Cramer tear up and apologize 
to his viewers for being so wrong. Thata€™ s something .This video is a modern classica€!

• Chris Stokel-Walker: Students Are Using AI Text Generators to Write Papersa€”Are They Cheating?: 
a€~Teachers are struggling to catch up...
Give a gift subscription

AJs:

John Thornhill: Forget the humanoids a€” ita€™ s industrial robots that willl transform the world: 
a€~Societies need all the imagination of science fiction writers to use proven functional skills 
rather than replicate our owna€!. Societies will have to become far more creative than most science 
fiction writers in imagining how we can best collaborate with robots. Rather than constantly 
benchmarking them against humans, we should exploit their complementary
capabilitiesa€!. Our obsession with humanoid robots replicating what humans can already do 
represents the assertion of form over function. Far better for function to inform form. Start with 
the human need and reverse engineer the robot to do what they do besta€!

Nilay Patel: Welcome to hell, Elon: a€~You fa€”-ed up real good, kiddo. Twitter is a disaster clown 
car company that is successful despite itself, and there is no possible way to grow users and 
revenue without making a series of enormous compromises that will ultimately destroy your 
reputation and possibly cause grievous damage to your other companies. I say this with utter 
confidence because the problems with Twitter are not engineering problems. They
are political problems^}. The asset is the user based!. The problem when the asset is people is 
that people are intensely complicated, and trying to regulate how people behave is historically a 
miserable experienced!. You are now the King of Twitterd! personallyd! responsible for everything 
that happens on Twitter nowd! Absolute monarchs usually get murdered when shit goes sideways.

Paul Krugman Wonking out: Itd™ s a lagged, lagged, lagged, lagged world: d~So far, however, there 
hasnd™ t been much evidence of economic coolingd!. So doesnd™ t this say that the Fed needs to do 
more? Dond™ t the numbers speak for themselves? Well, no. Numbers rarely dod!. Is a€cetruea€D 
inflation really coming down?d!. Wage growth is slowing. Wages are still rising too fast to be 
consistent with the Fedd™ s inflation target, but if
the economy is really set to weaken, wage growth will probably weaken too. Furthermore, you can 
argue that past wage growth, like surging rents, partly reflected a one-time adjustment to 
pandemic-related shocks, which will go away over time. So does the Fed need to do more, or has it 
already done too much? Itd™ s a judgment calld!

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

