CONDITION: War in Europe:

Paul Poast @ProfPaulPoast

How will Russia's invasion of Ukraine play out? What is Putin's end game? I see four scenarios, 
none of which are good. [THREAD]


Lutsk

Kharkiv #

Dnipro

Claimed by

bv Ukraine


•X Odessa

me of

Kherson Mariupol

12:29 PM r™ Feb 24,2022

2,435Likes879Retweets

The four scenarios are: Putina€™ s puppet in Kiev, Russian annexation of Ukraine, imperial 
overreach as Putin attempts to bring all of the a€oenear abroada€D back into his sphere of 
influencea€”and fails but causes multi-decade chaosa€”and major-power war.
Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...

Share

First: a€oe47% of Americans Are Freeloaders Who Pay No Income Taxes!a€D

The remarkable thing about Rick Scotta€™ s culture-war Republican campaign documenta€”the only 
thing that the Republican Party has put out about what its legislative program might bea€”is that 
in order to achieve his culture-war objectives, Rick Scott did not have to call for raising taxes 
on more than 100 million people. All he would have had to do was drop the word income from the 
phrase a€oeall Americans should pay income tax to have skin in the gamea€la€D

Lawrence H. Summers: a€™ Josh Barro points out

SER


IVery Serious

Rick Scott Just Gave a Huge Gift to Democrats

When we talk about popularism, we usually talk about Democrats and whether theya€™ re working hard 
enough at being popular. But this weeka€™ s big popularism story is a Republican one, with Florida 
Senator Rick Scott taking a hammer to his partya€™ s pretty successful efforts to do popularism on 
economic issues in recent yearsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 18 likes A- 13 comments A- Josh Barro

that the Republican Senate campaign manifesto vows that a€oeAll Americans should pay some income 
tax to have skin in the game.a€D Wow. I wonder if it reflects ignorance, cruelty or both 
«https://t.co/onDmxR2Alj». This would mean tax increases for 100 million middle income and poor 
people. It would require largely cancelling Ronald Reagana€™ s, and every subsequent presidenta€™ 
s, EITC. It would highly disproportionately raise taxes for African Americans and, by eliminating 
net refunds, massively increase child povertya€!
LINK:

Lawrence H. Summers @LHSummers

.@jbarro points out that the Republican Senate campaign manifesto vows that a€oeAll Americans 
should pay some income tax to have skin in the game.a€D Wow. I wonder if it reflects ignorance, 
cruelty or both.


I






4

ioshbarro.comRick Scott Just Gave a Huge Gift to DemocratsThe GOP Senate campaign chair wants to 
revive an unpopular economic agenda a€” including a tax increase on over 100 million Americans
5:01 AMT™ Feb 23,2022

213Likes45Retweets
Here is Rick Scotta€™ s opening:

The militant left now controls the entire federal government, the news media, academia, Hollywood, 
and most corporate boardrooms a€“ but they want more. They are redefining America and silencing 
their opponents. Among the things they plan to change or destroy are: American history, patriotism, 
border security, the nuclear family, gender, traditional morality, capitalism, fiscal 
responsibility, opportunity, rugged individualism, Judeo-Christian values, dissent, free speech, 
color blindness, law enforcement, religious liberty, parental involvement in public schools, and 
private ownership of firearmsa€!

<https://www.politico.com/f/?id=0000017f-lcf5-d281-a7ff-3ffd5f4a0000>
And here is the a€ceEconomy/Growtha€D plank:

[ POINT FIVE ] ECONOMY/GROWTH

Socialism is un-American and always leads to
poverty and oppression. We will stop it. We
will shrink the federal government, reduce the
government work force by 25% in 5 years, sell


government buildings and assets, and get rid or

the old, slow, closed, top-down, government-run-
everything system we have today.


» Socialism will be treated as a
foreign combatant which aims
to destroy our prosperity and
freedom.

» Other than essential core
functions, government should not
be doing anything that the private
sector can do better and cheaper.

» We will apply the “Do It Better”
Test: If American businesses can
serve the American people better
and cheaper than government, the
work goes to them.

» No government assistance unless
you are disabled or aggressively
seeking work. If you can work, but
refuse to work, you cannot live

off of the hard work and sweat of
your fellow Americans.

» We will require “truth in
governing.” If government passes
a  law that does not achieve what
it promised, the program will be
shut down.

34 11 POINT PLAN TO RESCUE AMERICA

And here, kinda-sorta economic in part, is a€oeAmerica Firsta€D:

» We will balance the federal
budget. It can be done. Slates do it
all the lime.

» If Congress does not pass a
budget, the members of Congress
do not gel paid. Full stop.

» Other than disaster relief, the
federal government must stop
spending money on non-essential
state and local projects until the
budget is balanced.

» Eliminate truly non-essential
government employee positions,
because they are non-essential.

» Implement the line-item veto.
It works in state capitols. It will
work in Washington.

» Expedite all federal permit
applications to be granted or
denied within 30 days.

» All Americans should pay some
income tax to have skin in the
game, even if a small amount.
Currently over half of Americans
pay no income tax.

MADE IN
UNITED STATES

» Prohibit debt ceiling increases
absent a declaration of war.

U S. SENATOR RICK SCOTT (FL)

[ POINT ELEVEN ] AMERICA FIRST


America will be dependent on NO other country.
We will conduct no trade that takes away jobs or
displaces American workers. Countries who oppose
us  at the UN will get zero financial help from us. We
will be energy independent and build supply chains
that never rely on our adversaries. We will only help
countries that are willing to defend themselves, like
Israel.


» We will unapologetically lead
the world by example. A world
without American leadership
would be a very dark world.

» Adhere to the New Monroe
Doctrine - America will not allow
any global enemy, such as China,
Russia, or Radical Islam, to grow
their presence in our hemisphere.

» No foreign aid to any country that
habitually opposes us at the UN.

» We will not pay any dues to
the United Nations or any
international organization that

undermines the national interests
of the USA.

» We will make our international
allies pay their fair share for their
own defense. We will not send our
kids to do what their kids will not
do.

» Our military will not be used as
a peace-keeping force, it exists
to protect us by intimidating or
killing our enemies.

» Nation-building does not work,
we will not waste our treasure or
troops doing it.

» We will always defend our allies,
starting with Israel.

» We will treat our enemies like
enemies.

» No adversarial foreign
government or corporation
controlled  by an adversarial
foreign government can purchase
American land.

» 'Ihe weather is always changing.
We take climate change seriously,
but not hysterically. We will not
adopt nutty policies that harm our
economy or our jobs.

We will gradually end all imports
from Communist China until a
new regime honors basic human
rights and freedoms.

We will build supply chains
that rely solely on American
workers and allies. We will not
be at the mercy of our enemies

for medications or any essential
commodities.

» We will terminate any trade deal
that takes away American jobs.

» America will be energy
independent.

58 11 POINT PLAN TO RESCUE AMERICA                                       U.S. SENATOR RICK SCOTT 
(FL) 59

Josh says that:

Liberals on Twitter will mostly notice the culture-war content of the document, and they may 
underestimate the strength of the political ground that Republicans stand on with many of those 
issues.  big opportunity for Democratsa€! lies in a short statement about taxes: a€oeAll Americans 
should pay income tax to have skin in the game, even if a small amounta€Da€! a promise to raise 
taxes on well over one hundred million peoplea€!


One Picture: The Year 1400


ColiUr

lavinidt

Sal Un al r

ZminM I              Empire of Timur

Ibatulra       Mamluk

(Mongol)

Tibetan Tribes
and Kingdoms

Ming
Dynasty


Berber Tribe*   Nomadic Tribe*

Sultanate

Medina

Bed u Ins

Delhi
Sultanate


HIUMI

State*

kanem

Empire  D^u     taulid'

Vlrt


Bantu
People*

Luo

People* Cushite*

Stair*


I nurinr

Papuans


Bantu
People*

Khoisan
People*

Malag

Australian
Aboriginal
People*

Very Briefly Noted

Steve M.: MEMIFY IT, DEMOCRATS". a€~An appalling phrase in a Republican National Committee 
resolution condemning Liz Cheney and Adam Kinzingera€l [FOR] participating in a€oepersecution of 
ordinary citizens engaged in legitimate political discoursea€Da€!. Hang the phrase around 
Republicansa€™ necksa€! <https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2022/02/memify-it-democrats.html>

Joe Weisenthal: Itd€™ s Time for Bitcoin to Become a Better Tool for Laundering 
Afoney<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2022-02-17/it-s-time-for-bitcoin-to-become-a-better-t
ool-for-laundering-money>

Dave Winer: Scripting News: Thursday, February 17, 2022". a€~If the open web had a good lawyer we 
could stop Spotify from calling their radio programs a€oepodcastsa€D because ita€™ sa€! 
fraudulenta€!. People expect podcasts to work in any player. Spotify is lyinga€! 
<http://scripting.com/2022/02/17,html>

Laura Spinney: Pandemics Disable Peopled€”The History Lesson That Policymakers Ignore". 
a€~Influenza, polio and more have shown that infections can change lives even decades later. Why 
the complacency over possible long-term effects of COVIDa€“19?a€! <https 
://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-022-00414-x>

Galadriel: Lament (Quenya) <https://www.elfdict.com/phrases/2-quenya/17-galadriels_lament>

Perry Mehrling: a€™ Looking forward to this!§€.\ The history of international finance, hung on the 
life and times of Charles P. Kindlebergera€!. Register here: <https: //bit ly/3 gKt4cF>a€!


Perry Mehrling @PMehrling

Looking forward to this! Kindleberger was a 1933-1937 Columbia PhD, formed by the intellectual 
ferment (and monetary upheaval) of the Great Depression.

GLOBAL
THOUGHT

Global Thought @global_thoughts

Join Professor Perry Mehrling as he discusses the history of international finance, hung on the 
life and times of Charles P. Kindleberger, & the underlying economic forces and political obstacles 
that continue to shape our globalized world. Register here: 
https://t.co/3YBoOaxRI7https://t.co/qoBO3XAelY
11:15 AM r™ Feb 20,2022

49Likes IQRetweets

Daniel Larison: Yes, Reviving the Nuclear Deal Is d€ "Worth Ita€™

Eunomia

Yes, Reviving the Nuclear Deal Is 'Worth It'

Steven Cook ends up arguing that good and bad policies are all basically the same: The obvious 
answer to all of this for many in Washington is to return to the JCPOA. They have a point. For 
whatever the shortcomings of the agreement Obama negotiated, maximum pressure failed to arrest 
Irana€™ s nuclear program and brought it ever closer to being able to build a weapona€’’something 
even some Israeli security experts and officials now acknowledge. Still, the regional dynamics 
havena€™ t changed all that mucha€!

Read more

a year ago A- 10 likes A- 2 comments A- Daniel Larison

Paragraphs

Jacob Greenspon, Anna Stansbury, & Lawrence H. Summers: Productivity & Pay: A Comparison of the US 
& Canada: a€~Strong evidence of linkage between productivity and pay in the US but more mixed 
evidence for Canada, possibly due to it being a smaller, more internationally open economy. 
Overall, the findings suggest that measures to boost productivity growth are important for raising 
pay for the average and typical workera€!
LINK: <https://voxeu.org/article/productivity-and-pay-comparison-us-and-canada>

Cnrv Dnpfnrnw Pluralistic 11 Pch 7(177' daily) links from Cnry) dnctnrnw a^~Thp Ria T ip that kppns 
thp TThpr EPTTIP alivp.' A rrpdiilnns nrpcc rnntiniips tn rpnnrt massivp Inssps a« nrnfitahilitva^! 
Thp fmvthiraR dav TThp.r attains dnminanrp and nrnfitahilitv Qnmpnnp P.ISP ran start a rnmnptitnr 
that nrnvidps pxartlv thp samp sp.rvirp.s with pvartlv thp samp drivp.rs and p.xartlv thp samp 
nassp.nap.rs Thp. nnlv diffp.rp.nrp.9 That npw sprvirp wnna£™t hp $31 hillinn in thp hnlp.a^! 
TThp.r was is and alwavs will hp a hpyylpa^! inst aavp stuff awav at thp.ir initial invpstnrsa^™ 
PYnpnsp and nrptpndpd thp.rp. was a nath tn nrnfitahilitv at thp pnda^!


LINK: <https://pluralistic.net/2022/02Zll/bezzlers-gonna-bezzle/#gryft>

Steve M: CBS Cana€™ t Process the Fact that Its Poll Says Republicans Want to Punish Disloyalty to 
Trump'. a€~Republicans want the January 6 investigation stopped (72% say so), want the January 6 
insurrectionists pardoned (61%), and want Trump to run for president again (69%). And they want 
future Republican leaders to be very, very Trumpya€!. If this is the GOPa€™ s way of saying ita€™ s 
moved on from Trumpism, Ia€™ ma€l not seeing ita€!
LINK: <https://nomoremister.blogspot.eom/2022/02/cbs-cant-process-fact-that-its-poll.html>

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA....
Share

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Matt Yglesias Makes Me Want to Scratch a Philosophy-of-History Itcha€!

While Matthew Yglesias has affection for Robert Nozick, I have nothing but exasperation: Anarchy, 
State, & Utopia <https://archive.org/details/anarchvstateutopOOnozi> claimed to make an argument 
that the only way legitimate title could be acquired was through direct personal creation or 
voluntary exchange. Confronted with the fact that all of our title to everything has dirty hands 
somewhere in the past, those its response was not that this poses a big problem for the view that 
"what we have, we hold Dash and no one can legitimately take it away from us by, for example, 
taxing or regulating usa€D, but instead took his philosophical argument as in some way a 
justification for taking the current distribution of property as in some sense legitimate, and thus 
sacred going forward.
This more than half-convinced me that the book was a joke gone wrong. This conviction that was 
somewhat reinforced when Nozick then used the Cambridge Rent Control Board to extort $30,000 from 
his landlord, Erich Segal 
<https://web.archive.Org/web/20030404174732/http://www.daft.com/~rab/libertv/Miscellaneous/Nozick-ar
ticle>. After all, if even Nozick takes his a€oephilosophya€D not as a guide as to how to 
walk-the-walk, but just as a game, why should any of us pay attention to him?

But Matt this morning focused on one interesting but undeveloped idea of Nozicka€™ sa€”an idea that 
he certainly did not think was interesting enough to develop, and may have adopted simply as 
another way to troll left-wing academics, but that I nevertheless find interesting:

Matt Yglesias: The Case for the Austro-Hungarian Empire. a€~Robert Nozicka€! taught the seminar 
a€!a€oePhilosophy of History: The Russian Revolutiona€Da€! an effort to develop a philosophical 
account of historical contingency that he teases a little in his 2003 book Invariances but doesna€™ 
t explore at great lengtha€!. Some moments in history are causally thin.a€! If Alexander the Great 
decides to settle down earlier rather than push his armies east, hundreds of years of Indo-Greek 
and Greco-Bactrian culture dona€™ t exist. Nozick, to own Marxism-influenced professors, wanted to 
say that the Russian Revolution was, in fact, highly contingenta€!. But then he wants to argue that 
contingent on Lenina€™ s victory in the Russian Civil War, the lapse into Stalinist totalitarianism 
is essentially inevitablea€!
LINK:


Slow Boring

The case for the Austro-Hungarian Empire

This is a post about the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a weird subject, I know. But before we get to the 
Habsburgs, we need to take an even weirder detour into the philosophy of history, which is barely a 
real subfield of philosophy but is absolutely something that I took a class on in collegea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 143 likes A- 157 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

My thinking on this has longa€”for more than 30 years, perhaps?, at least since Krugman and 
Matsuyama <https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_ papers/w297 l/w2971 ,pdf>, 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/24091297_Increasing Returns 
Industrialization_and_Indeterminacy pf_Equilibrium>, 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5202703_A_Theory of Sectoral Adjustment>a€’’divided this 
particular conceptual corner of the world into four separate ideal-types:

1. Processes that have a single equilibrium, where history and how you got there has next to zero 
impact on what the situation will be, as individual actions and shocks set in motion countervailing 
forces that cancel their effects. Here history is barely worth considering.

2. Processes where the shadow of the past matters greatly, in that a number of different equilibria 
could have been reached, but in which small differences in how the past actually happened induce 
equal or smaller differences in how the future will be.

3. Processes where a butterflya€™ s wings flapping or not flapping at a particular moment sets into 
motion a chain of consequences such that there either is or is not a hurricane in the future.

4. Processes that are none of the above: in which it is neither the case that the history is 
unimportant, or that the history is important in a way that we can readily comprehend, or that the 
history is important but in which a€cethe want of a naila€D makes big differences in a way in which 
we can kinda-sorta see a fragile logic elsewhere, but rather something else: processes that have a 
deep historical logic, but that could have had a very different outcome, and in which we can point 
to collective human decisions that made things go this way rather than that in an important 
dimension.

The first of these is a€cenecessitya€Da€”a single equilibrium. The second of these is 
a€cehistorya€D, or a€oepath dependencea€D. The fourth of these is a€oeexpectationsa€D. All three of 
these are within the purview of the economist. The third of these is a€oechaosa€D, or perhaps 
a€oenarrativea€n. But here economists have nothing and historians have little to say other than to 
tell the story and analyze the conditions that made Alexander the Great matter.
I dona€™ t think that this was what Nozick was getting it with his a€cethina€D and a€cethicka€O. I 
do think this is what he ought to have been getting at. Here is me < 
https://www.icloud.com/iclouddrive/042amp0XrHgmGx46Sa 1 sQFvqw> attempting to grope toward 
classifying historical processes into classes (2), (4), and (3).

As to Nozicka€™ s claim that Leninism was (3), but that, conditional on Lenin, Stalinism was (2)? I 
am not so sure. Somebody, somewhere, was going to see how large corporations and 
total-industrial-war militaries worked, and take that and discontent with the market to try to run 
a central-planning economy. That it was Lenin in Russia definitely (3). That it happened somewhere? 
That I think is much more likely to be (2). And a Stalin if not the Stalin? I think a Stalin is, 
rather, a (1), and that a Stalin in Russia is a (2).
Muscovy, after all, had a Czar in the late 1500s. It has a Czar today.


My thinking on this has longa€”for more than 30 years, perhaps?, at least since Krugman and 
Matsuyama <https://www.nber.org/system/files/working papers/w297 l/w2971 ,pdf>, 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/24091297 Increasing Returns Industrialization and 
Indeterminacy of Equilibriums <https://www.researchgate.net/publication/5202703 A Theory of 
Sectoral Adjustment>a€’’divided this particular conceptual corner of the world into four separate 
ideal-types:

1. Processes that have a single equilibrium, where history and how you got there has next to zero 
impact on what the situation will be, as individual actions and shocks set in motion countervailing 
forces that cancel their effects. Here history is barely worth considering.

2. Processes where the shadow of the past matters greatly, in that a number of different equilibria 
could have been reached, but in which small differences in how the past actually happened induce 
equal or smaller differences in how the future will be.

3. Processes where a butterflya€™ s wings flapping or not flapping at a particular moment sets into 
motion a chain of consequences such that there either is or is not a hurricane in the future.

4. Processes that are none of the above: in which it is neither the case that the history is 
unimportant, or that the history is important in a way that we can readily comprehend, or that the 
history is important but in which a€oethe want of a naila€D makes big differences in a way in which 
we can kinda-sorta see a fragile logic elsewhere, but rather something else: processes that have a 
deep historical logic, but that could have had a very different outcome, and in which we can point 
to collective human decisions that made things go this way rather than that in an important 
dimension.

The first of these is a€cenecessitya€Da€”a single equilibrium. The second of these is 
a€cehistorya€D, or a€oepath dependencea€D. The fourth of these is a€ceexpectationsa€O. All three of 
these are within the purview of the economist. The third of these is a€oechaosa€n, or perhaps 
a€oenarrativea€n. But here economists have nothing and historians have little to say other than to 
tell the story and analyze the conditions that made Alexander the Great matter.
I dona€™ t think that this was what Nozick was getting it with his a€cethina€D and a€oethicka€D. I 
do think this is what he ought to have been getting at. Here is me < 
https://www.icloud.com/iclouddrive/042amp0XrHgmGx46Sa 1 sQFvqw> attempting to grope toward 
classifying historical processes into classes (2), (4), and (3).

As to Nozicka€™ s claim that Leninism was (3), but that, conditional on Lenin, Stalinism was (2)? I 
am not so sure. Somebody, somewhere, was going to see how large corporations and 
total-industrial-war militaries worked, and take that and discontent with the market to try to run 
a central-planning economy. That it was Lenin in Russia definitely (3). That it happened somewhere? 
That I think is much more likely to be (2). And a Stalin if not the Stalin? I think a Stalin is, 
rather, a (1), and that a Stalin in Russia is a (2).
Muscovy, after all, had a Czar in the late 1500s. It has a Czar today.

