Subscribe now

FIRST: Back to the Future with "The Verge"!

From my pespective most interesting thing to cross my desk this morning:

Nilay Patel: Welcome to the New Verge: ^“Revolutionizing the media with blog postsa€L Our own 
platform should be an antidote to algorithmic news feedsa€!. The Vergea€™ s homepage is the single 
most popular page at Vox Media, and it should be a statement about what the internet can be at its 
best. So wea€! landed on: well sa€”-, we just need to blog morea€!. Our plan is to bring the best 
of old-school blogging to a modern
news feed experience and to have our editors and senior reporters constantly updating the site with 
the best of tech and science news from around the entire interneta€!. We can embed anything, 
actually: Ia€™ m particularly excited that we can directly point people to interesting threads on 
Reddit and other forums. The internet is about conversations, and The Verge should be a place to 
find great conversations^!


And:

Ben Thompson: An Interview with a€oeThe Vergea€D Editor-in-Chief Nilay Patel About Building a 
Destination Site: a€“Talk[ing] with Patel about the thinking that went into this new approach, 
whicha€! I think is very smarta€!. NP: We have this very unique asseta€! a huge home page 
audiencea€!. We built the quick post editora€!. Wea€™re like, a€oeWe just built a really nice 
toola€D and our reporters are like, a€oeYes, we
would prefer to use this toola€Da€!. Every time you open The Verge, you know ita€™s going to be 
good because we are going to make it and you know that wea€™ll not have the noise of a social media 
platform. If wea€l say our competition is Twitter instead of Wired. Even if wea€™re a little bit 
successful, wea€™re going to be really successfula€!. My joke is, a€oeWea€™re going to 
revolutionize the media with blog
postsa€Da€! bring back thisa€! reverse chronological feed of good stuffa€!

Naturally, I'm very enthusiastic about this. I wish them well. I am primed to hope and expect their 
success. So, naturally, Ithen must ask the natural question of a Dismal Scientist: If this is the 
way to go, why haven't people made lots of money doing it before? Why the shift to the social media 
hellscape in the first place?

I think the shift to the social media hellscape took place because websites failed to become 
a€oedestination sitesa€Da€’’failed to offer, in Ben Thompsona€™ s words, a€oecompelling content of 
consistently high quality .a€D Instead, websites shifted to a strategy of churning out more content 
and throwing it against the wall to see if it stuck. The idea was that if we put up more, everyone 
coming to the site will find something that they like.
But it does not work that way. A smA5frgA¥sbord is outweighed by a human intention to share on 
social media. And then wee are into the downward spiral.

Does this have implications with what I do with this space now that the book launch is in progress? 
Clearly yes. What are those implications? I am not surea€!
Share

One Image:

Historical performance of alternative investments since 2001

Growth of $100


Past  performance  not  indicative  of  future  results.  Based  on  data  from  December  2000  to 
 March  2021  (except  for  private
equity, which is as of December. 2019) Performance period is dictated by availability of the 
private equity index, which is
reported                                                                                            
     on a lag relative to other indices

Source: Chief Investment Office

Historical Performance of Alternative Investments (Source: Merrill Lynch)

Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Alexander Salazar; a€~Great read [Slouching Towards Utopia] so far. Giving flashbacks of Econ 1 
when Prof. DeLonga€™ s syllabus perplexed us Freshmen by including books about anthropology, social 
psychology, and neoliberalism (forcing avowed Berkeley leftists to read Milton Friedman). Quite the 
revelatory course around 2010a€:

• Tristan Bove: Why You Should Be Happy About Inflation & Worried About Something Else, Top 
Economist Brad DeLong Says


•  Jenny Blair: Study: More Than 335,000 Lives Could Have Been Saved During Pandemic if U.S. Had 
Universal Health Care

•  Daniel Immerwahr: Polanyi in the United States: Peter Drucker, Karl Polanyi, and the Midcentury 
Critique of Economic Society

• A-dAJn PA^: Fascism

• A-dA Jn PAV & F.M. Atkinson: Syndicalism

•  Barry Ritholtz: 10 Sunday Reads: a€~Avert your eyes! My Sunday morning look at incompetency, 
corruption and policy failuresa€!

• Joe Conason: What We Can Still Learn From Kenneth Starr

• Jill Lawrence: If you care about your country and your rights, don't vote for any Republicans in 
2022 
<https://www.usatoday.eom/story/opinion/columnists/2022/09/18/dangerous-2022-elections-abortion-voti
ng-democracy/10368442002/>: a€~Do reality-based Republicans deserve to win? Maybe. But could 
America survive a GOP House unscathed? Also maybe, and thata€™ s not good enougha€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Steve Viadeck: a€~Founding-era ambivalence over whether the Attorney General was an officer of 
the executive branch or an officer of the courts (or a weird hybrid of both). The Judiciary Act of 
1789 (which created the AG) didn't expressly resolve it...

This is fascinating. It's also consistent with Founding-era ambivalence over whether the Attorney 
General was an officer of the executive branch or an officer of the courts (or a weird hybrid of 
both). The Judiciary Act of 1789 (which created the AG) didn't expressly resolve it.

Jameel Jaffer @ Jameel Jaffer

Herea€™ s something quite amazing. The OLC wrote a powerful memo explaining why the Attorney 
General's independence is vital to our constitutional system. It reads as if it had been drafted 
this morning, in response to todaya€™ s political landscape, but a€!. /I 
https://t.co/ieOeIsAvBehttps://t.co/ssAKk7b7sR
1:37 PM r™ Sep 19,2022

69Likes24Retweets

•  Adrian Hon: Book 39: Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century by 
Brad DeLong. Excellent, clear, and funny, using sci-fi counterfactuals and tales of individuals to 
illustrate the last 150 years of economic history. Like Sapiens in its scope a€“ but good!a€!

Adrian Hon @adrianhon

Book 39: Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century by Brad DeLong. 
Excellent, clear, and funny, using sci-fi counterfactuals and tales of individuals to illustrate 
the last 150 years of economic history. Like Sapiens in it's scope a€“ but good!

‘Magisterial’PAUL KRUGMAN

S L 0 U C HIN G


AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

J. BRADFORD DELONG

8:31 AMT™ Sep 6,2022

Leave a comment

AJs:

Daniel Williams: The focus on Misinformation Leads to a Profound Misunderstanding of Why People 
Believe and Act on Bad Information: a€~A better frameworka€! focusesa€! on motivated reasoning and 
rationalisation markets. Human beings are rational and vigilant a€“ but only when our goal is to 
form accurate beliefs. We are also motivated to believe things for their emotional, social, or 
material benefits. This process of motivated reasoning is subject to
a rationalisation constraint, however: to believe what I want to believe whilst maintaining an 
illusion of objectivity, I must acquire evidence and arguments that rationalise my desired 
conclusions. Ambitious individuals and firms compete to produce intellectual ammunition for 
societya€™ s political and cultural factionsa€!. The result isa€! an emergent marketplace of 
rationalisations. Ambitious individuals and firms compete to produce intellectual ammunition
for societya€™ s political and cultural factions. In return for their often-intense cognitive 
labour, the winners of such competition receive attention, status, and financial rewardsa€!

Guido Franzinetti: Karl Polanyi's Fascist Cousin A-dAJn PA3r 
<http://italogramma.elte.hu/wp-content/files/Guido. Franzinetti Odon Por .pdf >: a€~Peter Drucker 
(the Austrian economist turned long-standing management guru in the USA) provided in his memoirs an 
interesting, if unreliable, recollection of the family of KAjroly and MihAjly PolAjnyi. Amongst 
others, he mentions one of the PolAjnyi brothers, supposedly called Ottoa€!. The number of
inaccuracies, exaggerations and falsehoodsa€! is difficult to quantifya€!. This does not mean that 
Druckera€™ s garbled recollections are entirely useless; indeed, most are based on fact. a€oeOtto 
Polanyia€D really existed. He was not the brother of Karoly and MihAjly, but their cousin. His name 
was in fact A-dAJn PA3r (which explains how Drucker garbled the name). He was the son of TerA©z 
Pollacsek (KAjrolyi PolAjnyia€™ s aunt), and was born in
1883.    He died in in Italy in 1971a€!. His fife may classified under a series of headings: (i) 
Hungarian Socialism at the beginning of the XXth century; (ii) Italian Socialism and its crisis 
during the First World War; (iii) Early Fascism (1922a€“1929); and (iv) Fascism in its phase of 
consolidation (1929a€“1940)a€!. The book he publisheda€! Fascism^} presenteda€! by the magazine 
Mask in the following glowing terms: a€oeFASCISM by Odon Por, Translated
by E. Townshend. The Labour Publishing Co. Ltd. 7/6a€!. A clear and practical book, showing in what 
way Labour is closely connected with Fascism: showing also how Fascism possesses what Labour 
a€oehas nota€! the power of appealing to the imagination of a people, provided imagination has not 
been utterly condemned as a worthless quality by the peoplea€™ s rulersa€!

Michael Spagat: a€~This hardly qualifies as BigTime wrong but I do think that you're a bit harsh on 
Norman Angell although it does seem plausible that his is the saddest book on your shelfa€!. He 
belaboured his argument to the point of tedium. Conquest is counterproductive. Economic progress is 
available through peaceful cooperation. He makes the argument standing on one leg, standing on his 
head, hanging from a tree branch, etc. But why the overkill? I
think the answer lies in the fact that he saw scores of influential people all around him still in 
thrall to the Great Illusion. That is, he was fighting a desperate uphill battle. It's true that at 
times he does seem succumb to an optimistic view that people will finally get it. I think that this 
is the origin of the stain permanently affixed to Angell's reputation claiming that he predicted 
the impossibility of future war right before WW1 broke outa€!. For people trained in a
rational choice tradition, as we certainly were in economics, it's a small step to say that people 
will avoid doing something that will harm thema€!. We should distinguish between: 1. an argument 
that starting a war would be stupid; and 2. an argument that war is impossible. Angell occasionally 
slipped from 1 to 2 but, broadly, I think that he saw the danger of a big war and made a cogent 
case to prevent it, albeit to no avail (so, yes, it's the saddest book on your
shelf)a€!

Michael Spagat @Michael_Spagat

1. This hardly qualifies as BigTime wrong but I do think that you're a bit harsh on Norman Angell 
although it does seem plausible that his is the saddest book on your shelf. @ delong

Brad DeLong dY— @ delong

©Michael Spagat But you haven't yet told me what I have gotten BigTime wrong here...


1:10 PM r™ Sep 19,2022

1 Like 1 Retweet

Tiago Santos: a€~I love Jared C. Rubin and Mark Koyamaa€™ s book, but this thread impels me to 
write about a tendency in development economics I think is negative: an all encompassing "anti 
silver-bulletism". My point is not to defend silver bullets; like everyone, I agree they don't 
exist. A true "silver bullet" would imply something which is both necessary and sufficient for 
development to happen. Such things just aren't there, not only in dev econa€!.
Matt Yglesias talks about the surprising lack of attention to breakthroughs in obesity treatments!. 
We're stuck in a dead-end debate over body positivity and dieting when real solutions to the 
problem exist. As Matt points out, effective obesity treatments in general have a negative 
reception among most people. They are seen as an "easy way out". The overwhelmingly dominant 
approach is to recommend a change in life habits. If a person has good habits, then
they will be thin. The problem is that such recommendations just don't worka€!. Surgery, 
semaglutide, on the other hand, do work. And they work for the same people who could not diet and 
exercise their way out of obesity. They are hardly a silver bullet either. On average, people lose 
15% of their weight with semaglutide. As the word "average" implies, this means some people will 
lose less than that. So my recommendation for development economists is to
talk more about the "semaglutides" of development. Interventions which will on average make a 
significant difference, even if they are not the impossible single solution to a society's 
problemsa€!

Tiago Santos @tribsantos

I love ©jaredcrubin and @MarkKoyama's book, but this thread impels me to write about a tendency in 
development economics I think is negative: an all encompassing "anti silver-bulletism". My point is 
not to defend silver bullets; like everyone, I agree they don't exist. (1/)

Jared Rubin ©jaredcrubin

I want to correct a misconception about the argument in How the World Became Rich (w ©MarkKoyama) 
This is that we dona€™ t say why the modern economy came to be. We just list a bunch of 
contributing factors without claiming which were most important This is NOT what we do 1/
1:04 PM r™ Sep 19,2022

2Likesl Re tweet

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

