
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

We are all coupon-clippers:

From: Steve Jobs, sjobs@apple.com
To: Steve Jobs, sjobs@apple.com

Date: Thursday, September 2, 2010 at 11:08PM

I grow little of the food I eat, and of the little I do grow
I did not breed or perfect the seeds.

I do not make any of my own clothing.

I speak a language I did not invent or refine.


I did not discover the mathematics I use.

I am protected by freedoms and laws I did not conceive
of or legislate, and do not enforce or adjudicate.

I am moved by music I did not create myself.

When I needed medical attention, I was helpless
to help myself survive.

I did not invent the transistor, the microprocessor,

object oriented programming, or most of the technology
I work with.

I love and admire my species, living and dead, and am
totally dependent on them for my life and well being.

Sent from my iPad


Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Adam Tooze: Top Links #95: Yeatsa€! Schumpetera€! China-US Life Expectancy (Again): a€~Fintan 
Oa€™Toole: WB Yeats's Rule: a€oeThe more quotable Yeatsa€™ s poem, The Second Coming, seems to 
commentators and politicians, the worse things area€!

•  Dorian Lynskey: 'Things fall apart1: The Apocalyptic Appeal of WB Yeats's a€oeThe Second 
Cominga€D: a€~One reason for the poema€™ s booming popularity was its supporting role in two 
influential masterpieces. Chinua Achebea€™ s Things Fall Aparta€\. Joan Didiona€™ s essay 
collection Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968) had a similar effect in
the US at a time of stomach-churning fluxa€!

• Social Studies: Navin Narayan Memorial Lecture

• Social Studies: A Brief History

• Cory Doctorow: Spotify is a Ripoff, a Spotify Exclusive: a€~More Chokepoint Capitalism 
stunt-publishinga€!

•  Giles Wilkes: a€oeln 2001 DeLong and Summers wrote this very readable piece <https://t.co/4UH99 
VyAbM>. But it contained two wrong forecasts: that new tech would struggle to gain monopoly rents, 
and its economic weight would grow. Fascinating: J. Bradford DeLong and Lawrence H. Summers: The 
a€~New Economya€™: Background, Historical
Perspective, Questions, and Speculations <https://core.ac .uk/download/pdf/6793328 .pdf>a€!

Give a gift subscription

AJ:

Anthony Grafton: How to Cast a Metal Lizard: a€~The knowledge that underpins our world of things, 
by contrast, has been discovered over centuries, through trial and error, two steps forward and one 
step back. It has been produced and improved by collaboration: the work of talented, largely 
anonymous groups, generation after generation, rather than identifiable
individuals. And it is less verbal than embodied. Most of the experiments involved in forming a 
craft and the practices used to teach and further develop it go unrecorded, as do those who carried 
them outa€!. Teaching in the world of things is often physical: the teacher urges pupils to apply 
all of their senses and employs gestures as well as words to make clear how one
wields   a tool or decides if something has finished cookinga€!. No notes preserve those lessons. 
How can we hope to discover how a medieval blacksmith learned to forge tools or a Renaissance 
tailor learned to cut brocade? Embodied knowledge isa€”or was, in an age before prefabrication had 
taken commanda€’’incredibly varieda€!. Expertise that had to be acquired by
touch and hearing, smell and sight. This sort of learning is gained by handling objects. It means 
training onea€™ s hands to do many basic things precisely, quickly, and automaticallya€’’leaving 
the mind free to concentrate on the most complex parts of the task.


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions
Subscribe now

