Subscribe now

Brad DeLong: When the Fed Stops Trying: First, it was committed not to fall into the same trap as 
President Barack Obamaa€™ s administration in 2009, when it failed to set clear
priorities and look more than one move ahead. While Obama and his advisers had a plan for the first 
round of recovery measures following the 2008 financial crisis, they did not
have   a strategy for what to do when congressional Republicans and a€ceblue-doga€D (pro-austerity) 
Democrats mobilized against them. When that first round proved insufficient
for delivering a robust recovery, the stage was set for a lost half-decade of tepid growth and 
widening income inequalities.

Second, the Biden administration^™ s policy planners were wary of providing too large a boost to 
spending. But they also knew that achieving a rapid and complete recovery
would mean accepting some level of inflation. Because the post-pandemic economy would be configured 
differently than the economy that had preceded it, wages would have to
rise  in the newly expanding industries to attract the necessary supply of workers. Without clear 
price signals, workers would not have gone where they needed to go for the recovery
to stay on track.

Similarly, it was inevitable that bottlenecks would emerge during an economic reopening, and prices 
of bottlenecked commodities duly rose. Again, such signals were necessary to
show where the problems lay. Higher prices naturally create incentives for substitutions and other 
solutions.

Just how much inflation would there be? Nobody could say, but Bidena€™ s team knew that if the 
reopening inflation shock was too large, it could easily trigger an overreaction
from the US Federal Reserve. That, eventually, would put America back in a semi-depressed or 
depressed state of secular stagnation, with little policy traction to respond to the next
crisis or to promote a recovery.

The third hazard to be avoided was that spending would rise by too much and the Feda€™ s reaction 
would be too restrained. In this scenario, inflationary expectations would
become elevated or unanchored, and the economy would end up in 1970s-style stagflation.

Investing in Health for All
Getty Images-959020748

PS Events: Investing in Health for All

Register now for our next virtual event, Investing in Health for All, organized by the European 
Investment Bank and World Health Organization, where global experts will consider
what lessons the COVID-19 pandemic and other recent crises offer for confronting public health 
challenges in the years ahead.

REGISTER NOW

The situation was thus analogous to Odysseus sailing between Scylla (a multi-headed monster) and 
Charybdis (a massive whirlpool). The Biden administration could either not try
to navigate the strait at all (the first mistake), or it could try its luck with Scylla (secular 
stagnation) and Charybdis (stagflation).

Journeying safely to the other side seemed eminently achievable as recently as a year ago, when 
there was both the policy and the political will to set the oars to work to drive the
boat forward at the right speed. There even seemed to be a wide middle path between secular 
stagnation and stagflation. While many argued over which danger was worse, both
risks seemed relatively low, and thus manageable with a Fed that understood the situation and was 
not prone to panic.

Then came February 24,2022, when Russian President Vladimir Putin ordered his invasion of Ukraine. 
The safe path appeared to narrow. By June, the Fed had abandoned its
forward guidance and replaced an anticipated 50-basis-point interest-rate hike with a 75-point 
hike, citing an unreliable figure from the University of Michigan inflation­
expectations survey to justify the move. At this point, the Fed no longer believed that it 
understood the situation.

Today, it is unclear whether there is still a safe path between Scylla and Charybdis. But following 
two more 75-bps hikes in July and September, I worry that the Fed has given up
on even trying to find it. Instead, like Odysseus, it has intentionally started to hew toward 
Scylla (secular stagnation), viewing it as the lesser of two evils. One no longer hears Fed
officials cautioning that last winter and springa€™ s tightening has yet to ramify fully throughout 
the economy. Instead, the Fed has signaled another 1.25-bpsa€™ worth of hikes
to come before the end of this year.

US Secretary of the Treasury and former Fed Chair Janet Yellen once told me that the Feda€™ s 
rate-setting Federal Open Market Committee will tend to overreact to the
immediate news cycle unless it bases its thinking on some transparent formula like the Taylor Rule. 
But while the Taylor Rule made sense during the Great Moderation, the days of
persistently low and stable inflation are gone, and the Fed has no replacement framework to elevate 
its thinking above the news-driven groupthink.

Not without reason, financial markets seem to be betting that the Fed is about to make mistake 
number two: pursuing policies that will likely drag the US back toward secular
stagnation. If past is prologue, we eventually will return to a scenario in which monetary policy 
is stuck at the zero lower bound. The economy may suffer another lost half-decade
of growth, and socially and politically destabilizing inequalities will become even more 
pronounced.

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


