Subscribe now

Adrian Hon on Brain-Hacking by Gamifiers:

The problem with a€oe Artificial Intelligencea€D technology is not that the machines are so smart, 
but rather that the humans are so dumb. It is like the old joke: no, I do not need to be faster 
than the beara€”I just need to be faster than you. The problem is that all you need is a moderately 
clever programmer to program a dumb machine to hack the brains of the humans that interact with it 
at scale, to their detriment. That is the problem that the very sharp Adrian
Hon is addressing in his brand-new Youa€™ ve Been Played: How Corporations, Governments, and 
Schools Use Games to Control Us All chttps://www.amazon,com/dp/B09PL67GN6>. I highly recommend the 
book. Alexandria Symonds has a launch-day review in the New York Times'.

Alexandria Symonds: The Gamification of Humanity: a€~a€oeYOUa€™ VE BEEN PLAYED: How Corporations, 
Governments, and Schools Use Games to Control Us Alla€D, by Adrian Hona€! traces how and why 
gamificationa€! experience points, streaks, leader boards, badges and special challengesa€”has come 
to suffuse nearly every aspect of human existencea€!. Hon slips easily between the perspectives of 
expert, enthusiast
and critica€!. Neuroscience informs his explanation of the behaviorist underpinningsa€!. Leading 
the games company behind the popular running app a€oeZombies, Run!a€Da€! Hon isa€! clearlya€! a 
believer in the promise of gamesa€! used right, to delight people and even improve their livesa€!. 
That Hon is neither Luddite nor scold lends his criticisms of gamification bite and authoritya€!. 
Tension between incisive, specific ideas
about technology design and mushier ones about society persists into the conclusion^!. Ita€™ s hard 
to feel therea€™ s any way to win if the final boss to be defeated is capitalism itself. Still, the 
book is charming and accessible enough to overcome these moments of overreach, just as you might 
excuse some hyperbolic asides in a conversation with your nerdiest friend about why he is both 
worried and optimistic about techa€™ s
future. Ita€™ s worth keeping up your reading streak to finisha€!

Back in the old days, there were people who would attempt to use your potential addiction to games 
to pump money out of you. They would set up a place for you to play the game, induce you to visit 
that place, get you to sit down at the table, present you with a game that would exactly fit your 
particular gameplay, interest profile and addictive reward loop, and then somehow present your 
better long-term-thinking self from figuring out how to keep you from
coming back and re-entering the situation in which your short-term-thinking self was vulnerable.

That took work.

But what happens when the network allows people who wish to be bad actors to present you with a 
broad spectrum of games, at least one of which is higlhly likely to hit your sweeta€”or, rather, 
soura€”spot? What happens when the government or when your employer decides that it wants to use 
these tools, and to use these tools not for your good or in some win-win scenario, but for its good 
and your detriment?
I think Alexandria Symonds is right: The book provides a very good guide to what is going on, and 
has lots of very good small-scale ideas about technology designa€”and about how you can structure 
your interactions with technologies attempting to hack your brain to your detriment. (DOWN, 
Twitter! DOWN!!)

But Alexandria Symonds is also right: a€oe Ita€™ s hard to feel therea€™ s any way to win if the 
final boss to be defeated is capitalism itself.a€D Except that it is much worse: It is not just 
capitalism. It is bureaucracy a€’’all the bureaucracies: Big Brother and all of the Little Brothers 
tooa€”that is the Final Boss here.
Share


One Image:

Matt Darling

@besttrousers

My explanation:

Public expenditure on activation policies in 2017

Public expenditure as a percentage of GDP (* indicates alternative latest year)
Country


spam

Germany
Netherlands
Switzerland

OECD

Italy
Norway
Poland
Estonia
Portugal
Ireland
Korea

Czech Republic

Lithuania
New Zealand

Slovenia

Australia

I 0.61

0.52

0.51*

0.47

0.42

0.42

0.41

■■ 0.4

0.32

■ 0.31

0.3

■ 0.29~

0.25

■ 0.24


Canada
Slovak Republic

Latvia

Israel
Japan
Chile

United States

0.22

0.22

0.19

0.17

0.15

I 0.14

|0.1

O Lawrence H. Summers 9 @LHSummers • Sep 20

Most of those not working say they don't want to work; there are two
vacancies for every unemployed person; all countries have structural change
but   the US stands out. Demand side economics won't fix this problem.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Must-Read:

John Holbo: Is There Anything Wrong with Da€™ s Running Those Ads Aiming to get Trumpist Lunatic 
Ra€™ s Nominated?: a€~You have probably heard [that] some Dems boosted crazy MAGA Trumpists via ad 
buys in various Rep primaries, obviously angling for victory in November over more extremist, 
presumptively easier-to-beat opponentsa€l. I just dona€™ t see what the fuss is abouta€l. Ita€™ s 
just weird, I think. It isna€™ t normal a strategy
like this seems likely. Buta€”strange timesa€l.

Realpolitik firsta€I 1st best: the Democrat wins. 2nd best: the moderate Republican wins. 3rd best: 
a crazy MAGA election-denier winsa€l. Dems are increasing the chances of 1 but also 3. Is that 
obviously a stupid mistake?a€l. A Dem is way better than a moderate Republicana€!. There is a 
distinct risk that seeming-moderates would turn out to be squishes who break MAGA under 
pressurea€!. A lot of establishment Ra€™ s clearly hate Trump and have
contempt for MAGA but are just riding the crazy traina€l. Electing moderate Ra€™ s actually 
encourages these squishy anti-antis to fence-sit like thata€l.

Now, leta€™ s consider whether this is all just too sneaky and dishonest and lyinga€l. It isna€™ 
ta€I. The ads have all been perfectly honest and informational. The ads are intended to inform R 
primary voters of who the most deplorable R is, so they can go out and vote for them. The theory 
is: the R voters willa€l. The moderate Ra€™ sa€! want to create some uncertainty a€ I in the hopes 
that some Rs will vote for them, thinking they are more deplorablea€l. A
perfectly good democratic principle is that ads that increase the ability of voters to find the 
candidate who best suits their preference in candidates are good adsa€l. These ads area€l ironica€l 
attack ads but they obviously anticipate that the attacks will a€~backfirea€™, causing the attacked 
MAGA candidate to wina€l. But why is that dishonest? What the ad says is exactly what those paying 
for the ad think. It tells the voters a true fact that the person buying the
ad wants the voters to knowa€l. You wanta€l elections to make the stakes clear. We want the voters 
to have choices and be informeda€l

Get 25% off a group subscription

Other Things I Have Seen:

Very Briefly Noted:

• John Gruber: Review of Apple Watch Ultraa€l


•  Mark Cliffe: The Sting of Climate Risk Is in the Tails: a€~Heatwaves, wildfires, storms, 
droughts, and floods make it increasingly clear that global warming is causing more extreme 
weathera€!. Conventional climate models have chronically overlookeda€! these risks...

•  WONDERFUL!! TLS Review of Slouching!: Paul Seabright: Trouble in paradise: Why is economic 
progress so little cause for celebration? 
<https://www.the-tls.co.uk/articles/slouching-towards-utopia-j-bradford-delong-book-review-paul-seab
right/>

• Jonah E. Bromwich & al:. Trump Accused of Overvaluing His Assets in N.Y. Lawsuit 
<https://www.nytimes.com/live/2022/09/21/nyregion/trump-fraud-lawsuit-ny- james>

• Alan Alda: Alan Alda on a€~M*A*S*Ha€™: a€~Everybody Had Something Taken From Thema€™: 'The series 
finale remains the highest rated non-Super Bowl program ever broadcast on American TVa€!
Leave a comment

Twitter & a€~Stack:

• My First Twitter Mob: objecting to the Hayekian need for inflation right nowa€! 
<https://fortune.com/2022/09/17/why-inflation-good-economy-stagflation-recession-brad-delong-larry-s
ummers/>

FORTUNE @FortuneMagazine

Not only are you paying more for stuff than a year ago, but inflation continues to devastate the 
stock market, too. But higher inflation can also be good. How? 0Y§^ bit.ly/3Sim4Vb

Year-over-year percent change in U.S. inflation

Consumer Price Index percentage changes

Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics • Get the data • Created with Datawrapper

3:46 PM r™ Sep 20,2022

553Likes235Retweets

•  Rafael Guthmann: Ancient Scientists and Economic Performance in Antiquity: a€~Fast growth from 
800 BC to 300 BC, slow growth from 300 BC to around 1 AD, negative growth from 1 AD to the 7-8th 
centuries AD...
Rafaela€™ s Commentary

Ancient scientists and the economic performance of antiquity

In this piece, I said that the Ancient Greek world was wealthier than the Roman Empire. This can 
give the reader impression that these two were distinctly separate worlds that existed in different 
periods. However, the reality is that the a€oeAncient Worlda€D was basically a network of 
city-states around the Mediterranean sea that flourished from the 1st mila€!
Read more

5 months ago A- Rafael R. Guthmann

Crivp a aift suhsrrintinn


AJs:

Felicia Wong: Why Is This Happening? Joe Biden & the End of Reagonomics: a€~Neoliberalisma€! this 
market fundamentalism, a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away, blessed be the market,a€D 
that's what Brad DeLong calls ita€!. The political birtha€! in the 1970sa€! [was] a reaction to 
chaosa€! on two frontsa€!. Growth in people's wages was going to be outpaced by inflationa€! gas 
linesa€!. Chaos on the political and cultural sidea€! post-
Vietnama€! sexual revolutiona€! women were demandingaCI black Americans were demandinga€L The fear 
[of] many middle class white Americansa€!. People were looking fora€! calma€! for order.a€! Go to 
work, have your job, be a good job, and have all political decisions actually made, or many 
political decisions, I should say, made by the marketa€!. The markets were going to deliver, and 
government really should just get out of the waya€!. You
should lower taxesa€! lessen government regulation^! definitely not have labor unionsa€!. Thata€! 
was the kind of world that Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher ushered ina€!

Calculated Risk: Predicting the Next Recession : 'The Fed cannot ease pandemic related supply 
constraints (except by curbing demand), and the Fed cannot stop the war. So, there is a possibility 
that the Fed will tighten too much and that will lead to a "hard landing" (aka recession). The key 
will be to watch housing. Housing is the main transmission mechanism for Fed policy. One of my 
favorite models for business cycle forecasting uses new home sales
(also housing starts and residential investment).... What I focus on is single family starts and 
new home sales. The pandemic has distorted the economic data, and as I've noted many times, we 
can't be a slave to any model.

Tom Watson: A Big Win for the 'Inside Game' POSTED: 'I kept coming back to the same thought over 
and over again: "This is the opposite of extremism."... The trademark Cinton Global Initiative 
Commitments to Action represent people, governments and institutions coming together to try and 
make this place better for people. It is indeed the opposite of the snarling, populist, xenophobic 
extremism we've seen here in the United Statesa€’’frankly, the
disgraceful and hateful disinformation aimed at the Clinton Foundation itself. And it's sure the 
opposite of the mass graves being uncovered in Ukrainian forests...

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

