Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: Coyotes in the Neighborhood^!

Six houses away:

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!.
Share

First: Free Speech, vs. Free Profiting-by-Lying by Spotify

The very sharp Ben Thompson seems to me to have this one completely wrong.
Free expression is a very powerful value indeed in America.

Free profiting-by-lyinga€’’juicing your profit numbers by spreading misinformation to scare the 
shit out of your readers, and leading them to ruin their lives, all because by so doing you can 
glue their eyeballs to a screen and sell them adsa€”is not fine, but ugly and contemptible. It, 
rightly, is a very powerful value only to those who glee in hacking for profit the brains of their 
users to their detriment.
Spotify having Joe Rogan in its podcast directory is free speech. Apple having Joe Rogan in its 
podcast directory is free speech. Overcast having Joe Rogan in its podcast directory is free 
speech. If Apple were to delete Joe Rogan from its podcast directory, if Overcast were to delete 
Joe Rogan from its podcast directory, I would be upset.

Whata€™ s that? You say you Joe Rogan has been deleted from the Apple Podcasts directory? You say 
Joe Rogan has been deleted from the Overcast podcast directory?
What dastardly creature has committed such a violation of free-speech norms?

Whata€™ s that? You say Spotify has deprived Joe Rogan of his ability to reach those who want to 
hear him who use Apple Podcasts or Overcast, or another non-Spotify mode of access? Spotify has 
cancelled him from the Apple and Overcast directories?

You say Spotify has paid Joe Rogan in the nine figures, has blocked his podcasts from Apple and 
Overcast and other non-Spotify listeners, and made his podcasts Spotify exclusives? You say that 
Spotify then wants to spend money like water, saying: YOU MUST LISTEN ON SPOTIFY! ONLY ON SPOTIFY 
CAN YOU GET JOE ROGAN!! AND YOU REALLY WANT TO LISTEN TO JOE ROGAN BECAUSE HE TELLS YOU SO MANY 
LIES ABOUT
COVID!!!! PLUS ADDED BONUS RACISM!!!!!

Spending dollars by the tens of millions to attract viewers to people who will lie to them so that 
you can profit massivelya€”and not because you think they have a message that needs to be 
hearda€”is not the first, an exercise of free speech, but rather the second. It is a grift. It is a 
con. It is hacking the brains of your listeners to their detriment. Daniel Ek at Spotify knows 
damned well that grabbing an exclusive on Joe Rogan and then trying as hard as they can to
boost the number of people he misinforms and whose brains they hack is not a€oefree speecha€D. But 
he knows also that he may be able to ride this one out if he can throw enough chaff in the air and 
get enough useful idiots to say that Spotify is defending free speech by trying to maximally 
monetize Joe Rogana€™ s podcast exclusive. And Ben Thompson has fallen for it:

Ben Thompson: Spotify and Joe Rogan, Culture and Principles, Music Versus Podcasts & the Long Run: 
a€~Ek is righta€”the slope is slippery a€’’and the fact of the matter is that we are, at least in 
terms of the elite culture dominated by U.S. media, at the bottom of the hill. Yes, the First 
Amendment still exists as a law, but it is hard to argue free expression still exists as a value. 
In other words, while it used to be the case that simply
declaring that you were in favor of free speech was enough to tamp down most controversies, 
particularly in terms of comedians or edgy personalities, today one is quickly mired in the exact 
sort of muck I noted above, trying to defend broad principles while distancing oneself from 
specific examples. Ita€™ s an impossible dance, anda€”not to defend any specific instances of 
speech (here I dance)a€”Ia€™ m not sure we have yet fully
internalized the long-term costs of no longer accepting free speech as a blanket principle citable 
by everyone from cranks to CEOs. One implication of this observation is that Ek perhaps wishes he 
had realized it in 2020, before Spotify brought Rogan on board; the podcasts where Rogan used a 
slur were already part of his catalog, and while Spotify may have thought that podcasts that had 
existed for years without controversy were
covered  under the sort of a€oeWe support free speecha€D defense that used to be commonplace, the 
company might have acted differently had it realized that that defense is, in many quarters, no 
longer valida€!

LINK: 
<https://stratecherv.com/2022/spotifv-and-ioe-rogan-culture-and-principles-music-versus-podcasts-and
-the-long-run/>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Video

Aaron Rupar: Marco Rubioa€™ s Incredible Cowardice, in One Video Clip: a€~Trumpa€™ s one-time 
critic now wona€™t even admit it was wrong for the former president to try to overturn his election 
loss:



ibhc Notice

Marco Rubio's incredible cowardice, in one video clip

In the span of six years, Sen. Marco Rubio went from comparing Trump to a a€oethird-world 
strongmana€D to repeatedly refusing to condemn him for trying to end American democracy. He did the 
latter on Sundaya€™ s installment of Face the Nation, when host Margaret Brennan asked for Rubioa€™ 
s thoughts about former VP Mia€!

Read more

a year ago A- 18 likes A- 2 comments A- Aaron Rupar

One Picture:

The Roman Empire through time:

-320                            -300                            -220                           - 
140


Very Briefly Noted:

• Oded Galor & Omer Ozak: Land Productivity & Economic Development: Caloric Suitability vs. 
Agricultural Suitability <https ://ideas.repec.org/p/bro/econwp/2015-5.html>

•  Tom Clark: The UK Is Facing Two Lost Decades on Living Standards'. a€™ Fixing stalled 
productivity will take timea€”but government can do more now to help those most in needa€! 
<https://www.ft.eom/content/7968048a-3f7f-4cb0-8fal-el0affl4b94c>

•  Henry Mance: The Last Days of Boris Johnson'. a€~This is the slight flaw with delegating all the 
real work: what happens when there is no one left to be delegated to?a€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/8d5b562b-a074-46a3-8dd4-7d612b58af5e>

•  Justin Ocean: The $50 Million-&-Up Mansion Club Gets Bigger: a€~Only one sold above that 
threshold in 2013; the next year saw a flurry of super-high-end sales, but in 2015, $50 
million-plus sales fell again to only one, a $57.3 million oceanfront estate in East Hamptona€!. At 
least 42 residential properties sold for more than $50 million last yeara€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/newsletters/2022-02-05/pursuits-weeklv-the-50-million-
and-up-mansion-club-gets-bigger?cmpid=BBD020522 PUR>

•  Rana Foroohar: US Trade Policy Needs a Radical Redesign: a€~Chinese strategy makes it 
unrealistic to return to the a€oeone world, two systemsa€D vision of the 1990sa€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/labb98e8-576e-4a42-8cld-97663f057f7d>

• Doug Jones: The World Inside: a€~Tuzo and Jason are two of Eartha€™ s lesser-known continentsa€! 
<https ://logarithmichistory.wordpress.com/2022/01/30/the-world-inside/>

•  Gideon Rachman: Putin, Ukraine & the Madman Theory of Diplomacy: a€~Western leaders cling to the 
hope that the Russian leader is bluffing about an invasiona€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/3d8b94e9-0db7-4aa5-ac6a-9fef2ce43ab6>

•  Michael Tomasky: If Republicans Believe Violence Is d€ceNormal Political Discourse,d€dThen They 
Cana€™ t Be Saved: a€~The GOPa€™ s evolution into an organization that explicitly endorses mass 
political violence is now complete. Can Democrats break from pretending otherwise?a€! LINK: <https 
://newrepublic .com/article/165301/republicans-violence-normal-political-discourse>

• Doug Jones: Carga€™ s Home <https://cargshome.wordpress .com/>

• David Dayen & Rakeen Mabud: How We Broke the Supply Chain: a€~Rampant outsourcing, 
financialization, monopolization, deregulation, and just-in-time logistics are the culpritsa€! 
<https://prospect.org/economv/how-we-broke-the-supply-chain-intro/>

Paragraphs:

Barry Ritholtz: 10 Weekend Reads: a€~a€0 Workers Are Having Their Moment. How Long Can It Last? 
Most workers are benefiting from a tight labor market that developed during the nationa€™ s 
recovery from Covida€“19. Those in highest demand are in some cases the ones who started out 
further behind, with fewer gains before the pandemic. They include the young and the less educated, 
as well as those who work in lower-wage industries and perform
blue-collar tasks. Many are based in the South. Wealthier, older, college-educated professionals in 
other parts of the country are also making gains. Wages are rising, and just about anyone who wants 
a job can get one in certain industries. The demand for labor is not expected to abate anytime 
soona€!

LINK: <https://ritholtz.eom/2022/02/10-weekend-reads-24/>

Dan Alpert & David Beckworth: Current Trends & Tensions in the US Economy: a€™ A post-Keynesian 
account of the global safe asset shortage, the impact of the US policy response to COVIDa€“19, 
whether inflation will remain a problem heading into 2022, whata€™ s driving the a€~Great 
Resignation^™, whether capital assets are overvalued, and much more.a€!
LINK: <https://macromusings 
.libsyn.com/dan-alpert-on-current-trends-and-tensions-in-the-us-economy>

Zachary D. Carter: The Economy Is Good, Actually: a€~We are living through the best labor market in 
50 years. The U.S. economy created 467,000 jobs in January, more than triple the 125,000 that 
economists had anticipated. According to the most recent data, the economy created 700,000 more 
jobs at the end of last year than previously believeda€!. Compared with the federal governmentaC™ s 
response to the 2008 financial crisis, the recovery from the
COVIDa€“19 crash has been an extraordinary successa€!. It remains difficult to find intellectuals 
or policy makers eager to take credit for these triumphs. This silence is especially noticeable on 
the left, which can reasonably claim much of the change in approach as its owna€L Most of the 
conversation about the economy today is not about manufacturing jobs, strike activity, or quit 
rates. Ita€™ s about inflationa€!. Highlighting the strength of the job market
may or may not be a winning message for politicians, but ita€™ s essential for understanding both 
the calamity we avoided and how to responda€!. The Great Recession was a generational cataclysm for 
the American middle class. The COVIDa€“19 recession has not been, because policy makers have 
prioritized the benefits of a high-demand economy over the risk of moderately rising prices. They 
should not be ashamed of their successa€!

LINK: <https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2022/02/economy-biden-iobs-good-inflation/621496/>

Alex Armlovich: a€~This NYTimes write-up ofMMT is just a dovishly parameterized narrative of 
standard macro, the New Keynesian synthesisa€\. Deficits at the ZLB amid large output gap dona€™ t 
have a social opportunity cost. But this isna€™ t newd€\. d€ceDovishly parameterizedd€L2[does] a 
lot of work in my tweet. Many policymakersaC™ mental models were calibrated to the behavior of 
rstar in the mida€“90sa€!. Things really were different in
1995! The world changed & real interest rate behavior changeda€!

LINK:


Alex Armlovich @aarmlovi

@JohnnyFrontier @TheStalwart @stevehouf "Dovishly parameterized" did a lot of work in my tweet. 
Many policymakers1 mental models were calibrated to the behavior of r_star in the mid-90s If you 
read @delong's old blogs, things really were different in 1995! The world changed & real interest 
rate behavior changed
5:02 PM a~™ Feb 7,2022

Chad Orzel: You Need to Be Lucky AND Good'. a€~Legendary former Maryland coach Lefty Driesella€!. 
a€oeNah, if it was just luck, it woulda€™ ve run out by now. Youa€™ re still around because youa€™ 
re good.a€Da€! Discourse around career success goes off the rails in two diametrically opposite 
directions. On the one hand, you have people who insist that ita€™ s all personal talent and hard 
worka€!. On the other, there are people who insist that
absolutely everything is luck, or more insidiously various types of privileged!. I end up liking 
the Driesell formulation. Luck is important, but luck runs out. It can get you in the door, but to 
stick around, let alone open the next door, you also need to be goodd!

LINK:

LN L<p


Counting Atoms

You Need to Be Lucky AND Good

Therea€™ s a line about career success I like that Ia€™ ve heard a couple of times on sports 
podcasts from ESPN anchor Scott Van Pelt, which he attributes to legendary former Maryland coach 
Lefty Driesell. The story is that the two met up sometime after Van Pelta€™ s broadcast career 
started going well, and Driesell congratulated him on his success. Van Pelt repa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- Chad Orzel

John Ganz: Looking for an American Myth'. a€~The Right is perhaps a little more self-aware than the 
Left about attempting to formulate such a myth. Writing in the American Conservative this week, 
Matthew Schmitz invokes Sam Francis as a guide to the contemporary American Righta€!. He proposes 
that a new crop radical right intellectuals has a genuine and organic constituency in the historic 
core of the conservative movement: It has a deep and abiding
base of popular support in what Sam Francis called the a€oepost-bourgeois proletariat,a€D people 
who live in, but are not fully part of, our managerial regimea€!. Francis described the beliefs of 
the post-bourgeois proletariat^!. They show a€oelittle attraction to bourgeois conservatism and its 
emphasis on laissez-faire economics, the rights of property, [and] the minimal state. a€D These 
ideas supported and were supported by a bourgeois order that the rise of
large organizations^’’the so-called managerial revolutiona€”has displaceda€!. Sam Francis is really 
the clearest and most-honest guide to the present disposition of the Righta€!. Francis understood 
this a€oedispossessed peoplea€D in racial terms, and became increasingly explicit about ita€!. 
Francis here was borrowing from Georges Sorel, a name whom readers of Unpopular Front will 
recognize. Sorel believed that political movements required animating
myths, which were not rational programs or explicitly articulated ideologies, but expressions of 
the groupa€™ s inner convictionsa€!. Ia€™ d argue that the Right already has just such a myth in 
the stolen election conspiracy theory. It is not subject to refutation with facts and it is 
primarily the story of dispossession of a€oethe true nationa€D at the hands of an alien Othera€!

LINK:


Looking for an American Myth

One reflection of the political and social crisis in the country is the on-going battle of over 
myths of national origin and purpose. We can see this taking place now in the furious reaction to 
a€oeCritical Race Theory,a€D now resulting in book banning and censorship. We can also see it in 
the intense anger and controversy generated by the 1619 Project, whica€!

Read more

a year ago A- 27 likes A- 3 comments A- John Ganz
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below: MO AR on Lisa Cook:

Hexapodia Podcast, without Special Guest Lisa Cook:

I must say I am not impressed by the Biden White Housea€™ s lining up the Great-&-Good to say nice 
things about Lisa Cook, a tenured economics professor at a major university in the Midwest, former 
point staff economist for the White House on the Eurozone side of the Great Recession financial 
crisis, former Special Advisor to the Secretary of the Treasury on development & finance, former 
HOOVER INSTITUTION NATIONAL FELLOW for
Jeebusa€™ sake, long-time expert on finance, structural change, and growth (with particular focus 
on Russia before and after Communism), long-time expert on racial and other forms of inequality and 
their socio-cultural economic supports, and (in a small way: I did not get to Berkeley until she 
was almost finished with her Ph.D.) my student.

A lot of people who ought to have been making very friendly noises out of the gatea€! were not:



PODCAST: "Hexapodia" is AMe Key Insight XXXIV!: Federal Reserve Nominee Lisa Cook, without Special 
Guest Lisa Cook

Listen now (50 min) I Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that 
this Grasping Reality newsletter is a reader-supported publicationa€”I really would like to collect 
enough from it to hire ana€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- Brad DeLong

And so, as what ought to have been a wave of endorsements did not arrive immediately, but instead 
began to trickle in, somebodies at the Washington Post thought that they could get away with 
publishing: a€oe[her] peer=reviewed academic writings pertaining to monetary policya€da€’’note, not 
a€ceher policy-analysis experience pertaininga€!a€D or a€oeher work history 
pertaininga€!a€na€”a€Dare, to be polite, thina€!. But she strokes
progressivisma€™ s erogenous zonesa€!a€D

a€oeShe strokes progressivisma€™ s erogenous zones.a€D

Those who grew up at Bill Buckleya€™ s knee know well how to call a Black woman a whore in a way 
just genteel enough that they can afterwards claim that was not what they meant at all.
But I see you, Washington Post.

I see you, George F. Will.

Grave moral fault attaches to anyone who pays any monies to the Washington Post, or provides it 
with anything of value. Grave moral fault attaches to anyone who receives George F. Will in any 
form of polite, or impolite, society.
Just sayinga€!


PODCAST: "Hexapodia11 is A34e Key Insight XXXIV!: Federal Reserve Nominee Lisa Cook, without 
Special Guest Lisa Cook

Listen now (50 min) I Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that 
this Grasping Reality newsletter is a reader-supported public ationa€”I really would like to 
collect enough from it to hire ana€!

Read more

a year ago A- 3 likes A- Brad DeLong

And so, as what ought to have been a wave of endorsements did not arrive immediately, but instead 
began to trickle in, somebodies at the Washington Post thought that they could get away with 
publishing: a€oe[her] peer=reviewed academic writings pertaining to monetary policy a€Da€’’note, 
not a€oeher policy-analysis experience pertaininga€!a€D or a€oeher work history 
pertaininga€!a€na€”a€Dare, to be polite, thina€!. But she strokes
progressivisma€™ s erogenous zonesa€!a€D

a€oeShe strokes progressivisma€™ s erogenous zones.a€D

Those who grew up at Bill Buckleya€™ s knee know well how to call a Black woman a whore in a way 
just genteel enough that they can afterwards claim that was not what they meant at all.
But I see you, Washington Post.

I see you, George F. Will.

Grave moral fault attaches to anyone who pays any monies to the Washington Post, or provides it 
with anything of value. Grave moral fault attaches to anyone who receives George F. Will in any 
form of polite, or impolite, society.
Just sayinga€!

