Subscribe to get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. Become a paid subscriber to get the Directora€™ 
s Cut versions, anda€”if you think this is usefula€”to support me spending my time doing this 
rather than something else.

|Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

First: No, the Fed Is Not (Far) Behind the Curve!

Here is a reason I do not think that the Fed is (far) behind the curve:

Goldman Sachs US Financial Conditions Index YoY% vs. ISM Manufacturing Index


---------- 1-------- 1---------1---------1-------- i----------1---------1-------- 
1---------1-------- 1---------1---------r- 30

98     00     02     04     06     08     10     12     14     16     18     20     22

- US Financial Conditions Index (inv)           ISM Mfg Index (rhs)         Recession

It seems highly likely that at least the manufacturing part of the economy will slow markedly over 
the next 1 1/2 years, no?

And that is with what the Fed has already done (and is expected to do). Would one want more slowing 
than the FC index tells us is already baking in the cake? If you think so, why?
Yes, bottlenecks, oil shocks, wheat shocks, and China-lockdowns will do what they will do to 
inflation in the short run.

But over the medium and the long run, the bond market is still quite happy with the outlook as far 
as inflation is concerned, at least if you believe the information in TIPS:

1.5


1.0

0.5

0.0

2006      2008      2010      2012      2014      2016      2018      2020     2022

So then why now do we have the extremely sharp Olivier Blanchard, commenting on Reifschneider and 
Wilcox 
<https://www.piie.com/publications/policv-briefs/case-cautiouslv-optimistic-outlook-us-inflation>, 
writing 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/whv-i-worrv-about-inflation-interest-rate
s-and-unemployment>:

Figure 1

The last time the Fed fell this far behind the curve on inflation
was in 1975 and it took 9 years to bring under control

Core inflation and the real policy interest rate, percent


17% gap 1

Feb 1975 I

12% gap 1

Jan 2022 |


1960                                                                                   2022

Note:   Core inflation is consumer price index inflation excluding food and energy. The real policy
interest rate is the federal funds interest rate minus core inflation over the previous 12 months.

Sources:   US Bureau of Labor Statistics and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
retrieved from Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis (FRED).

Moreover, he is far from alone:

•  Neil Irwin: a€oeWhen did the Fed start getting behind the curve? I think it was one year ago 
this week. Between December '20 and March '21 meetingsa€!a€n <https://twitter.com/Neil 
Irwin/status/1503364672686280706>;

• Irving Swisher: a€oeConsensus is that the Fed has fallen behind the curvea€!a€D 
<https://twitter.com/IrvingSwisher/status/1503774531009363975>;

•  Squawk Box: a€oea€~We are behind the curve. We have to movea€™ , says Former Dallas Fed 
President Richard Fishera€!a€D <https://twitter.com/SquawkCNBC/status/1503340706731Q77641> (never 
mind that Fisher made precisely zero correct calls his entire time at the Fed);

•  Mohamed El-Erian: a€oeThe US Federal Reserve, the worlda€™ s most powerful central bank, is 
already dealing with self-inflicted damage to its inflation-fighting credibility. With that comes 
the likelihood of de-anchored inflationary expectationsa€!a€D 
<https://www.ft.com/content/db9e3706-84dd-47bc-a943-90d7dfef6abe>;

• Eric Rosenbaum: a€oeFed 'behind the curve' on inflation, says former Obama economist Jason 
Furmana€!a€D 
<https://www.msn.com/en-us/monev/markets/fed-behind-the-curve-on-inflation-savs-former-obama-economi
st-iason-furman/ar-AAQvbLT>.

a€oeSelf-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™s] inflation-fighting credibility a€ I a€D:


0.8


2016        2017        2018        2019        2020        2021        2022

a€oeSelf-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™s] inflation-fighting credibility a€ I a€D:


1.9

2021-04              2021-07              2021-10              2022-01

I simply do not see this a€oeself-inflicted damage to [the Feda€™ s] inflation-fighting 
credibilitya€!a€D

Now maybe there is an argument did the people treating in the bond market are weirdos, disconnected 
from the inflation expectations embedded in the actors in the economya€’’those whose beliefs and 
expectations really matter because they drive decisions. Maybe there is an argument that we need to 
fear not bond-market vigilantes, but rather other actors and agents. Maybe it is their expectations 
of inflation have become substantially
de-anchored already. Maybe they are already taking steps that will produce a persistent inertial 
inflationary spiral.

But who are they?

What are their expectations?

How are their expectations now being translated into actions?
And how are those actions not easily reversible?

I have not seen any of those arguments made.

Blanchard writes, apropos of the 200 basis-point increase in the Federal Funds rate we expect to 
see over the next two years:

Is it reasonable to think that a 200-basis-point increase in the policy rate, so only 1/6 of the 
rate increase from 1975 to 1981, will do the job this time when the gap between core inflation and 
the policy rate is 2/3 of what it was in 1975? And that unemployment will barely budge? I wish I 
could believe ita€!

But why is the rate increase from 1975-1981 relevant? We have a target: inflation from five to ten 
years out. We have an instrument: the current level and planned forward path for the Fed Funds 
rate. We have a reading on whether we are on a glide path to the targeta€”the bond marketa€™ s 
5-year, 5-year forward expected inflation rate. That reading says we are.


0.0

2006      2008      2010      2012      2014      2016      2018      2020     2022

Is there a better reading available as to whether we are on the glide path?
If so, what is it?

I believe that there is not. So why is the conclusion not: a€oePolicy is appropriate. The Fed is 
not behind the curvea€U? This is, to me, a very genuine mystery.
Blanchard writes:

There are good reasons, however, to think that the Phillips curve will, as it has done many times 
in the past, shift, and that the landing will be harder than Reifschneider and Wilcox conclude. 
Part of the inflation will indeed go away on its own, but the Fed may have to increase interest 
rates by more than 200 basis points to get back to its targeta€!

Indeed. The Fed may have to raise interest rates by more than 200 basis points. The Phillips Curve 
may well shift. And when there is evidence that the Fed is indeed behind the curve and not on an 
appropriate glide path, it will be time for the Fed to use forward guidance that it has changed its 
policy plans to shape expectations.
But why is today that day?

Especially since errors in not raising interest rates quickly enough are errors from which we can 
recover, but at and near the zero lower bounda€’’which we area€’’errors in raising rates too 
quickly are errors from which we cannot reasonably recover.
Know someone who you think should read this? Please share!

Share

CONDITION: Tankies Gotta Tank:

There was a certaina€! Mephistopheleana€! grandeura€’’doing evil that good may comea€”in shilling 
for Stalin back in The Day, especially if you genuinely thought that British and French power 
structures would reach an accomodation with or surrender to Hitler, that the U.S. would wash its 
hands of Europe, and thus that Hitler and Stalin were your only choices.
There is nothing good about shilling for Putina€’’asserting equivalence between the 
a€oebrinksmanshipa€n of a U.S. saying a€oewe wona€™t fight for Ukraine, but please dona€™ ta€!a€D 
and a Putin rolling the tanks:

Wolfgang Streeck: Fog of War. a€~Accounting for the descent of the European state system into the 
barbarism of wara€”for the first time since NATOa€™ s 1999 bombing of Belgradea€’’needs more than 
lay psychiatrya€!. Nobody knows at the time of writing how the war over Ukraine will end, and after 
what amount of bloodshed. What we can try to speculate about at this point is what the reasons may
have beena€”and human actors have reasons, however crankish they may seem to othersa€”for the 
uncompromising brinkmanship on the part of both the US and Russiaa€!

LINK: <https://newleftreview.org/sidecar/posts/fog-of-wai>

Plus bonus Milosevic whitewashing as well. But what can you expect from the thugs of the New Left 
Review?



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

One Audio:

Kai Wright & Corey Robin: Why the a€~Reagan Regimea€™ Endures'. a€™ Presidencies are rarely 
transformational, and neither Biden nor Trump have lived up to their supportersa€™ dreams. So what 
does it take to really change our politics? Host to confront that question, and take your calls 
about Bidena€™ s first year in office: 
<https://www.wnvcstudios.org/podcasts/anxietv/episodes/reagan-regime>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


One Picture:

Humanity today and humanity's past  Oᵘʳ Wᵒʳˡᵈ

Fnrh vrnin of sand in this visualization


represents 10 million people.

140 million children are born every year.
14 grains of sand enter the hourglass.

You are here. These 795 grains represent the

7.95 billion people who are alive today.

In the following chart I am using this triangle
shape to represent 7.95 billion people.

60 million people die every year.

6 grains of sand pass through the hourglass.

About 109 billion people have lived and died.


IU.TVAJ grains or sana.

About half the people who ever lived
lived in the last 2000 years

Socrates, who was killed in
399 BCE. lies about here.

Half of the dead bodies here
are the bodies of children.

[ In pre modem times half of all children die

the AcfK ultural Revolution

B^cd on the historic al estimates from Toshiko Kaneda and Carl H auh (Population Reference Bur caul 
and the UN Popul ation Division Based on a design hy (

OurWorldinDataorg - Research and data to make progress against the world s largest problems      
Lkcnsed under COBY by the author

Very Briefly Noted:

• Jean Pisani-Ferry: EuropeaC™ s Economic Response to the Russia-Ukraine War Will Redefine Its 
Priorities & Future 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/europes-economic-response-russia-ukraine-
war-will-redefine-its>

•  Laura Curti: Supply Chains Latest: China Lockdowns Have U.S. Ports Bracing for Effects'. a€~ust 
as Americaa€™ s busiest ports are beginning to process some of the pandemic backloga€! 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2022-03-15/supply-chains-latest-china-lockdowns-have-u-s
-ports-bracing-for-effects?cmpid=BBD031522 TRADE>

• Chad P. Bown: Russiaa€™ s War on Ukraine: A Sanctions 
7zme/me<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/russias-war-ukraine-sanctions-time
line>

•  Julie Legrand: a€™Ita€™ s not just student housing the NIMBYs resist. The effort it took for a 
small parish to tear down an crumbling, little used building and replace it with affordable, senior 
housing was a nightmarea€! <https://twitter.com/Off_The Ground/status/1503496761846878208>

• Sam Anderson: It Starts with Homer: Writing a Classics 
CMmcMZMAn<https://antigoneiournal.com/2022/03/writing-classics-curriculum/>

•  Bret Devereaux: a€™ Eyes have shifted from whether Putin will lose to if Ukraine can win. These 
are, in fact, different questionsa€!


Bret Devereaux @BretDevereaux

If you are trying to keep track of the war in Ukraine and wondering why Ukrainian success hasn't 
caused an outburst of optimism from a lot of experts, it's because eyes have shifted from whether 
Putin will lose to if Ukraine can win. These are, in fact, different questions.
7:46 PM r™ Mar 14,2022

37 !Likes72Retweets

Paragraphs:

Ben Thompson: Substack Launches App, Substack & the Four Bens, In-App Purchase and the Substack 
Bundle: a€~Substack, needless to say, is no longer a Faceless Publisher, but thata€™ s not a 
surprise; that die was cast when Substack raised their Series A. In other words, a lot of the angst 
about this announcement was better felt in 2019; still, ita€™ s worth diving into the specific 
implications of this announcement, and I like how
Substack distinguished between different categories of stakeholders in announcing their new appa€!. 
The Substack app is a big win for Reader Ben: I was never reading these posts via emaila€!. Writer 
and Publisher Bena€!. If I were just starting out, I would be a bit nervousa€! being in my 
readersa€™ email inbox is really valuable, and I would be worried about being forgotten in yet 
another app that my readers need to remember to
checka€!. My contenta€! commoditized to just another item in a Substack-branded feeda€!. [But] 
Stratechery as an independent publication which can be added to the Substack app by adding the RSS 
feeda€! pretty happya€! [because] readers who make the deliberate choice to add Stratechery to the 
Substack app wona€™ t forget about mea€!. Analyst Bena€!. There is no RSS feed for individual 
Substacksa€!. Apple is a great friend
to Aggregators and an obstacle for would-be platforms; the App Store and App Tracking Transparency 
accentuate the advantages that flow to companies that command consumer attention and make things 
much more difficult for companies that seek to operate in the background; faceless publishers face 
just as many if not more obstacles than faceless e-commerce operators. Substack making itself a 
consumer brand is a natural response
both to its VC incentives as well as Applea€™ s preferencesa€!

LINK: 
<https://stratechery.com/2022/substack-launches-app-substack-and-the-four-bens-in-app-purchase-and-t
he-substack-bundle/>

Timothy B. Lee: Therea€™ s a Serious Risk of a Recession in 2022: a€~Surging oil prices have 
economists worrieda€!. a€oePrior to the Ukraine war, it was already going to be difficult to 
execute a soft landing,a€D said David Beckworth, an economist at the Mercatus Center. The war in 
Ukraine a€oecomplicates matters a lot.a€Da€! The US actually became a net petroleum exporter back 
in 2020a€’’arguably achieving a€oeenergy
independence.a€Da€! But this hasna€™t insulated consumers from rising energy prices. 
Producersa€’’including US oil companiesa€”can put oil on a tanker and ship it anywhere on the 
planeta€!. American consumers are competing with consumers in Japan and Brazil for gas. If 
theya€™re paying higher prices, we will be tooa€!

LINK: <https://fullstackeconomics.com/theres-a-serious-risk-of-a-recession-in-2022/>

Richard Russo: a€™ Wea€™re jolted but not surprised. Ita€™ s from my wifea€™ s sistera€! Fox News 
and social media. Theya€™ ve believed from the beginning that the coronavirus has been overblown by 
mainstream media, and that doctors are in on it because they somehow get paid more when they record 
the death of somebody who died in, say, a car accident as having been caused by COVIDa€‘ 19a€!. 
Vaccines are not
about public health so much as personal freedoma€!. And now, the reckoninga€!. My sister-in-law 
cana€™ t stop coughing, though she says her own case is relatively mild. Her husband, however, is 
being put on a ventilator; his chances of survival, according to his doctors, are roughly 
50a€“50a€!. The question she wants my wife to help her with isna€™ t a€oeHow could we have been so 
stupid?a€D but rather a€oeWhy is this
happening?,a€D and she asks this in all sincerity. The obvious answer is one she cana€™ t or wona€™ 
t accepta€”in part, I suspect, because it naturally leads to another question that, even in this 
excruciating moment, she refuses to entertain: a€oeWhat else have we been wrong about?a€Da€! I 
ought to be able to summon a more sympathetic response than a€oeWhat on earth did you expect?a€D 
but often I just cana€™ ta€!. When
my     wife finally hangs up in the next room, I hear her let out a cry of pure exasperationa€!. 
One of the problems with screaming a€oeHow could you be so stupid?a€D at people who behave stupidly 
is that we too often think of the question as rhetorical when it isna€™ ta€!

LINK:


Russia's Logistical Nightmare Will Keep Getting Worse

1. Logistics One of the truisms of military affairs is: Tactics are for amateurs. The professionals 
understand that wars are won and lost through logistics. The great Tom Ricks has written a short, 
but deeply informative, piece about logistics that everyone ought to reada€!

Read more

a year ago A- 40 likes A- 37 comments A- Jonathan V. Last

Jeet Heer: Civil War Games: a€~Michael Anton has the Confederate delusion of victory in an 
unwinnable conflicta€!. The civil strife America has to worry about is persistent terrorism from 
so-called a€oelone wolvesaCD radicalized by the extremist ideology that the Antons of the world 
promote. The return of conflicts modeled on the massed armies of the 19th century is virtually 
impossible. But even more absurd is the presumption
that Texas with its aCcemore robust embrace of the old virtuesa€O is likely to trounce California 
with its a€oelong experiment with postmodern deracination and anti-masculinity.a€D The term 
a€cederacinationa€D should set off alarm bells, and they should stay ringing at the idea that 
Texans are tougher, more manly and thus likely to win a wara€!. Thata€™ s the very illusion 
southerners had on the eve of the Civil Wara€!. James
McPherson delineated this thinkinga€! a€oeSoutherners invented a genealogy that portrayed Yankees 
as descendants of the medieval Anglo-Saxons and southerners as descendants of their Norman 
conquerors. These divergent bloodlines had coursed through the veins of the Puritans who settled 
New England and the Cavaliers who colonized Virginiaa€!. If matters came to a fight, therefore, one 
Norman southerner could doubtless lick
ten                                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
        of those menial Saxon Yankees.a€D These ideas were tested on the killing fields of the 
Civil Wara€!. Anton should consider himself lucky. The Civil War he dreams of will never happen, so 
hea€™ 11 be spared the ignominy experienced by his precursorsa€!

LINK:


7he TIME of MONS TERS

The Time of Monsters

Civil War Games

Michael Anton is no ordinary crank. His 2016 essay a€oeThe Flight 93 ElectionaCD was singularly 
influential in solidifying right-wing support for Donald Trump. He was rewarded by being named 
Deputy Assistant to the President for Strategic Communications on thea€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 14 likes A- 6 comments A- Jeet Heer

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe


TIME of MONS TERS

The Time of Monsters

Civil War Games

Michael Anton is no ordinary crank. His 2016 essay a€oeThe Flight 93 Electiona€D was singularly 
influential in solidifying right-wing support for Donald Trump. He was rewarded by being named 
Deputy Assistant to the President for Strategic Communications on thea€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 14 likes A- 6 comments A- Jeet Heer
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

