Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

CONDITION: Not Getting Vaxxed & Boosted Boosts Your Mortality Risk 100-Fold:

Scott Lemieux: The Virus Dond€™ t Care About Your Feelings'. a€™ Remember the Washington state 
trooper who told Jay Inslee to a€oekiss his assa€D when resigning rather than taking a safe and 
effective vaccine to own the libs? This story has a stunning twist ending Ia€™ m sure you never 
anticipated: a€oeWashington State Trooper Robert LaMay, who grabbed headlines when he blew up at 
Gov. Jay Inslee (D) over vaccine mandates, has died of
COVIDa€‘T9, KIRO news radio reported Fridaya€!a€D You cana€™t make one of the most successful 
anti-public health campaigns in American history without breaking a few hundred thousand eggsa€!

LINK: <https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2022/01/the-virus-dont-care-about-your-feelings>


United Stales: COVID-19 weekly death rate by vaccination status, All ages,
Dec 4, 2021

Death rates are calculated as the number of deaths in each group, divided by the total number of 
people in this group. This is
given per 100,000 people.

Our World
in Data



The problem? It was just the vibe. The overwhelming bro-left vibe. The a€oeHow dare anybody 
actually try to do something to make a better world! Become a lanyard geek working for the UN 
trying to stop or shorten a war? F*** No! Dweebs! Let us radically reject! Let us show that we 
radically reject by smoking weed and bullshitting!a€D vibe.

Perhaps the real problem I had is that Ursula K. LeGuina€™ s a€oeThe Ones Who Walk Away from 
Omelasa€oe chttps://archive.org/details/newdimensions300gard/page/n 13/mode/1 up> is not written to 
be an easy story. If your reaction is: Ones who walk away, yay! Ornelas, boo!a€”Well, then, I do 
not think you have understood the story or LeGuin. I would dare say I do not think you have really 
read the story at all. The ones who walk away from Ornelas,
after all. Do they know where they are going? Ursula Le Guin will only say that they a€oeseem 
toa€D. But it may not exist. It is less imaginable than the city of compromised happiness.

We do not know where they arrive, or if, indeed, they arrive anywhere. One powerful key that 
provides a way to read the story suggests that they die in the wilderness. Each of them leaves 
alone, without friends or companions or comrades, heading for the mountains. You do not need to be 
an anthropologista€™ s daughter to know that the chances of survival of a lone East African Plains 
Ape, however well-equipped, in the mountains of the Pacific Northwest are
very small indeed. Another powerful key is to read it alongside J.R.R. Tolkiena€™ s a€oeLeaf by 
Nigglea€D <https://wp.lps.org/mpayant/files/2010/08/LEAF-BY-NIGGLE.pdf> and its ending: a€oeThey 
both laughed. Laugheda€”the mountains rang with it!a€D A third powerful key is to consider it as a 
refutation of the William James theme on which it is based: James thought the citizens of Ornelas 
would be unable to live with themselves, and
a€oeOmelasa€D can be read as LeGuin pointing out thata€”as so much history showsa€”James was simply 
wrong for the overwhelming proportion of people. The ones who choose or find themselves forced to 
walk away from Ornelas are few and rare.

And there are many other possible keys to the story.

Ursula K. LeGuin did, after all, construct it as a puzzle that has no answera€”or, perhaps, a 
puzzle in which all answers are unsafe and unbearable.

Thus, in my opinion at least, if you think the story-puzzle has an answer that is bearable and 
safe, you have not really read the story at alla€”have not understood at all what it would be like 
to live in or visit Ornelas, where a€oeWith a clamor of bells that set the swallows soaring, the 
Festival of Summer came to the city Ornelas, bright-towered by the seaa€!a€D
But have I made a mistake? Should I give them another chance, and listen to their a€ceOmelasa€D 
episode?

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Picture:



Abducted by an alien circus company.

Professor Doyle is forced to write calculus
equations in center ring.

Very Briefly Noted:

• AngA©lique Janssens: The Modernization of Health in the Ae/Aer/an^^https ://lrhmatters 
.com/drivers-of-health/the-modernization-of-health-netherlands-1854-1940>

•  Jennifer Worrel: Leta€™ s Go Freedom: Communing Between aCoeLetaC™ s Go Brando nd€m& aCoeLetaC™ 
s Go,     
<https://ordinary-times.com/2022/01/29/lets-go-freedom-communing-between-lets-go-brandon-and-lets-go
-darwin/>

•  Adam Tooze: Team Transitory Roars Back'. a€~Matt Klein on his Overshoot Substacka€!. About two 
thirds of the deviation of CPI from pre-COVID trend can be attributed to just two 
categoriesa€’’motor vehicles and energy prices. Almost all of the excess inflation is attributable 
to components collectively worth one third of the overall indexa€!


Chartbook

Chartbook #72: Team Transitory Roars Back

After the record series of a€ceprintsa€D for US CPI inflation in October, November and December 
2021, there was a sense that the balance of policy argument had shifted. Inflation could no longer 
be dismissed as a temporary aberration. a€oeTeam transitorya€D and a€oeteam sectorala€D were on the 
ropesa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 21 likes A- 3 comments A- Adam Tooze

• Stephen Kinsella: a€™ I want to tell you a story involving a friendly tractor, a Hugo Boss suit, 
and some shoesa€!

Stephen Kinsella @stephenkinsella

A little personal news. As of today I'm Professor of Economics at the University of Limerick. I'm 
not here to humblebrag though. I want to tell you a story involving a friendly tractor, a Hugo Boss 
suit, and some shoes.
8:06 PM a~™ Jan 27,2022

13,388Likesl,152Retweets

•  William E. Spriggs: a€™ Those of us who actually know what the Board of Governors do, and the 
qualifications of those who have held the post, need to be clear that these attacks are baseless. 
And we should take note of those making those claimsa€!

William E. Spriggs @WSpriggs

@delong @TrevonDLogan Those of us who actually know what the Board of Governors do, and the 
qualifications of those who have held the post, need to be clear that these attacks are baseless. 
And we should take note of those making those claims. First, not all Fed governors are economists.
2:04 PM a~™ Jan 28,2022

8Likes2Retweets

Paragraphs:

Charles Wilson (1967): Trade, Society, & the State: a€~The two areas which in 1500 represented the 
richest and most advanced concentrations of trade, industry and wealth were the quadrilateral 
formed by the Italian cities Milan, Venice, Florence and Genoa; and the strip of the Netherlands 
that ran from Ypres north-east past Ghent and Bruges up to Antwerp. It was not merely coincidence 
that these were the areas where the tradesmen of the cities had been
most successful in emancipating themselves from feudal interference and in keeping at bay the newer 
threat of more centralized political control offered by the new monarchies. In the fleeting 
intervals between the storms of politics and war, men here glimpsed the material advance that was 
possible when tradesmen were left in peace unflattered by the attentions of strategists who 
regarded their activities as the sinews of wara€!

LINK: <https://archive .org/details/cambridge-economic-historv-of-europe-iv/page/n2/mode/1 up>

FT Alphaville: So Long Izzy, Wea€™ ll Miss You: a€~Ita€™ s an emotional day at FT Alphaville 
Towers. Our beloved editor, Izabella Kaminska, is leaving after a 13-year stint at the blog. Having 
joined in 2008 as a junior reporter after working for Big Oil (yes, thata€™ s right conspiracy 
theorists), Reuters and CNBC, Izzy rose through the ranks to finally be made head honcho in 2017, 
succeeding FTAV founder Paul Murphy. She will be sorely missed by all
of us, and many of you. Readers will agree that there is no one quite like Izzya€!. Here are some 
stories, and a video, from her over the yearsa€!. Whether a€oeFulfilled by Amazona€D was at risk of 
being swamped by counterfeit goods due to its co-mingling policya€!. Did currency debasement lead 
to the collapse of the Roman Empire?a€! Ubera€™ s business model didna€™ t look sustainablea€!. 
Izzya€! produced a fantastic mini-film about QAnona€!.

Over 2,000 words on how the Roman Empire dealt with the pirate threat to its grain suppliesa€!. Who 
is Satoshi Nakamoto?a€!. A history of bitcoin. From 2013. Need we say more?a€! Izzy had a go at 
working for Deliverooa€!. Explaining the commodity warehouse trade with scripturea€!. Dona€™ t have 
a clue what real-time gross settlement systems are?a€! Solar panel pricesa€!. Therea€™ s no better 
example than this post on the problem with DAOs
froma€!a€%csix years agoa€!. FT Alphaville: Vaudevillea€!. So long Izzy, and thank you for the 
memories. We wish you all the best at your next endeavoura€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/70bfe728-5b94-49a8-910Q-839b9b49417e>

Josh Barro: Why I Hate Cryptocurrency: a€~As someone who is in general more favorable to the social 
value of finance than a lot of commentatorsa€! I want finance to be useful, serious, and furthering 
the production of useful products and services in the real economy. I want banks lending for the 
construction of new buildings; equity markets making it possible for the most promising companies 
to raise funds to build useful products; bond markets making
cheap and efficient financing available for public and private activities that will support payment 
of interest on the bonds. I was a big champion of the Feda€™ s actions to rescue the financial 
system in spring 2020 because I know a robust and liquid financial system isna€™ t just something 
people on Wall Street likea€”ita€™ s something that makes it possible to get a mortgage, use a 
credit card, remain employed at a company, and generally enjoy all the things
made possible by a modern economy. And I am concerned that tens of millions of Americans investing 
in a stupid market with no such thing as fundamental valuea€! is likely to lead to significant 
financial dislocation and reduced trust in the financial system when a lot of them lose their 
shirts. So thata€™ s why crypto bothers me and I lack a sense of humor about ita€!

LINK:

SER

10/iS


Why I hate cryptocurrency

Play stupid games, win stupid prizes: Cryptocurrency values are way down over the last couple of 
months, but whoa€™ s to say whether the new prices or the old prices are right? Crypto markets 
arena€™ t like normal financial markets where the price is supposed to tell you something useful 
about the real economy a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 56 likes A- 36 comments A- Josh Barro

Adam Tooze: Team Transitory Roars Back'. a€~Joe Weisenthal at Bloomberg has been tracking the 
supply chain story as closely as anyone. He remains unconvinced that we are facing anything more 
than a transitional shock. So what exactly is overheating? Whata€™ s a€oetoo hot?a€D The most 
plausible answer is that the speed with which wea€™ ve returned to normal is extremely fast, and 
thata€™ s taxing the system as a whole. This seems reasonable. It
has been an extraordinary rapid bounce back, at least from the perspective of past downturns. And 
not only has the bounce back been very rapid, consumption patterns have changed amid the bounce 
back. As everyone knows by now, people are buying a lot more a€cestuffa€D relative to services, and 
as such the price of durable goods has shot up. One takeaway from all this is that it may be too 
soon to bury the t-word, a€oetransitory.a€D Sure, nobody uses the
word anymore. Most people seem to be too embarrassed to even say it out loud. But there are still 
reasons to think that the big upward pressure wea€™ ve seen in prices is related to the rapid 
journey back to trend and the shift in consumer demand. And ita€™ s important to remember that the 
rapid journey back to trend is a good thinga€!

LINK:

Chartbook

Chartbook #72: Team Transitory Roars Back

After the record series of a€ceprintsa€D for US CPI inflation in October, November and December 
2021, there was a sense that the balance of policy argument had shifted. Inflation could no longer 
be dismissed as a temporary aberration. a€oeTeam transitorya€D and a€oeteam sectorala€D were on the 
ropesa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 21 likes A- 3 comments A- Adam Tooze

Ryan Avent: The Fed Looks Increasingly Determined to Make a Major Policy Error. a€~And to miss a 
golden opportunitya€!. The costs of making a dovish error are substantially lower than the cost of 
making a hawkish error. If you tighten too little, then a year from now inflation is higher than 
youa€™ d like it to be, which annoys people and imposes some small efficiency costs across the 
economy, but at least you have all the tools you need to address the
problem. If you tighten too much then a year from now employment is lower than it otherwise would 
be, which is more than a mere annoyance and which is likely to involve economic costs substantially 
larger than those associated with an inflation overshoot. Oh, and there may not be much you can do 
about ita€!. There were thus very good reasons for the Fed to be patient last year as inflation 
rosea€!. I am skeptical that the Fed will actually find itself able to
go through with all of this, but if it does it will pack into about one year what took roughly four 
during the last tightening cycle. In doing this, the Fed has given itself very little margin for 
errora€!

LINK:

The Bellows

The Fed looks increasingly determined to make a major policy error

Making monetary policy is hard, and I sympathize with officials at the Fed who have to make very 
difficult and very consequential decisions under extreme uncertainty. As someone with pretty dovish 
views on what policy ought to be now, I have to acknowledge that the Fed remained very patient in 
2021 even as inflation rose well above its target and despita€!

Read more

a year ago A- 11 likes A- 2 comments A- Ryan Avent

Duncan Weldon: Ita€™ s All Relative'. a€~The recent increase in inflation is really a result of 
changing relative prices rather than a generalised rise. That has important implications for 
policya€!. The fraction of the overall inflation variability attributable to the common inflation 
component drops sharply, from over 50% to between 15 and 30%, once the prea€“1980 period of high 
and volatile inflation drops out of the estimation windowa€!. Monetary policy
operates on a surprisingly narrow range of pricesa€!. The sectors whose prices are responsive to 
marginal adjustments in the stance of policy have a relatively small weight in the overall price 
indexa€!

LINK:



value

Added R

U/ITI i niiKinAMu/ri nnM


WITH DUNCAN WELDON

Value Added

It's all relative

The Bank for International Settlements produces some of the most interesting macro research of any 
global institution. And whilst I dona€™ t always agree with it, I usually find it interesting. This 
week the VoxEU write-up of a recent paper on inflationa€l
Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- Duncan Weldon
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription


Value Added

It's all relative

The Bank for International Settlements produces some of the most interesting macro research of any 
global institution. And whilst I dona€™ t always agree with it, I usually find it interesting. This 
week the VoxEU write-up of a recent paper on inflationa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- Duncan Weldon
Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to hire 
an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

