
Niccolo Machiavelli: Letter to Francesco Vettori <https://courses.Washington.edu/hsteu401 
/Letter%20%20to%20 Vettori.pdf>

Chad Orzel: Imminent Death of the Academy Predicted



Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

Beyond these places, the fierce winters
and great ice formations make travelling
hard, and by the powers of the gods,
these places are unexplored

EUXINE SEA


MEDIT

LIBYA

Mtca hoc moa

Berenice

Petra
Lcfki komi

ARABIA

Apolog ou

P'iiK if

HL

M innagara

V Barbancon

Alexandria

* Bucephalus

Ganges

Thinae


Ptotomats of
the Hunt

Axu mites AAvahtes

Sator  Sabbatha        .

I n

M

aSopatHM
U^uki

Mundus


Periplous of the
Erythraean Sea

nepinAouc; rqq
EpuOpdq OaAdooqq

Niton

♦Coikhi

Periplous
Land route

Roman
Empire

Himyarite
Kingdom

King Cltarib.M‘1

Kingdom of Aksum

King Zairas

Nabataean kingdom

King I


1st century AD        Rapta 0

Indo-Scythian
Kingdom

King Namtanu*

o Pandian

Parthian
Empire

Spices
Wine

v Cheras

• Damirica

u Others

Ivory
Metals

Aromatic
flowers

Silk


Gold         Cloth

Precious

stones

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Angela Huyue Zhang: Chinaa€™s Golden Tech Grab: a€~The authoritiesa€™ effort to discipline 
Chinese tech firms over the last 18 months has been clumsy and highly costly, featuring a raft of 
opaque and unpredictable regulations. But the approach the government seems poised to replace it 
with is not much bettera€! 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/china-regulatorv-crackdown-tech-firms-golden-share-own
ership-stake-bv-
angela-huyue-zhang-2022-05>

• *Wikipedia_*: List of Tyrants of Syracuse <https: //en .wikipedia .org/wiki/List _of_tyrants_of_ 
S yracuso

•  Osita Nwanevu: What Is Political Writing For?: a€~Morsels of rage and misery dona€™ t have much 
effect, but they do feed an online writing economya€! 
https://www.cir.org/special_report/political_writing future_internet.php>

•  Gianni Giacomelli: Superminds Bridging The Innovation Chasm: a€~Sociobiologist Edward O. Wilson 
once said that the real problem of humanity is [that] we have palaeolithic emotions, medieval 
institutions, and God-like technology. A positive exponential future will depend on how effectively 
that trio handles societya€! 
<https://www.exponentialview.co/superminds-bridging-the-innovation-chasm-373/>

• Ricardo Reis: The People versus the Markets: A Parsimonious Model of Inflation Expectations 
<https: //ideas .repec .org/p/cpr/ceprdp/15624,html>

•  Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution: a€~n the two 
generations before 1914, European society as a whole had been transformed more fundamentally than 
in centuries of earlier historya€! <https://archive.org/details/endoftsaristruss00001iev>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Nellie Bowles: TGIF: Conspiracy Theories and Hard Realities: a€~George W: Our former president 
was giving a speecha€!. We can now rewrite the phrase Freudian slip: a€oeThe decision of one man to 
launch a wholly unjustified and brutal invasion of Iraqa€! I mean of Ukraine,a€D he said, But ita€™ 
s what he mumbled under his breath afterward that struck me. Pausing, catching himself, laughing, 
then saying softly, a€oelraq too.a€D Ita€™ s
remarkable footagea€!



TGIF: Conspiracy Theories and Hard Realities

af Three shootings in one week: On Saturday, in Buffalo, New York, a young white man traveled to a 
black neighborhood to shoot up a grocery store, killing 10 people and wounding 3. On Sunday, in 
Laguna Woods, California, a Chinese man went to a Taiwanese church with a gun, killing one and 
critically injuring four. In Dallas, a young black man went to a Korean spa, shooting threea€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 378 likes A- 795 comments A- Nellie Bowles

•  Paul Cohen: a€™ Ita€™ s kind of stunning to realize that Eric Williamsa€™ classic Capitalism and 
Slavery isna€™t mentioned anywherea€!. The broader questions the NYT is asking arena€™ t quite as 
novel as the paper would like to suggesta€!

Paul Cohen @Paul E Cohen

That the book - whose arguments about the centrality of Caribbean slavery in the origins of modern 
capitalism proved deeply influential - was published in ... 1944 reminds us that the broader 
questions the NYT is asking aren't quite as novel as the paper would like to suggest 13/
5:18 PM r™ May 21,2022

543Likes74Retweets

• Michael Kofman: a€™ Circling back to Russiaa€™s problem with manpower^}

Michael Kofman @KofmanMichael

Circling back to Russia's problem with manpower availability and the question of mobilization. Its 
unclear how they can sustain the war without making difficult political choices (and even with). 
However, general mobilization is the wrong issue to focus on. Thread. 1/
6:37 PM r™ May 12,2022

4,774Likes935Retweets

•  Duncan Weldon: That a€™ 70s Show. a€~2022 is going to be a painful year. But learning the wrong 
lessons would make it even more soa€!



value

Added  R

WITH DUNCAN WELDON


Value Added

That 70s Show

The number of references to the 1970s appearing in economic opinion columns is stacking up. With 
British inflation at a 40 year and with growth beginning to slow, that is understandable. There is, 
after all, a word for the toxic combination of weak growth and fast price rises and one that is 
most associated with the 1970sa€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 6 likes A- Duncan Weldon
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

A journalistic piece is not a scholarly monograph. But the thing you have to understand in order to 
make sense of all the people mad at the New York Times today is that it has a strong culture of 
non-recognition. In the view not just of academics, but of their competitors: They take all the 
work, the ideas, and the insights of others, and pass them off as their own. Their competitors 
area€”in privatea€”even more furious than academics out there today couching
their lances to defend the honor of Eric Williams;

Paul Cohen: a€™ Ita€™ s kind of stunning to realize that Eric Williamsa€™ classic Capitalism and 
Slavery isna€™t mentioned anywhere in the piece. That this booka€”whose arguments about the 
centrality of Caribbean slavery in the origins of modern capitalism proved deeply influentiala€”was 
published ina€! 1944 reminds us that the broader questions the NYT is asking arena€™t quite as 
novel as the paper would like to
suggest. What the NYT has done is precisely that a€“ no more and no less than what all historians 
do. And no more than what dozens upon dozens of PhD students and historians working on 
Saint-Domingue, Haiti, the Haitian Revolution, and the histories of capitalism, colonialism and 
empire have been doing for decades. I cana€™ t help but feel that their work in the archives, their 
analysis, their arguments, and their voices have
largely been silenced here to a certain extent, the articlea€™ s section on a€oeSecondary 
Sourcesa€D is framed in a way that functions to legitimate the journalistsa€™ claims about the 
originality and importance of their work. Consider one example: the piece invokes economist Thomas 
Piketty, as having verified the total amount of the reparations Haiti paid to France. Hea€™ s cited 
elsewhere briefly, but you wouldna€™ t know it
from this piece that Piketty devotes a whole chapter of his Capital et IdA©ologie to reparations 
not just in France, but in Britain and US (where the national governments compensated slave-owners 
with taxpayer funds). Piketty makes even bigger claims about the world-historical importance of 
these wealth transfers than the NYT doesa€!

LINK:


Paul Cohen @Paul E Cohen

That the book - whose arguments about the centrality of Caribbean slavery in the origins of modern 
capitalism proved deeply influential - was published in ... 1944 reminds us that the broader 
questions the NYT is asking aren't quite as novel as the paper would like to suggest 13/
5:18 PM r™ May 21,2022

543Likes74Retweets

There is the state variable in the economic model that determines the vertical location of the 
short-run Phillips Curvea€”the inflation-unemployment tradeoff. Economists call that 
a€oeexpectationsa€D. There are also what people expect inflation to be. That the distribution of 
peoplea€™ s individual expectations shifts does not tell me much about what is happening to the 
state variable. So I am dismissive of this line of work by the very sharp Ricardo Reis:

Ricardo Reis: The People versus the Markets: A Parsimonious Model of Inflation Expectations'. a€™ 
Expected long-run inflation is sometimes inferred using market prices, other times using surveys. 
The discrepancy between the two measures has large business-cycle fluctuations, is systematically 
correlated with monetary policies, and is mostly driven by disagreement, both between households 
and traders, and between different
traders. A parsimonious model that captures both the dispersed expectations in surveys, and the 
trading of inflation risk in financial markets, can fit the data, and it provides estimates of the 
underlying expected inflation anchor. Applied to US data, the estimates suggest that inflation 
became gradually, but steadily, unanchored from 2014 onwards. The model detects this from the fall 
in cross-person expectations skewness, first across
traders, then across people. In general equilibrium, when inflation and the discrepancy are jointly 
determined, monetary policy faces a trade-off in how strongly to respond to the discrepancya€!

LINK: chttps://ideas .repec .org/p/cpr/ceprdp/15624.html>

A very, very nicely put thumbnail summary of what I have been trying to say about the implications 
of the coming of modern economic growth after 1870. It destabilized politics and political economy 
around the globe. Shaky regimes crashed. Solid regimes became shaky. And rock-solid regimes began 
to feel earthquakes building:

Dominic Lieven: The End of Tsarist Russia: The March to World War I & Revolution'. a€~Although the 
Russian case is unique, in this respect too international comparisons are nevertheless very 
important. In the two generations before 1914, European society as a whole had been transformed 
more fundamentally than in centuries of earlier history. It was hard for anyone to keep his balance 
amid dramatic economic, social, and cultural
change; predictions as to where change might lead in the future could inspire even greater 
giddiness. A common feature across Europe was the growth of civil society and its impact through 
the press, lobbies, and political parties on governments. In contemporary parlance, civil society 
is always supposed to be on the side of the angels. As regards international relations in 
prea€“1914 Europe, this was not true. Civil society, meaning
above  all the press, often played a big role in stoking international conflict. This might be just 
a question of pandering to public prejudices and thirst for sensations, but it rattled and 
bedeviled policy makers nonetheless. More serious were systematic efforts to use foreign policy as 
a means to generate nationalist support for governments at home, in the process undermining the 
rational calculations on which diplomatic bargaining was
based. No great power, Russia included, was entirely innocent in this respecta€!

LINK: <https://archive.org/details/endoftsaristruss00001iev>

I very much agree with Duncan here. Are we fooling ourselves? At the moment, we see only a few of 
the many strong factors that made for inflation in the 1970s:

Duncan Weldon: That a€™ 70s Show: a€~2022 is going to be a painful year. But learning the wrong 
lessons would make it even more soa€!. Whilst ita€™ s easy to point to the energy price and/or the 
wage-price as the major drivers, neither alone was sufficient. Instead one should take into 
account: The energy price spike after the Yom Kippur War. The wage-price spiral in the context of a 
radically different labour market and wage
bargaining structure than exists today. But alsoa€! The end of Bretton Woods and the floating of a 
weak pound. The newly liberalised/deregulated banking system and booming mortgage market. The 
macroeconomic framework under which policymakers were analysing the economy and how it produced the 
wrong signals. Some of the worst macro-policy making of the century, with the ill-timed dash for 
growth stoking the Barber Boom
just   as the energy crisis hit. Pretty much everything that could go wrong on the inflation front, 
did. At the same time. Yesterday, to remind myself of the US context, I found myself re-reading 
Brad Delonga€™ s superb 1997 paper on the US experience. I was especially struck by his argument 
that a period of high inflation was, perhaps, inevitablea€!

LINK:


value

Added R

WITH DUNCAN WELDON


That 70s Show

The number of references to the 1970s appearing in economic opinion columns is stacking up. With 
British inflation at a 40 year and with growth beginning to slow, that is understandable. There is, 
after all, a word for the toxic combination of weak growth and fast price rises and one that is 
most associated with the 1970sa€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 6 likes A- Duncan Weldon

Value Added

As near as I can see, under current mobilization policies, Muscovy cannot maintain its operational 
tempo while Ukraine can. So either Russia is going to be slowly, bloodily, destructively pushed 
back, or Muscovy will have to change its mobilization policies. It is to everyone's interest to 
offer Muscovy a deal that it prefers to either changing its mobilization policies or being pushed 
out:

Michael Kofman: a€™ Circling back to Russiaa€™ s problem with manpower availability and the 
question of mobilization. Its unclear how they can sustain the war without making difficult 
political choices (and even with). However, general mobilization is the wrong issue to focus ona€l. 
The Russian military does not need general mobilization to sustain combat operations, and address 
its immediate manpower shortagea€l. The


... r

_  ±      1:*: u..

J 1          .—_ USZMAI „         r  i  *

•--------------

u, J *        *


WITH DUNCAN WELDON

Value Added

That '70s Show

The number of references to the 1970s appearing in economic opinion columns is stacking up. With 
British inflation at a 40 year and with growth beginning to slow, that is understandable. There is, 
after all, a word for the toxic combination of weak growth and fast price rises and one that is 
most associated with the 1970sa€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 6 likes A- Duncan Weldon

As near as I can see, under current mobilization policies, Muscovy cannot maintain its operational 
tempo while Ukraine can. So either Russia is going to be slowly, bloodily, destructively pushed 
back, or Muscovy will have to change its mobilization policies. It is to everyone's interest to 
offer Muscovy a deal that it prefers to either changing its mobilization policies or being pushed 
out:

Michael Kofman: a€™ Circling back to Russiaa€™ s problem with manpower availability and the 
question of mobilization. Its unclear how they can sustain the war without making difficult 
political choices (and even with). However, general mobilization is the wrong issue to focus ona€l. 
The Russian military does not need general mobilization to sustain combat operations, and address 
its immediate manpower shortagea€l. The
fastest way for Putin to alter these constraints is also politically the most unpalatable: declare 
a state of war. Ita€™ s clear that for a host of reasons this is something he doesna€™ t want to 
do.

However, the Russian military effort is also unsustainable as is. The current Russian approach 
appears to be halfway measures to muddle througha€!. It is quite possible that eventually Moscow 
will be forced to conduct what constitutes a partial mobilization, whether declared or undeclared. 
Taken together with changes to laws/regulations, this could provide enough manpower over time to 
drag the war outa€l
LINK:

Michael Kofman @KofmanMichael

Circling back to Russia's problem with manpower availability and the question of mobilization. Its 
unclear how they can sustain the war without making difficult political choices (and even with). 
However, general mobilization is the wrong issue to focus on. Thread. 1/
6:37 PM r™ May 12,2022

4,774Likes935Retweets


