Subscribe now
The passage is:

Dig into Friedmana€™ s thesis that the Great Depression was a failure of government and not of 
market, and things become interesting. For how could you
tell whether interest rates were too high, too low, or just right? According to Friedman, too-high 
interest rates would lead to high unemployment. Too-low
interest rates would lead to high inflation. Just-right interest ratesa€”those that corresponded to 
a a€ceneutrala€D monetary policy a€’’would keep the
macroeconomy balanced and the economy smoothly growing. Thus theory became tautologya€!

Mark Skousen writes:

I'm dumbfounded by your claim that Milton Friedman wanted to "stabilize interest rates" (pp. 
401-402). Actually Friedman wanted to target the growth of
the stock of money, not the price of money. He wanted the Fed (central banks) to increase the money 
supply at a stable rate equal to the long-term
economic growth rate, and to let interest rates find their own equilibrium.a€D

He is correct: the implication that Milton Friedman sought to stabilize interest rates is wrong. He 
sought a neutral monetary policya€”in which interest
rates, and much else, would be stable. What I was trying to get at was that when Friedman talks 
about focusing on the monetary base plus checking
depositsa€”M2a€”as a quantity to be stabilized, this M2 is not a control variable but rather an 
intermediate target. It is a leading indicator of nominal
spending,      and valuable and important only to the extent that it is a reliable leading 
indicator. M2 is, in Friedman's schema, an immense help as a thing to
watch  in crafting a neutral monetary policy. Whenever Goodhart's Law arrived and roosted, and the 
correlation between M2 and future nominal spending
broke down. Friedman threw away the M2 target and focused on the nominal spending path as an ex 
post indicator of whether monetary policy had been
properly neutral. But too much of that a argument was left on the cutting room floor in the final 
compression of the ms. And so it makes the points only to
someone, like me, who already understands what I am trying to say.

For a while in his career, Friedman relied on historical correlations for his claim that a 
a€ceneutrala€D monetary policy could be made automatic. But as
Charles Goodhart had warned him, the historical correlations broke down as soon as central banks 
started to try to rely on them as control mechanisms. See

C. A. E. Goodhart, a€oeProblems of Monetary Management: The UK Experience,a€D in Monetary Theory 
and Practice: The UK Experience, London:
Palgrave Macmillan, 1984,91a€“121. Friedman then took refuge in a a€oea€~neutrala€™ is whatever 
worksa€D position. See Timothy B. Lee,
a€oeMilton Friedman Would Be Pushing for Easy Money Today,a€D Forbes, June 1,2012, 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/timothylee/2012/06/01/milton-
friedman-would-be-pushing-for-easv-monev-today/?sh=76b918545b 16>.

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


