Subscribe now

One Audio:

Spencer Jakab & Barry Ritholtz: Reddit, Gamestop & Meme Stocks 
<https://ritholtz.com/2Q22/07/transcript-spencer-jakab/>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image: Inflation Is a Better Problem to Have than a Permanent Output Gap: Massively Better

FRED             — Real Gross Domestic Product

20,000

19,000

in

=o   18,000
CM

O

£   17,000
(D

C

o   16,000

c

o                           \         X

15,000

14,000

2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       2020      2022

Share


Very Briefly Noted:

•  Scott Lemieux: Theya€™ re Getting What They Want: a€~The states with the most restrictive 
abortion laws are also, as a rule, the states that do the least for families and childrena€!. 
Reproductive autonomya€! weakens hierarchies of gender. And the social safety neta€! undermines the 
preferred conservative social order of isolated, atomized households kept in line through market
disciplined! <https://www.lawversgunsmoneyblog.com/2022/07/theyre-getting-what-they-want>

•  Jemima Kelly: Web3 Is Just a Fresh Serving of the Same Old Crypto Nonsense: a€~The future is 
bright; the future is a€ce append-only a€D databasesa€!. Buta€! in truth, Web3a€! is just the 
newest way of serving up the same old crypto bullshita€! « 
https://www.ft.com/content/bb53f8d8-a4bca€“4ab0a€“8a81-e8befe7e31dl»

•  Andy Haldane: In Conversation - RSA: a€~The Overton window is now open for us to rethink how we 
value, reward and make resilienta€! essential activities and jobsa€! broader than the future of 
worka€! also a€! the future of business, the future of government and the future of civil 
societya€! <https://www.thersa.org/comment/2021/ll/andy-haldane-in-conversation>

•  Minxin Pei: Can the US Win the New Cold War?: a€~If the Republican Party continues its assault 
on US democracya€! the US will, at the very least, lose its ideological appeala€!. [And] it is hard 
to imagine that a country beset by such turmoil could possibly lead a coalition of democracies on 
the world staged! <https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/us-republican-assault-on-
democracy-undermine-prospects-in-new-cold-war-by-minxin-pei-2022-07>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Erik Hoel: All Writing Is Centralizing onto Substack: a€~Precisely for the reasons of UI and UX 
and ease and audience onboarding. A lotd!. This is, I think, a very good thing. Substack is an 
alternative means of engagement with the weba€”it is centralized but, importantly, siloedd! <

The Intrinsic Perspective

All writing is centralizing onto Substack

If I compare my experience on the web now to that of 15 or 20 years ago, the obvious difference is 
centralization. Almost everything has been centralized, from where I consume entertainment to where 
I listen to music to how I get my news to how I interact with other web denizens. That the interned!
Read more

8 months ago A- 125 likes A- 106 comments A- Erik Hoel

AJs

Perhaps this is because at the bottom we may be wired for sociability through network-based 
gift-exchange. The next question is: Where does property come from? But once you have property, the 
path to the "elementary intuitions about freedom" as a combination of doing what you want with your 
property and reciprocity and gift exchange seem almost inescapable:

George Scialabba (2018): Slouching Toward Utopia: d'Unless we have reached the end point of 
humankindd™ s moral developmentd! the average educated human of the 23rd century will look backd! 
and ask incredulously about a considerable number of our most cherished moral and political axioms, 
doeHow could they have believed that?a€Da€! Two four-letter
words lie at the heart of contemporary Americad™ s public morality: doefreedD and a€oefair.a€Da€! 
All production is social productiond! the joint product of all preceding ages, and all those born 
into the present are legitimately joint heirs of those assetsd!. The most galling part of each day 
is encountering the ubiquitous self-designation of apologists for capitalism
as champions of freedomd!. Stilld! the elementary intuitions about freedom to which defenders of 
laissez-faire capitalism appeal are widespread and at least superficially plausibled!

LINK: <http://georgescialabba.net/mtgs/2018/03/slouching-toward-utopia,html>

Forthcoming on October 14,2022 from Oxford. I would give a limb to write some thing as great as 
Jonathand™ s Karl Marx: A 19th-Century Life. I am not so sure that there can be a thematic unity 
for the period 1950 to 2000, but, if there can be, Jonathan's decision to make it "interconnection" 
appears to me to be the most fruitful theme to explore:

Jonathan Sperber: The Age of Interconnection: A Global History of the Second Half of the Twentieth 
Century: d'lmagining the Erad!. 1. The rate of global economic and population growth over the years 
1950d“ 73d! greater than at any previous timed!. 2. In 1950, the United States was the only country 
in the world with at least 250 privately owned automobiles per
thousand peopled!. By 2000, there were twenty-four countriesd!. 3. In the five years after the end 
of the Second World War, one person in thirteen in the world was a refugee. 4. About one-tenth as 
many people were killed in wars of the second half of the twentieth century as during the two World 
Warsd!. 5. The decolonization of Asia and Africad! saw the end of the
largest colonial empires in human history. 6.d! Human presence in space has been limited to low 
earth orbitd!. 7. As late as 1960, atmospheric CO2 levels were little above their preindustrial 
valuesd!. 8. By 2000, there were more women university students than mend!. 9. In 1960d! commercial 
passenger aircraft were propeller planes; by 1970d! jets. 10d!.
antibioticsd! DDT, anda€! mass vaccinationd! reduced infectious disease so drastically in the 
quarter century after 1945a€!. 11. In 1995, there were only sixteen million users of the Internetd! 
Five years laterd! 361 milliond!. How [can] all thesed! be understood as part of a broader 
historical process, and not merely as a succession of disconnected headlines[?]d!

LINK: <https://www.amazon.com/Age-Interconnection-History-Twentieth-Century/dp/0190918950/>

Our perceptions are only the things that can (or might) drive actiond’T think that is essential to 
understanding how the brain works. Not that I think I have the slightest clue:

GyAJrgy BuzsAjki: How the Brain a€~Constructsa€™ the Outside World: d~We learn that sticks that 
look bent in water are not broken by moving themd!. Neuronal circuits that initiate an action 
dedicate themselves to two tasks. The first is to send a command to the muscles that controld! 
bodily sensorsd!. Neurons that initiate eye movement also notify visual
sensory areas of the cortex about what is happeningd!. This corollary message provides the second 
opinion sensory circuits need for groundingd”a confirmation that dcemy own action is the agent of 
change dD Similar corollary messages are sent to the rest of the brain when a person takes actions 
to investigate the flower and its relationship to oneself and other
objectsd!. As an experimenter, I did not set out to build a theory in opposition to the outside-in 
framework. Only decades after I started my work studying the self-organization of brain circuits 
and the rhythmic firing of neuronal populations in the hippocampus did I realize that the brain is 
more occupied with itself than with what is happening around ita€!

LINK: <https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/how-the-brain-constructs-the-outside-world/>


I think that Cosme is right here in picking up on this theme from Ernest Gellner. In the Before 
Fimes, the ruling ideas had to be the ideas that reinforced the force-and-fraud 
exploitation-and-extraction machine that the upper class used to grab from others, in order to 
provide enough for its own members and their families. Thus the test of an idea was rarely a€oeis 
it true?a€D in the sense of being
useful in manipulating nature or cooperatively organizing people, but rather a€oeis it useful?" for 
we in the upper class. The coming of the Royal Society, and its insistence that we take nothing on 
the word of an authority but, rather, experimentally test everything is a huge shift once it 
becomes general.

But there is always, always backsliding, wherever there is a valued hierarchy:

Cosma Shalizi: Books to Read While the Algae Grow in Your Fur, July 2007: a€~Ernest Gellner had a 
really profound analysis of the political aspects of scientific rationality (see e.g. Plough, Sword 
and Book, or most centrally Legitimation of Belief; or the exegesis by Michael Lessnoff), where he 
pointed out that one of the effects of rationalism and empiricism was to
a€oelocate the well of truth outside the walls of the citya€U, i.e., to create a source of 
epistemic authority which was not under social controla€!. Suppose he was right about this (as I 
think he was)a€!. In a firm which adopts evidence-based decision-making, the decisions of superiors 
become challengeable by inferiors, on grounds which the hierarchy has committed itself to
respecting. Whether this advances the interests of the organization or not, it cana€™t be 
comfortable for those in chargea€!. Scenarios include: evidence-based decision-making become a 
ritual shell for business as usual; increasing secrecy and restriction of information, so that 
higher management preserves its authority on the grounds that it does, in fact, know best; such
centralization, followed by the discovery that empiricism in one conference room does not, in fact, 
lead to better decisions leading to the rejection of evidence-based management as a failure; or, 
perhaps, some sort of partial democratization within managements I

LINK: chttp:Z/bactra.org/weblog/algae-2007-07 .html>

The question is: what was tsarist Russia? It had many pieces. There was the frontier-settler rich 
agricultural society of the Ukraine and Odesa. There was the early-industrialization society of the 
Baltics and St. Petersburg, plus Moscow. There was the start of the resource-extraction industrial 
society. And there was the orthodox-peasant society. The way of such things is that the 
modern-urban social
formations colonize and then assimilate the pieces of pre-modern Agraria that they rule as 
modernity advances, one way or the othera€’’Peasant into Frenchmen 
chttps:ZZarchive.orgZdetailsZpeasantsintofrenOOOOwebe>. And it is that process that creates both a 
nation and a national-industrial economy. Perhaps a regional focus would be better, applied to the 
Empire of the Tsars? Poland, Baltics-St.
Petersburg, west Ukraine, east Ukraine, Muscovy, Caucasus, Urals, central Asia, far Siberia? I 
confess I have a hard time wrapping my head around what happened, let alone what might have 
happened had things been otherwise:

Davis Kedrosky: Twilight Imperium?: a€~Tsarist Russia was in the early stages of a not-too-atypical 
European development pattern, hamstrung by poor (but not fatal) political economy and rapid 
population growtha€!. Ia€™ m also not arguing that counterfactual Tsarist growth would have been 
faster than under Lenin and Stalina€!. I find Allena€™ s story of rapid labor
mobilization, increased human capital, and an accelerated demographic transition relatively 
convincinga€!.. Without the war, ita€™ s possible that Russian growth and (potentially) 
institutional change would have delivered the goods and forestalled the violent destruction of the 
old ordera€!

LINK:

Davis Kedrosky

Economic History Research


TL;DR: I defend the a€ceoptimista€D position on the economic performance of Tsarist Russia. The 
pre-1914 Russian economy was experiencing sustained economic growth which was interrupted by WWI 
and curtailed by the Bolshevik Revolution and Civil War. The a€cepessimista€D stance ignores or 
explains away real signs of capitalist development in Russia in spite of itsa€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 11 likes A- 17 comments A- Davis Kedrosky
Subscribe now


Subscribe now

