Subscribe now

First:

I see the late David Graeber is in the news today.

I do not trust anything he ever wrote. Let me tell you why.

Let me pick a chapter at random from Graebera€™ s Debt: The First 5,000 Yearsa&A I land on chapter 
12a€! I start readinga€! I come to the third page 
<https://archive.org/details/DebtTheFirst5000Years/page/362/mode/2up> and find:

"I would hear occasional rumors of secret gold vaults underneath the Twin Towers in Manhattan.... 
After the Towers were destroyeda€! one of the first questions many New Yorkers asked was: What 
happened to the money?... Some spoke of legions of emergency workers secretly summoneda€! 
desperately carting off tons of bulliona€!. One particularly colorful
conspiracy theory suggested that the entire attack was really staged by speculatorsa€!. The truly 
remarkable thinga€! is that.. I did a little research and discovered that, no, actually, ita€™ s 
true...

A reader reading this thinks that the a€oeita€D of a€oeactually, it's truea€D is:

1. There were a€oesecret gold vaults underneath the Twin Towersa€D,

2. a€oeLegions of emergency workers [were] secretly summoned to make their way through miles of 
overheated tunnelsa€D, and

3. They worked a€oedesperately carting off tons of bulliona€D,

And perhaps also: (4) a€oeThe entire attack was really staged by speculators .a€D

Actually, what is actually true is that the Federal Reserve Bank of New York does keep the gold in 
its custodial accounts in the vaults of 33 Liberty Street. 33 Liberty Street is not 
a€oeunderneatha€n the World Trade Center. 33 Liberty Street is not even, as Graeber later corrects 
himself, a€oetwo blocksa€D from the World Trade Center. It is six blocks from the World Trade 
Centera€”half a
mile away.

And do note that when David Graeber claims he a€oedid a little researcha€n, what he means is that 
he read the pamphlet the FRBNY hands out to visiting junior high school students.
And do not forget the most famous paragraph of Graebera€™ s Debt, of which barely a word was ever 
true:

Apple Computersa€! was founded by (mostly Republican) computer engineers who broke from IBM in 
Silicon Valley in the 1980s, forming little democratic circles of twenty to forty people with their 
laptops in each other's garages...

Afterwards, Graeber could not give a consistent account of how he had come to write this. Sometimes 
he claimed that it was 100% true, but not of Apple Computer, and that it was just a minor mind-o 
error. Sometimes he claimed he had been led astray by Richard Wolff (and perhaps one of his 
graduate students?) who had misinformed him. Sometimes he claimed it was his editora€™ s fault in
the copyediting, and he had missed the error when he reviwed the ms.

Not everything Graeber writes is wronga€”some of it is right, and some of it is quite good.
But nothing David Graeber writes is trustable.

Today we have Daniel Immerwahr 
<https://www.thenation.com/aiticle/societv/graeber-wengrow-dawn-of-everything/> writing that David 
Graeber and David Wengrowa€™ s claim that British-colonist settlers in America captured by 
Amerindians a€oealmost invariablya€D chose to stay with them is a€oeballistically falsea€D. 
Immerwahr writes:

Graeber and Wengrow twice assert that settlers in the colonial Americas whoa€™ d been a€oecaptured 
or adopteda€D by Indigenous societies a€oealmost invariablya€D chose to stay with them. By 
contrast, Indigenous people taken into European societies a€oealmost invariably did just the 
opposite: either escaping at the earliest opportunity, ora€”having tried their
best to adjust, and ultimately faileda€’’returning to indigenous society to live out their last 
days.a€Da€! The sole scholarly authority that Graeber and Wengrow citea€! argues the opposite. 
a€oePersons of all races and cultural backgrounds reacted to captivity in much the same waya€D is 
its thesis; generally, young children assimilated into their new culture and older
captives didna€™ta€!

New York Times reporter Jennifer Scheussler does the a€oehe said, he saida€D dance 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/31/arts/dawn-of-everything-graeber-wengrow.html> by reporting that 
David Wengrow says that it is a€celmmerwahr who was reading the source wronga€D.
Scheussler could havea€”and would have, if competent, resolved this. What the source Graeber and 
Wengrow draw on, Joseph Norman Hearda€™ s 1977 dissertation, actually argues is exactly what Daniel 
Immerwahr says it argues. This:

Boys and girls captured below the age of puberty almost always became assimilated, while persons 
taken prisoner above that age usually retained the desire to return to white civiliA zationa€!. An 
Indian child reared and cherished in a white family became assimilated in much the same manner as a 
white child adopted by an Indian family. The deterAmining factor was
age at the time of removal from natural parents for Indian children as well as for whites... 
<https://digitalcommons.lsu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=4156&context=gradschool_disstheses>

No. David Immerwahr has not misread it. Graeber and Wengrowa€™ s a€oealmost invariablya€D is false. 
Wengrow is lying.
Share

One Audio:

Jeet Heer: Podcast: The Deep Roots of GOP Extremism'. a€~A conversation with Will Wilkinson about 
Leo Strauss, Harry Jaffa, and the journey from Lincoln to Trumpa€!



The Time of Monsters

Podcast: The Deep Roots of GOP Extremism

Listen now (85 min) I A recurring theme of this newsletter is that the Republican turn towards 
authoritarianism is one of major problems in American politics. Recently, an episode of the superb 
podcast Know Your Enemies dia€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 5 likes A- 1 comment A- Jeet Heer
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Financial Times: J air Bolsonaroa€™ s Faults Go Well Beyond the Pandemic. a€~Brazila€™ s 
far-right leader will be remembered for bungling the economy tooa€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/4733957d-bla2-4efl-90dc-bb394f77997d>

•  Brian Merchant: Why Facebook Became Meta\ a€~The Real Reason Facebook Changed Its Name: Mark 
Zuckerberg wants to be the hero of the metaverse because he knows Facebook is boringa€! LINK: 
<https://www.theatlantic .com/ideas/archive/2021/10/facebook-metaverse-mark-zuckerberg/620538/>

• John Paul Koning: Does It Make a Difference If Tether Lends Out New USDt?’. a€~Tether has 
misadvertised itselfa€! says in its terms of service that it only creates new stablecoin tokens, 
USDt, in acceptance for moneya€!. But in reality, Tether does not seem to be waiting for deposits 
to roll in before issuing new USDt. As the FTa€™ s Kadhim Shubber reports, it is directly
lending new USDt out, much like how a bank puts new dollar lOUs into circulation by lending them 
outa€! LINK: <http://jpkoning.blogspot.com/2021/10/does-it-make-difference-if-tether-lends.html>

•  Davide Brignone, Alistair Dieppe, Martino Ricci: Quantifying Risks of Persistently Higher Us 
Inflation'. a€~Using the ECB-Global model, this column estimates the impact on inflation of the 
fiscal stimulus to be limited. Three scenariosa€! a steeper Phillips curve, stronger fiscal 
multipliers, and rising inflation expectations. The results suggest that the impact on inflation 
from
these sources of risk is likely to be moderate, unless all of the risks materialise simultaneously, 
and the Fed does not depart from the assumed monetary policy patha€! 
<https://voxeu.org/article/quantifying-risks-persistently-higher-us-inflation>

•  Steve M.: A Pro-Worker Party Without All that Silly Economic Populism'. a€~Axios reports that 
Marco Rubioa€! a€oewill call for a requirement that company boards are committed to U.S. national 
interest and devoid of conflicts of interest with nations such as China. Rubio will contrast that 
with what he says are a€~requirements that companiesa€™ board of directors be
sufficiently a€cediverse,a€D like what the Biden administration is pushinga€™ a€!a€D We know what 
this isa€! Fox News ragebait instead of ideas. Fox viewers hate China, though they probably cana€™ 
t tell you whya€! 
<https://nomoremister.blogspot.com/2021/11/a-pro-worker-party-without-all-that,html>

• Elizabeth Bear: Ia€™ ve Been Thinking About Healthcare, Health Outcomes, & American 
Exceptionalism

I've been thinking about healthcare, health outcomes, and American exceptionalism.

Cancer stuff updates will be a little delayed, as everything is sort of up in the air scheduling 
wise as we deal with delayed testing results and a minor surgical complication. (I'm fine, details 
when I have something more concrete to say. But all this healthcare stuff is making me think about 
America, and how badly broken our healthcare system is on so a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 7 likes A- 2 comments A- Elizabeth Bear

•  Parker Molloy: Time for a Social (Media) Experiment'. a€~As I sit here at my computer, silently 
trying to figure out what to write about for this edition of my newsletter, I keep coming back to 
something: I am miserable. And while ita€™ s certainly not the sole reason for said misery, I think 
that Twitter has a lot to do with ita€!



The Present Age

Time for a social (media) experiment
Read more

a year ago A- 22 likes A- 12 comments A- Parker Molloy

• Daniel Larison: China Hawks Want to Play an Exceptionally Dangerous Game of Chicken'. a€~Gamble 
with provoking an unnecessary war on the assumption that the U.S. and its allies can effectively 
a€ceclosea€D the a€cewindowa€Da€!

Eunomia

China Hawks Want to Play an Exceptionally Dangerous Game of Chicken

Michael Beckley and Hal Brands have a curious view of modern Chinese history: Beijing is a 
remarkably ambitious revanchist power, one determined to make China whole again by a€cereunitinga€D 
Taiwan with the mainland, turning the East and South China Seas into Chinese lakes, and grabbing 
regional primacy as a stepping-stone to global powera€!

Read more

a year ago A- 4 likes A- Daniel Larison

Paragraphs:

Henry Farrell: The Politics oflnformation: a€~The technologist Maciej Ceglowski describes machine 
learning as a€cemoney laundering for bias.a€D That can have terrible consequences if machine 
learning reflects the categories of official thought, and then interprets the policy consequences 
in terms of these categories too, so that bias compounds bias. This then creates incentives for ever
more distorted ways of understanding the world which are implemented through these algorithms and 
which then create these feedback loops which get worse and worse, and lead, perhaps, to human 
tragedy, but also to these authoritarian systems not working in the cool, clean, beautiful and 
efficient way that pundits like Harari expecta€!


LINK: <https://fivebooks.com/best-books/politics-of-information-henry-farrell/>

Packy McCormick: Sc3nius: a€~In 1997a€! David Banks argueda€! that, a€oeThe most important question 
we can ask of historians is a€~Why are some periods and places so astonishingly more productive 
than the rest?a€™ a€D a€! The same periods come up over and over again in these conversations 
because they were so head-scratchingly productive. Ancient Greece. Renaissance
Florence. Elizabethan England. Northern England during the Industrial Revolution. Silicon Valley. 
These time-place combinations produce new ideas, new art, new economic structures, and new 
technology of astonishing breadth, quality, and staying powera€!. Brian Enoa€! a€oeThe important 
changes in cultural history were actually the product of very large numbers of people and
circumstances conspiring to make something new. I call this a€~sceniusa€™ -it means a€~the 
intelligence and intuition of a whole cultural scenea€™ . It is the communal form of the concept of 
geniusa€!. Historically, scenius had been tied to, and limited by, placea€!. Johah Lehrera€! 
suggestsa€! Human Mixinga€! a diversity of peoplea€! shar[ing] ideas. Educationa€! new forms of 
teaching
and learninga€!. Institutions that Encourage Risk-Takinga€!. I tried to add some ingredientsa€! one 
in particular seemed to appear before most of historya€™ s great Scenia: catastrophea€!. 
Catastrophe focuses energy, attention, and talenta€!. Crisis shakes and breaks and calls for new 
solutionsa€!. Catastrophe brings people together in ways that are difficult to accomplish in 
peacetimea€!. Then
the endogenous factors take over, and ita€™ s up to the scene to make its impacta€!. Mutual 
appreciation^!. Rapid exchange of tools and techniquesa€!. Network effects of successa€!. Local 
tolerance for the noveltiesa€!. Competition^!. Place-Based Ritual: A scene needs a setting. The 
Junto met in a bar, The Inklings in The Eagle and Child Pub, Motowna€™ s artists in Detroit houses, 
and
Renaissance artists in le botteghe. Informal meeting placesa€!. Diversity of Thought and 
Experienced!. Those eleven factorsa€”four exogenous and seven endogenousa€”can turn groups of 
individuals into a Scenius, a community that accomplishes much more, across a range of disciplines, 
than would otherwise be expecteda€!

LINK:

Not Boring by Packy McCormick

Sc3nius

Welcome to the 854 newly Not Boring people who have joined us since last Monday! Join 81,328 smart, 
curious folks by subscribing here: dYZ§ To get this essay straight in your ears: listen on Spotify 
or Apple Podcastsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 49 likes A- 15 comments A- Packy McCormick

Addison Del Mastro: Main Street Manufacturing: a€~Operations like microbreweries and coffee 
roasteries were often zoned as light industriala€! located in industrial/office-type areas outside 
of downtown, often accessible only by car and by following a number of winding roads into the 
office parksa€!. Iita€™ s obviously not a great idea to more or less force people to drive to a 
place where
theya€™ll be drinking. Second, these kinds of businesses draw a lot of people, and are great ways 
to enliven main streets. Third, I get the sense that zoning hasna€™t caught up to reality herea€!

LINK:


.The Deleted Scenes

Main Street Manufacturing

Last month, I dashed off this tweet, inspired by an online presentation by Ilana Preuss, about her 
recent book making the case for small-scale manufacturing in downtowns and on main streetsa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- 4 comments A- Addison Del Mastro

Jonathan V. Last: Facebooka€™ s Pivot to Meter. a€~I ama€l skeptical of Facebook renaming itself 
a€oeMetaa€D as a sign that it is going to orient the company principally toward the metaverse 
futurea€!. I have seen this before. Back in 2015, Facebook launched a a€oepivot to video.a€Ua€! 
What happeneda€! is that everyone who tried to pivot with Facebook got burned. Bad. By 2018 the
pivot to video was dead and Facebook was pivoting back to what it does very well: Keeping Boomers 
addicted to the site so that they can sell targeted advertising against their eyeballs. The dirty 
secret of Facebooka€”and Google, tooa€”is that these mega-companies are just advertising platforms. 
Thata€™ s ita€!. Also: Wea€™ ve seen the metaverse before. It used to be called Second Lifea€!.
Mark Zuckerberg seems to think that the metaverse hea€™ s building will be like the Oasis in Ready 
Player One and that hea€™ 11 own it. This future seemsa€! unlikelya€!. Ia€™ m not even sure 
Facebook will be able to hold off TikTok and Snap over the next decade, let alone still be a 
dominant corporation a half century from nowa€!

LINK:

Facebook's Pivot to Meta

Every week I highlight three newsletters that are worth your time. If you find value in this 
project, do two things for me: (1) Hit the like button, and (2) Share this with someone. Most of 
what we do in Bulwark+ is only for our members, but this email will always be open to everyone. To 
get it each week, sign up for free here. (Just choose the free optioa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 102 likes A- Jonathan V. Last

David French: J.D. Vance & the Great Challenge of Christian Malice'. a€~Sohrab Ahmari wrote an 
essay in First Things called a€oeAgainst David Frenchisma€Da€! first, a critique of classical 
liberalism itself, and second, a critique of my (highly imperfect!) commitment to civility and 
decency as a mode of political discoursed!. His essay[a€™ s]a€! powera€! is expressed in these 
sentences:
a€oeProgressives understand that culture war means discrediting their opponents and weakening or 
destroying their institutions. Conservatives should approach the culture war with a similar 
realism. Civility and decency are secondary values. They regulate compliance with an established 
order and orthodoxy. We should seek to use these values to enforce our order and our orthodoxy, not 
pretend
that    they could ever be neutral. To recognize that enmity is real is its own kind of moral 
dutya€!a€D These words provided a theological and intellectual rationalization for a particular 
kind of public aggressiona€!. They provided a sacred frame that allowed and even encouraged 
Christians to conform their words to the words of the most publicly cruel man to ever occupy the 
Oval Officea€!.

Leta€™ s turn back to J.D. Vancea€!. The American Conservative published a fascinating profilea€!. 
The last paragraph contained these ominous words, especially coming from a Christian politician: 
a€oel think our people hate the right people,a€D Vance saida€!. All too many of us have forgotten a 
fundamental truth. There are no a€ceright peoplea€D to hatea€!

LINK:


Facebook's Pivot to Meta

Every week I highlight three newsletters that are worth your time. If you find value in this 
project, do two things for me: (1) Hit the like button, and (2) Share this with someone. Most of 
what we do in Bulwark+ is only for our members, but this email will always be open to everyone. To 
get it each week, sign up for free here. (Just choose the free optioa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 102 likes A- Jonathan V. Last

David French: J.D. Vance & the Great Challenge of Christian Malice'. a€~Sohrab Ahmari wrote an 
essay in First Things called a€oeAgainst David Frenchisma€Da€! first, a critique of classical 
liberalism itself, and second, a critique of my (highly imperfect!) commitment to civility and 
decency as a mode of political discoursed!. His essay[a€™ s]a€! powera€! is expressed in these 
sentences:
a€oeProgressives understand that culture war means discrediting their opponents and weakening or 
destroying their institutions. Conservatives should approach the culture war with a similar 
realism. Civility and decency are secondary values. They regulate compliance with an established 
order and orthodoxy. We should seek to use these values to enforce our order and our orthodoxy, not 
pretend
that    they could ever be neutral. To recognize that enmity is real is its own kind of moral 
dutya€!a€D These words provided a theological and intellectual rationalization for a particular 
kind of public aggressiona€!. They provided a sacred frame that allowed and even encouraged 
Christians to conform their words to the words of the most publicly cruel man to ever occupy the 
Oval Officea€!.

Leta€™ s turn back to J.D. Vancea€!. The American Conservative published a fascinating profilea€!. 
The last paragraph contained these ominous words, especially coming from a Christian politician: 
a€oel think our people hate the right people,a€D Vance saida€!. All too many of us have forgotten a 
fundamental truth. There are no a€ceright peoplea€D to hatea€!

LINK:

J.D. Vance and the Great Challenge of Christian Malice

Ia€™ m going to try an experiment. Ia€™ m hoping to start a weekly (or so) a€oeask me anythinga€D 
session with Dispatch members. Ia€™ 11 be on Zoom, and you can ask me about my newsletters, my 
podcasts, or how I cultivated my remarkable taste in movies. The catch is that it will be fora€!

Read more

a year ago A- 336 likes A- 662 comments A- David French
Leave a comment

Subscribe now


The French Press

J.D. Vance and the Great Challenge of Christian Malice

Ia€™ m going to try an experiment. Ia€™ m hoping to start a weekly (or so) a€oeask me anythinga€D 
session with Dispatch members. Ia€™ 11 be on Zoom, and you can ask me about my newsletters, my 
podcasts, or how I cultivated my remarkable taste in movies. The catch is that it will be fora€!

Read more

a year ago A- 336 likes A- 662 comments A- David French
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

