Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1.The coronavirus plague depression has been a disaster for low-paid workers in jobs requiring 
personal contact. How permanent will this be? Human smiles and social intelligence are
a powerful way people can add value. But there is an ongoing shift substituting information 
technology for human guidance In retail. Is the coronavirus plague depression going to
accelerate this trend? Or, rather, how much is the coronavirus plague depression going to 
accelerate the strand?:

Kate Bahn & Carmen Sanchez Cumming: U.S. retail sectoraC™ s recession experiences highlight 
continuing labor market travailshttps://equitablegrowth.org/u-s-retail-sectors-
recession-experiences-highlight-continuing-labor-market-travails/: a€~Public health measures 
require limiting in-person services, and as a result, many industries saw sharp declines in
employment....                  We examine... the retail industry.... In December 2020, the retail 
sector employed 410,000 fewer workers than in February of that year... sports, hobby, book, and 
music
stores                                                                shrunk more than 17 percent 
between February 2020 and December 2020. Almost 1 in 4 clothing store jobs have been lost. Garden 
supply stores, nonstore retailers, and general

merchandise... have actually grown.... Workers employed in nonessential businesses and holding jobs 
that require face-to-face interactions... more exposed. The downturn could be

accelerating dynamics that were reshaping the retail sector well before the onset of the recession. 
Continued job losses in the retail sector are hurting some of the most vulnerable

workers. Retail jobs are often the first rung in workersa€™ career ladders, making good jobs in 
retail an important piece of career advancement and influencing lifetime earnings

growth. And while many workers transition out of the retail sector when switching jobs, workers of 
color in general and Black women in particular are less likely...

2. From last June. Back then the need for much more support In order to keep the coronavirus plague 
depression from being both deep and long was obvious. It is still obvious.
Republican economists need to stand up and be part of a bipartisan telling of truth to power about 
the need for fiscal expansion to support recovery:

Erica Handloff (June 2020): More than 150 economists tell Congress: More relief needed to avoid 
a€~prolonged sufferinga€™ & a€~stunted economic

https://equitablegrowth.org/press/more-than-150-economists-tell-congress-more-relief-needed-to-avoid
-prolonged-suffering-and-stunted-economic-growth/: 'Led by Ben
Bernanke, Heather Boushey, and Cecilia Rouse, statement endorsers include two former chairs of the 
Federal Reserve, four former chairs of the Council of Economic Advisers, and two
Nobel laureates, among others: The Washington Center for Equitable Growth released a statement 
imploring Congress to immediately pass a a€oemultifaceted relief bill of a magnitude
commensurate with the challenges our economy faces .a€D. Congress and the Federal Reserve have each 
provided unprecedented levels of economic support for those affected by the

coronavirus recession, but the endorsers underscore the need for additional legislation. This 
relief will help avoid prolonged suffering, particularly in Black, Latinx, and Native
American communities, all of which are disproportionately affected by both the public health and 
economic crises. New legislation should provide, at a minimum, a€oecontinued

support for the unemployed, new assistance to states and localities, investments in programs that 
preserve the employer-employee relationship, and additional aid to stabilize aggregate
demand.a€D The signers also emphasize that a€oean adequate response must be large, commensurate 
with the nearly $16 trillion nominal output gap our economy faces over the next
decadea€Da€!

3. This is rather pleasing news. Formal employer monopsony power as measured by standard 
concentration ratios does not appear to be a big deal in shifting income from labor to
capital in America today. Of course, there remains the substantial puzzle that firms are not price 
takers even where buyers are not concentrated, but that is something that this very good
paper cannot address:

Gregor Schubert, Anna Stansbury, & Bledi Taska: Employer Concentration & Outside 
Oprionshttps^/equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/employer-concentration-and-outside-
options/: a€~We develop an instrument for employer concentration. estimate the effect of plausibly 
exogenous variation in employer concentration on wages across the large majority

of U.S. occupations and metropolitan areas. Second, we... identify. relevant job options outside a 
workera€™ s own occupation using new occupational mobility data constructed from

16 million resumes. Moving from the median to the 95th percentile of employer concentration reduces 
wages by 3%. But we also reveal substantial heterogeneity: the effect of

employer concentration is at least four times higher for low outward mobility occupations than 
those with high outward mobility. Since the majority of U.S. workers are not in highly
concentrated labor markets, the aggregate effects of concentration on wages do not appear large 
enough to have substantial explanatory power for income incomeinequality or wage
stagnation. Nonetheless, our estimates suggest that a material subset of workers experience 
meaningful negative wage effectsa€!

4.1 have never understood why anybody would ever have imagined that noncompete clauses could be a 
good thing for an economy. What is the externality that cannot otherwise be
contracted around that such are supposed to fix? Only when an employee has knowledge that would 
allow a competitor that learns it to route around intellectual property protections
would there be a case. That case would seem to hinge on the belief that our intellectual property 
protections are less than efficiently stronga€”an argument I do not see made often:

David Balan: Why noncompete clauses in employment contracts are by and large harmful to U.S. 
workers & the U.S. gconomyhttps://equitablegrowth.org/competitive-edge-why-
noncompete-clauses-in-employment-contracts-are-bv-and-large-harmful-to-u-s-workers-and-the-u-s-econo
mv/: a€~For a firm to succeed in attracting workers by not requiring a
noncompete,                                    it would likely have to make the absence of a 
noncompete a central element of its recruiting message to the exclusion of other, likely more 
effective messages. Moreover,
if   only one or a few firms did not require a noncompete, then they would tend to attract the 
workers who care the most about avoiding a noncompete. The specific claims of positive

effects... that they facilitate efficient transfer of knowledge... they facilitate efficient 
worker-funded employee training. Much information sharing will occur with or without a

noncompete simply because it is impossible to operate the business any other way. The efficiency 
benefit is only the increment of information sharing. By the same logic that the

noncompete increases the firma€™ s incentive to generate new knowledge, it decreases the workera€™ 
s incentive to do so. Noncompetes also impede the efficient flow of people

across firms.... Some training will occur with or without the noncompete simply because it is 
impossible to operate the business any other way. Standard economic theory indicates

that, in a competitive labor market, training with benefits that exceed the costs will occur 
regardless. With a noncompete, the firm will pay the cost and receive the benefit, but without a
noncompete, the worker will pay the cost (through formal schooling and/or lower wages early in a 
career) and receive the benefit. The training will occur regardless...

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1.    Interesting and very useful numbers about the likely effects of the Biden economic support 
plan. If the economy recovers more rapidly than expected, well and good, the federal
reserve cana€™ t handle any excess aggregate demand problems. But if the economy does not recover 
more rapidly than expected, this looks to be a very welcome thing for the

American economy over the next several years:

Wendy Edelberg & Louise Sheiner: The Macroeconomic Implications of Bidena€™ s $1.9 Trillion Fiscal 
Packagehttps://w w w.brookings .edu/blog/up-front/2021/01/28/the-
macroeconomic-implications-of-bidens-1 -9-trillion-fiscal-package/?preview id= 1391404: a€~We 
estimate that the package would boost economic activity, as measured by the level of
real             gross domestic product (GDP), by about 4 percent at the end of 2021 and 2 percent 
at the end of 2022, relative to a projection that assumes no additional fiscal support. We project
that if the Biden package were enacted, GDP would reach the Congressional Budget Officea€™ s (CBO) 
pre-pandemic GDP projection after the third quarter of 2021, exceeding it by 1
percent in the fourth quarter. In the middle of 2022, GDP would show a temporary and shallow 
decline and then grow at an annual rate of about 1.5 percent, coming close to the path
projected just before the pandemica€!

2. Every two years since 2000, financiers have expected interest rates to significantly normalize 
over the next two years. They are still expecting this. They have always been wrong.
And yet they do not seem to learn, or at least do not seem to learn fast enough. It would seem to 
require some regime shift in order to make such forecasts of a resumption to normalcy
in interest rates in the near term to be rational. But I do not see now, anymore than I saw 
2,4,6,8, or 10 years ago, what this resume shift is supposed to be colder

Kieran Healy: a€™ On the one hand, this is pretty strong evidence that something is wrong with your 
theory. On the other hand, at least youa€™re in a position to collect pretty
strong evidence that something is wrong with your theory, which is more than I can say for a lot of 
theories .a€!

3. From 1870 to 1914, Britain was the dominant economy and the dominant global power. Then from 
1914 to 1945, as the US became the dominant economy and the dominant global
power, it did not enthusiastically take up the burden of hegemony. Enormous distress and discontent 
was the result. After 1945, as the US fit itself for hegemony, the world worked
much much more smoothly than it had during the age of transition. Now we are entering a new age of 
transition. How well will things play out this time?:

Tom Orlik & Bjorn Van Roye: An EconomistaC™ s Guide to the World in 
2050https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/#2020-global-economic-forecast-2050/: a€~China has emerged
as a major global power, its single-party rule and state-dominated economy the cause of alarm in 
foreign capitalsa€”and pride in Beijing. By 2035, Bloomberg Economics forecasts,
China will have overtaken the U.S. to become the worlda€™ s biggest economy and perhaps also its 
most powerful political actor. A remarkable period of stability, stretching from

the end of World War II through to the early 21st century, is coming to an end. The center of 
economic gravity is shifting from West to East, from advanced economies to emerging
markets, from free markets to state controls and from established democracies to authoritarian and 
populist rulers. The transition is already upending global politics, economics and
markets. This is just the beginninga€!. The world is in the midst of a messy transition as the 
balance of economic and political power shifts from West to East, from free markets to the
state and from democracies to authoritarianism and populism. For businesses, investors and policy 
makers, history isna€™ t over. Ita€™ s just getting starteda€!

4. The Financial Timesa€™ s Ed Luce warns us the era of Trump, or rather of the Trumps, is not 
over. And he warns us that the next generation looks to be as toxic for America as the
last one:

Ed Luce: A a€~First Familya€™ That Warped 
Amerzcahttps://www.ft.com/content/68abcad5-485f-489b-a9ee-851ad787958b: a€~As Donald Trump limbered 
up to give his infamous
sneech to last weeka€™ s a€ceSave America marcha^n Donald Jr shot a video for the apes... a festive 
first familv. swavinp to Laura Branipana€™ s a€oeGloriaa€n shortlv before


Capitol Hill was breached. The video was for a€oeall you awesome patriots who are sick of the 
bullshita€D, said Don Jr. It showed Mr Trump and his self-styled first daughter
transfixed by images of the waiting crowd. It ended with Ms Guilfoyle calling on ralliers to a€oedo 
the right thing a€” fight !a€D... This desecration was at the incitement of the US
president. It was also egged on by his family.  Had the rally happened on any previous day of the 
Trump presidency, Mike Pence, the vice-president, would surely also have spoken.

Because of his role of overseeing the electoral certification, Mr Pence had turned into an enemy 
overnight. Some of the trespassers chanted a€oehang Pencea€D as they marauded the
Capitol building. A hangmana€™ s scaffolding was erected outside. There is no one quite so 
vulnerable as an apostate. The only people that Mr Trump and his base can trust are his
family.... His children are all keen to carry the torch. The Trumps will be down but they are by no 
means out.

5. 1 have three New York Times pieces by my elbow: one says Joe Biden owns a Rolex, a secon that he 
owns a Peleton, a third that America wants a dysfunctional government rather
than a president who issues executive orders. I dona€™ t know who the New York Times is working 
for, but it is not readers who wish to become informed. We need, badly, new
business models for journalism. Now the tech venture capitalists are wondering if there is anything 
they can do in the space:

Andreessen Horowitz: Doubling Down on the Futurehttps://a 16z.com/2021/01 
/25/doubling-down-marketing-update-new-media/: a€~People want to learn about the future. If Software
really lost to isEating the World, there needs to be a place that is dedicated to explaining and 
tracking it. So we are doing just that: we are building a new and separate media property
about the future that makes sense of technology, innovation, and where things are going a€” and 
now, wea€™re expanding and opening up our platform to do this on a much bigger
scale. We want to be the go-to place for understanding and building the future, for anyone who is 
building, making, or curious about techa€!

6. The health of an economy is different from the health of its manufacturing sector. The health of 
manufacturing as a productive enterprise is different from The number of workers
employed in manufacturing. And the subunits and regional units of manufacturing are very very 
different things as well. Do not presume that any of these are identical or even highly
correlated with any of the others:

Scott Lincicome: Busting the a€~Deindustrializationa€™ 
Afyr7zhttps://capitolism.thedispatch.com/p/busting-the-deindustrialization-myth: a€~Since trade 
often gets the blame for
manufacturing job losses, ita€™ s good to add Robert Lawrencea€™ s 2020 examination of 60 developed 
and developing countries between 1995 and 2011, which found that nations
with manufacturing trade surpluses actually experienced slightly larger declines in manufacturing 
employment than those with manufacturing trade deficits. He also found that
manufacturing job losses were as large in countries with a€ceimprovinga€D manufacturing trade 
balances over this period as those with a€oeworseninga€n ones. Why? Because
manufacturing job loss is less a story of a€oedeindustrializationa€n and more one of economic 
development. In general, all countries generally follow the same a€ceinverted-Ua€D
pattern of development, first adding and then losing manufacturing jobs as they get richer (and 
gaining services jobs over the same timeframe)a€!

7. One of the very, very best takes on the GameStop affair that I have seen: a short 
squeezea€’’positive-feedback tradinbg leading to financial destabilizationa€’’assisted by weaponized
derivativesa€’’technical bulls using their counterparties^™ hedging strategies to leverage-up their 
positions. This is a normal (to the extent that finance is ever normal) pump-and-
dump.       But this time the pump-and-dump is not the work of a small cabal of insiders, but 
rather an emergent Internet crowd. One of what I thought the things that I thought I had known
about finance has turned out not to be true. I thought a bubble needed sufficient uncertainty about 
the underlying to make it not implausible to fear that it might not be a bubble. This
time,  it is not even that there is a ridiculous story about how it is not a bubble. This time, 
there is no claim at all that this price move is not a bubble:

Daniel Davies: The GameStop affair is like tulip mania on 
5teroiJ5,https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2021/jan/29/gamestop-tulip-mania-16th-century-dut
ch-bubble-internet:
a€~New Yorka€™ s finest hedge funds bet against GameStopa€™  The Reddit crowd appears to have 
decided that this was unfair and that they should fight back on behalf of

gamers. using derivatives and brokerage credit in surprisingly sophisticated waysa€!. To 
everyonea€™ s surprise, the crowd wona€!. Stock exchanges have always frowned on this

sort of concerted action, and on the use of leverage to manipulate the market. The sheer volume of 
orders had also grown well beyond the capacity of the small, fee-free brokerages
favoured by the WallStreetBets crowd. Credit lines were pulled, accounts were frozen and the retail 
crowd were forced to sell; yesterday the price gave back a large proportion of its
gains. To people who know a lot about stock exchange regulation and securities settlement, this 
outcome was quite inevitablea€”ita€™ s part of the reason why things like this
dona€™t happen every day. To a lot of American Redditors, though, it was a surprising introduction. 
taking place in circumstances almost perfectly designed to convince them that

the system is rigged for the benefit of big money. Corners, bear raids and squeezes, in the 
industry jargon, have been around for as long as stock markets  The GameStop affair

exhibits some surprising new features... largely self-organisinga€!.. For most of stock market 
history, orchestrating a pool of people to manipulate markets has been something only the
most skilful could achieve. Some of the finest buildings in New York were erected on the proceeds 
of this rare talent. The idea that such a pool could coalesce so quickly and without

any obvious sign of a single controlling mind is brand new and ought to worry us a bita€!

8. Balancing one of the best, perhaps the single worst take on the GameStop affair. I sometimes 
hear earnest people claim that, back in the day, long long ago, Tom Friedman was
actually a pretty good reporter on the Middle East beat. But here, we have: Long sellers are 
supposed to benefit somehow from watching the value of their GameStop stock go from $60
to  $4? Short-sellers as magical hyenas who make a wildebeest carcass appear 50% bigger? The whole 
thing somehow the natural "circle of lifea€D, rather than human sociological-
economic dysfunction? I look at this, and all I can think is: "Why?!?!":

Tom Friedman&7waw& Box

SQUAWK
BOX

Squawk Box @SquawkCNBC

REDDIT REVOLUTION


GAMESTOP      328.00

[+69.42%]


AMC ENTERTAIN
NOKIA
BLACKBERRY

BED BATH & BEYOND

12.27

5.04

16.80

37.71

[+42.18%]

SQUAWK  THE FUTURE OF CAPITALISM


SQUAWK
BOX

J THE FUTURE OF CAPITALISM

i REDDIT REBELLION VS WALL ST.

12:44 PM r™ Jan 29,2021

742Likes222Retweets

: 'The whole thing is like I am watching a giant National Geographic nature film.... These people 
called "lions", they're long sellers. They noticed the wildebeast... hobbling. GME

stock, and they ate it... $63... down to $4.... Then along came hyenas. They're called "short 
sellers".... They fed off the carcass. They're magical hyenas. They actually made the carcass

grow 50% larger than it actually was. Then along came... "short-squeezers".... They were vultures 
who ate the hyenas. The really smart vultures ate and flew away when the stock was

$500. The dumb ones are going to stick around and keep eating, and in the end the lions will come 
along and eat them and the stock will eventually go back to $4 or $5. It's the circle of
life. Hakuna matata...

