Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth

1) We are highlighting this from a year and a half ago by our Fearless Leader Michelle Holder:

Michelle Holder: The d€ce Double Gapd€\3& the Bottom Line: African American Womena€™ s Wage Gap & 
Corporate Profits’. a€~Though African
American women have historically had the highest labor force participation rate among major female 
demographic groups in the US, they face both the
gender wage gap and the racial wage gapa€”a reinforcing confluence that I term the a€cedouble 
gap.a€D Finnoff and Jayadev (2006), as well as Seguino
and Braunstein (2017), have shown that both the share of women in the labor force and the crowding 
of women into low-wage jobs are negatively
correlated with the labor income sharea€!

LINK: chttps ://rooseveltinstitute ■org/wp-content/uploads/2O2O/O7/RLD0MMeGapReport_2O2OO3 ,pdf>

2) Most people I talk to have no idea how weak U.S. income-support programs are relative to those 
of peer yardstick countries:

Liz Hippie & Alix Gould-Werth: Weak Income Support Infrastructure Harms U.S. Workers & Their 
Families & Constrains Economic Growth'. a€~People
in the United States access income support from a wide range of programsa€! [yet] manya€! who need 
this support are blocked from accessing it. During
the COVID-19 crisis, the existing income support infrastructure has been wholly insufficienta€!. 
Whilea€! pandemic-specific income supportsa€! blunted
some of the worst paina€! they also failed to deliver for alla€! due to sustained underinvestment 
in these key income support programs over the past half-
century a€!

LINK: chttps://equitablegrowth.org/wp-content/uploads/2021/08/082321-income-support-ib .pdf>

3) This is brilliant! This is great! This is amazing! I am very proud of everyone on the team who 
has put this together:

Equitable Growth: A Visual Economy. a€~Looking for visuals on a particular topic related to 
economic inequality and equitable growth? The Washington
Center for Equitable Growtha€™ s Visual Economy page offers a way to sort through thousands of 
figures produced since the beginning of 2019. The six
a€oeFeatured Visualizationsa€O below showcase some of our most recent work and older classics. 
Filter and download our visuals using 31 different
economics topics as well as by our signature a€oeJobs Daya€D and a€oeJOLTS Daya€D featuresa€!

LINK: chttps://equitablegrowth.org/a-visual-economy/>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) This is a conference that I had been looking forward to for months. And it has proven to exceed 
my expectations. Go watch it!:

NBER: Economics of Mobility Meeting, Fall 2021’. a€~Old Boysa€™ Clubs and Upward Mobility Among the 
Educational Elite [by] Valerie Michelman
[et al.]a€! Who Benefits from Meritocracy? [by] Santiago PA©rez [and] Diana Moreiraa€!. Keynote 
[by] Hilary W. Hoynesa€!. Train to Opportunity: the
Effect of Infrastructure on Intergenerational Mobility [by] Myra Mohnen [et al.]a€! Air Pollution 
and Economic Opportunity in the United States [by]
Jonathan M. Colmer [et al.]a€! The Effect of Income During Infancy, Evidence from a Discontinuity 
in Tax Benefits [by] Andrew C. Barr [et al.]a€! The
Long-run Effects of the 1930s HOLC a€oeRedlininga€n Maps on Children [by] Daniel Aaronson [et 
al.]a€!

LINK: chttps://www.nber.org/conferences/economics-mobility-meeting-fall-2021>

2) The very sharp Ryan Avent hammering home the point that the failure of equitable growth to 
happen in the 2010s was not due to any structural or supply-side failures of human
and other resources to exist or be mobilized, but just to prolonged, sustained weakness in 
aggregate demand:

Ryan Avent: Revenge of the Robots’. a€~If the Fed doesna€™ t overreact to inflation and other 
events dona€™ t blow up the recovery, then this labor
market has some room to run. Workers at the bottom of the distribution are getting better money, 
which should support continued demand growth, which
should keep the economy humming, which should prevent the emergence of lots of new slacka€”for 
nowa€!. In many industries we already have in place
business models that use less labor more productively, but which have not yet become dominant 
because broader conditions havena€™ t been sufficiently
encouraginga€!. The technological capacity to automate the work of large swathes of the labor force 
has been building over time but hasna€™ t materially
affected  labor markets yet because therea€™ s been no incentive to make use of ita€!. 
Alternatively, industry shake-ups and the occasional adoption of
labor-saving methods and technologies begin to undercut the earning power that workers enjoy, and 
after a glorious few years wage growth decelerates. As
it   does, and the share of purchasing power held by those with a high propensity to spend 
declines, the old macroeconomic malaise sets in againa€!. The
current labor-market boom demonstrates that weak demand was the thing that made the 2010s so 
crummya€!

LINK: <https://rvanavent.substack.eom/p/revenge-of-the-robots>

3) Lots of us have been seeing a silver lining in our belief that Chinaa€™ s rapid growth will soon 
lead it to become a major source of demand for products made by U.S. workers.
Here, however, is more evidence that that hope may be vaina€”that China is already running into the 
middle-income growth trap:

The Economist: A Triple Shock Slows Chinaa€™ s Growth’. a€~From the sublime to the subpar: A triple 
shock slows Chinaa€™ s growth: Power cuts, the
pandemic and a property slowdown: all have taken a tolla€!

LINK: <https://www.economist.com/finance-and-economics/a-triple-shock-slows-chinas-growth/218Q5725>

4) Now from three decades old, on how our private-property system not only does not fit todaya€™ s 
society well, but did not fit the society of the 1730s terribly well either. But it
does fit todaya€™ s society uch less well:

Bruce Sterling (1992): a€™ Free as Air, Free As Water, Free As Knowledgea€™: a€~The American 
library system was invented in a different cultural
climate. This is how it happened. Youa€™re Benjamin Franklin, a printer and your average universal 
genius, and ita€™ s the Year of Our Lord 1731. You
have this freewheeling debating club called the Junto, and you decide youa€™ re going to pool your 
books and charge everybody a very small fee to join in
and read them. Therea€™ s about fifty of you. Youa€™re not big people, in the Junto. Youa€™re not 
aristocrats or well-born people or even
philanthropists. Youa€™re mostly apprentices and young people who work with their hands. If you 
were rich, you wouldna€™ t be so anxious to pool
your  information in the first place. So you put all your leatherbound books into the old 
Philadelphia clubhouse, and you charge people forty shillings to join
and ten shillings dues per annuma€!. Now forget 1731. Ita€™ s 1991. Forget the leatherbound books. 
You start swopping floppy disks and using a bulletin
board system. Public spirited? A benefit to society? Democratic institution, knowledge is power, 
power to the people? Maybea€! or maybe youa€™re an
idealistic nut, Mr. Franklin. Not only that, but youa€™re menacing our commercial interests. What 
about our trade secrets, Mr Franklin? Our trademarks,
copyrights, and patents. Our intellectual property rights. Our look-and-feel. Our patented 
algorithms. Our national security clearances . Our export licenses.
Our  FBI surveillance policy. Dona€™t copy that floppy, Mr. Franklin! And youa€™re telling me you 
want us to pay taxes to support your suspicious
activities? Hey, if therea€™ s a real need here, the market will meet it, Mr Franklin. I really 
think this a€oelibrarya€n idea of yours is something better left
to   the private sector, Mr Franklin. No author could possibly want his books read for free, sir. 
Are you trying to starve the creative artist? Leta€™ s get real,

1\/T«- U»*nMlrliM      TM n  A A  x-xlz-1 xx-x O A A/AM ZXX r in  AZTxxx o z-xz-xx-x-x l-xzx 
xxxxz4/-xx- 4-lxz-x rv-11 n     I/AM      HAfzAt^vinf


±v±± ±      iuu jviivjw wiiaiax-. □ ivcii, iv±i x iaiuvini; ivAMiivj io ivai.                 
OVVIII LU uu uiiuui iiiv iiiioappiviiviioiMii mat                  waiiLd UV XXW aiiu mat

enabling people to learn and follow their own interests will benefit society as a whole. Well, we 
no longer believe in society as a whole. We believe in the
economy as a wholea€!

LINK: <http://bactra.org/Sterling/Freea5theAirFreed'5WaterFreeas Knowledge .html>

5) 5) An old hobby-horse of mine. We all had noticed that Jackie Calmes as an economic reporter at 
the Wall Street Journal had been much much better than Jackie Calmes later on
as an economics reporter at the New York Times. We wondered what it happened. Now she tells us:

Dan Froomkin: Jackie Calmes Proposes a Baby Step for Political Reporters'. a€~Why do reporters fail 
to refute obvious lies? Why do they default to false
equivalence? [Jackie] Calmesa€!. a€oePart of is the fault of beat reporting,a€D Calmes said. a€oel 
know the pressures youa€™re under to maintain

sources .a€D And then some reporters are more interested in politics as a game and in appraising 
political strategya€!. Gender seems to play a rolea€L And
of course therea€™ s pressure from editors and the overall newsroom culturea€!. a€oel felt more 
pressure of the bothsidesism sort coming from the New
York Times than I did from the Wall Street Journal,a€D she said, a€oeand I think thata€™ s because 
the New York Times is sensitive to the fact that it is
known to be a liberal paper, so it bends over backwards to give both sides their due.a€D She 
described a€oetimeworna€n traditions at the Times, such as:
a€oelf youa€™re saying Republicans do something wrong you have to indicate that Democrats bear some 
blame too.a€Da€! Executive editor Dean

Baquet a€oeshould know better.a€D The New York Times, she said, a€oeneeds to loosen upa€!

LINK: 
<https://presswatchers.org/2021/10/jackie-calmes-proposes-a-baby-step-for-political-reporters/>

6) Where the rubber meets the road with respect to "supply chain disruptionsa€D, and the consequent 
increasing likelihood that the recovery from the coronavirus plague
depression will be cut short by a Federal reserve fearing that inflation is getting incorporated 
into expectations of future price increases. I believe that Flexporta€™ s Ryan Petersen
is                                                                                 100% right here: 
We could overwhelm at least the Long-Beach/Los Angeles port bottleneck very, very quickly, with an 
effective and proactive state or national government:

Ryan Petersen: a€™ Yesterday I rented a boat and took the leader of one of Flexporta€™ s partners 
in Long Beach on a 3 hour of the port complexa€!. First off, the boat captain
said we were the first company to ever rent his boat to tour the port to see how everything was 
working up closea€!. The ports of LA/Long Beach are at a standstill. In a full 3 hour
loop through the port complex, passing every single terminal, we saw less than a dozen containers 
get unloadeda€L There are hundreds of cranes. I counted only ~7 that were even
operating and those that were seemed to be going pretty slowa€!. The bottleneck is yard space at 
the container terminals. The terminals are simply overflowing with containers,
which means they no longer have space to take in new containers either from ships or land. Ita€™ s 
a true traffic jama€!. Right now if you have a chassis with no empty container
on  it, you can go pick up containersa€!. However, if you have an empty container on that chassis, 
theya€™re not allowing you to return it except on highly restricted basis. If you
cana€™ t get the empty off the chassis, you dona€™ t have a chassis to go pick up the next 
container. And if nobody goes to pick up the next container, the port remains
jammeda€!.  Also containers are not fungible between carriersa€!. With the chassis all tied up 
storing empties that cana€™ t be returned to the port, there are no chassis available to
pick                                                                                 up containers 
at the porta€!. And with all the containers piling up in the terminal yard, the longshoremen cana€™ 
t unload the ships. And so the queue grows longer, with now
over 70 ships containing 500,000 containersa€! a negative feedback loop that is rapidly cycling out 
of controla€L Alright how do we fix this, you ask? Simple. And we can do it
fasta€!. When youa€™ re designing an operation you must choose your bottleneck. If the bottleneck 
appears somewhere that you didna€™ t choose it, you arena€™ t running an
operation. Ita€™ s running youa€!. You should always choose the most capital intensive part of the 
line to be your bottleneck. In a port thata€™ s the ship to shore cranes. The
cranes should never be unable to run because theya€™re waiting for another part of the operation to 
catch up. The bottleneck right now is not the cranes. Ita€™ s yard space at the
container terminals. And ita€™ s empty chassis to come clear those containers out. In operations 
when a bottleneck appears somewhere that you didna€™ t design for it to appear,
you must OVERWHELM THE BOTTLENECK !a€!

LINK:

Ryan Petersen @typesfast

Yesterday I rented a boat and took the leader of one of Flexport's partners in Long Beach on a 3 
hour of the port complex. Here's a thread about what I learned.
1:39 PM r™ Oct 22,2021

8,15 !Likes2,639Retweets

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

