Subscribe now

FIRST: Two MOAR Comments on Adam Toozea€™s Review of My a€oeSlouching Towards Utopia"

In which I make two more comments on Adam Toozea€™ s review of my Slouching <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>:

Adam Tooze: Fueling Americaa€™ s Global Dream: a€~The title itself is telling. Slouching towards 
utopia? If utopia were on the cards, would slouching
really be our problem? The big worry right now is the fear that the 20th century has set us 
hurtling towards collective disaster. Believers in technology
insist that such pessimism is overdone. But nowadays they do at least feel the need to make the 
case, to demonstrate that to avoid disaster DeLongaC™ s
20th-century formulaa€”labs, corporations, markets and wise governments’’will suffice. Serenely 
untroubled by such concerns, Slouching Towards
Utopia   reads less like a history than a richly decked out time capsule, a nostalgic throwback to 
the 20th century as we imagined it before the great anxiety
began.

1/ You might ask W.B. Yeats the same thing: a€oelf the Second Coming were to be at hand, would 
slouching really be our problem?a€D
Here is YeatsaC™ s poem, The Second Coming 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems/43290/the-second-coming>:

Turning and turning in the widening gyre
The falcon cannot hear the falconer;
Things fall apart; the centre cannot hold;
Mere anarchy is loosed upon the world.

The blood-dimmed tide is loosed, and everywhere
The ceremony of innocence is drowned;

The best lack all conviction, while the worst
Are full of passionate intensity.

Surely some revelation is at hand;
Surely the Second Coming is at hand.

The Second Coming! Hardly are those words out
When a vast image out of Spiritus Mundi

Troubles my sight: somewhere in sands of the desert
A shape with lion body and the head of a man,

A gaze blank and pitiless as the sun,

Is moving its slow thighs, while all about it
Reel shadows of the indignant desert birds.

The darkness drops again; but now I know
That twenty centuries of stony sleep

Were vexed to nightmare by a rocking cradle,

And what rough beast, its hour come round at last,
Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?

Yes: a€ceslouchinga€D is indeed our problem, in that we have enormous technological powers to 
create wealtha€’’manipulation of nature and productive organization of
humansa€”that could be used for human betterment and flourishing. Instead, we have a world in which 
killer robots stalk the skies above Syria and Ukraine, some of our most
intelligent choose careers in which they work as hard as they can to terrify old people to glue 
their eyeballs to screens so they can be sold ads for fake diabetes cures, and the
monsoon this year is 200 miles south of where it ought and needs to be.

We have figured out how to bake a sufficiently large economic pie so that, potentially, everybody 
could have enough. But the problems of slicing and tasting the piea€”surely
second-order problems after baking?a€”continue to flummox us more-or-less completely. We are inept 
at equitably distributing our wealth, and at using our wealth to advance the
safety, security, happiness, and in some cases even the health of the human race.

Such hideous waste could perhaps have been expected back in 1914-1918, when the Age of Modern 
Economic Growth was less than two generations ago, and society was still
marked by the long age in which the motor of history had been the need, since there could not be 
enough, for an A©lite to elbow competitors out of its way and run a force-and-
fraud game on humanity. Back then we could understand how, in Winston Churchill a€™ s words:

The Great Wara€! differeda€! in the immense power of the combatantsa€! their fearful agencies of 
destruction^! the utter ruthlessness with which it was
fought. All the horrors of all the ages were brought together, and not only armies but whole 
populations were thrust into the midst of thema€!. Every
outragea€! was repaid by reprisals often on a greater scale and of longer durationa€!. Every effort 
was made to starve whole nations into submission
without   regard to age or sex. Cities and monuments were smashed by artillery. Bombs from the air 
were cast down indiscriminately. Poison gas in many
forms stifled or seared the soldiers. Liquid fire was projected upon their bodies. Men fell from 
the air in flames, or were smothered, often slowly, in the dark
recesses of the seaa€!. Torture and Cannibalism were the only two expedients that the civilized, 
scientific, Christian States had been able to deny
themselves:   and these were of doubtful utility a€!

But now? We have had a hundred yearsa€”four generationsa€”to grow up. And yet we have not.

2/ Indeed, the point of the book is that DeLonga€™ s 20th-century formulaa€”labs, corporations, 
markets and wise governmentaC’’suffices only for the baking of a sufficiently
large economic pie, not for the slicing and tasting of it.

For governments are not wise.

And while the market may bear some resemblance to the Storm God of the Semites, we remain too 
stiff-necked a people to accept, in place of a real utopia, the red-lentil stews that
if offers us.


