Clinton here is trying to do ten thingsa€”and he is a master politician:

1     . If the American people can be divided by race, wea€’’Democrats and Americaa€”lose


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Nikhil Venkatesh: Philosopher-in-Training\ a€~Utilitarianism. Ia€™m also interested in 
collective action, the long-term future of humanity, in Marxism, race and feminism, and in the 
nature of politics, normativity and moralitya€! chttps://nikhilvenkateshphilosophy.com/>

• N.S. Lyons: The Triumph & Terror of Wang Huning 
chttps://palladiummag.com/2021/10/11/the-triumph-and-terror-of-wang-huning/>

•  Danny Blanchflower: a€™I dona€™ t buy [the] tight labor market argument at all. EPOP=58.7 v 61.1 
in Feb20a€! when every other advanced country has seen EPOP risea€!. Not plausiblea€!


Professor Danny Blanchflower economist & fisherman @D Blanchflower

@besttrousers I dont buy tight labor market argument at all. EPOP=58.7 v 61.1 in Feb20 62.9 Jan08 & 
64.6 in Jan 2000 when every other advanced country has seen EPOP rise. So 6pp drop in EPOP means 
these folks are gone for ever from Imkt & wouldnt return if US moved to full empt? Not plausible
1:25 PM r™ Nov 2,2021

• Matthew Yglesias: a€ceStop & Friskd€dWas Really Bad'. a€~Eric Adams shouldna€™ t flirt with 
bringing it backa€!


Slow Boring

"Stop and frisk11 was really bad

New York City mayor-elect Eric Adams recently wrote an op-ed flirting with the idea of bringing 
back the a€oestop and friska€D preventative policing policy. This is a sign of how far the politics 
of crime have shifted under the pressure of rising shootings, and in general, I think Democrats 
could learn a lot from Adamsa€™ success. But this particular gambit is a bridge too far a€” 
anti-police
activists say plenty thata€™ s wrong, but they are fundamentally correct about stop and friska€!

Read more

a year ago A- 85 likes A- 236 comments A- Matthew Yglesias

•  Aaron Rupar: Russiaa€™ s Descent into Authoritarianism & What We Can Learn From If. a€~a€oeThe 
opposition has collapseda€D: a Q&A with Sarah Hurst, author of The Russia Reporta€!


Public Notice

Russia's descent into authoritarianism and what we can learn from it

Enjoy this free edition of Public Notice. If youa€™ d like to get this newsletter directly in your 
inbox, please subscribe. Even free subscriptions are much appreciated. And if youa€™ d like to take 
part in a subscriber-only Q&A on Thursday or just want to a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 6 likes A- Aaron Rupar

• Skanda Amarnath: d€™ I think the Fed fears the loss of a ZLB psychological trick if they admit 
that QE since April 2020 has been doing nothing other than forward guidance about rate hikes. 
Swapping risk-free assets means nothinga€!

Victoria Guida @vtg2

Notably, Powell has mentioned that a€ceevery dollar of asset purchases does increase accommodation 
,a€D which seems like an attempt to say the Fed is not pumping the brakes on the economy, ita€™ s 
just no longer flooring it.
4:18 PM a'™ Nov 30,2021


Paragraphs:

Michael Pettis: Will Chinaa€™ s Common Prosperity Upgrade Dual Circulation?'. a€~Rather than raise 
wages, in other words, Beijing will pass on what it deems to be the excess profits of businesses 
and the wealthy to middle- and working-class Chinese households in the form of fiscal transfers and 
donations from businesses and the wealthy. In this way, the Chinese government can keep
domestic wages competitively low, while at the same time raising overall household income levels by 
effectively delivering to workers and the middle classes a higher share of business profits. In 
principle, this approach could help strengthen domestic consumption without undermining export 
competitiveness, but there are at least three reasons to be cautiousa€!

LINK: <https://carnegieendowment.org/chinafinancialmarkets/85571>

Mara P. Squicciarini & Nico VoigtlAnnder: Human Capital & Industrialization: Evidence from the Age 
of Enlightenment'. a€™ While human capital is a strong predictor of economic development today, its 
importance for the Industrial Revolution has typically been assessed as minor. To resolve this 
puzzling contrast, we differentiate average human capital (literacy) from upper-tail
knowledge. As a proxy for the historical presence of knowledge elites, we use city-level 
subscriptions to the famous EncyclopA©die in mida€“18th century France. We show that subscriber 
density is a strong predictor of city growth after the onset of French industrialization. 
Alternative measures of development such as soldier height, disposable income, and industrial 
activity confirm this
pattern. Initial literacy levels, on the other hand, are associated with development in the 
cross-section, but they do not predict growth. Finally, by joining data on British patents with a 
large French firm survey from the 1840s, we shed light on the mechanism: upper-tail knowledge 
raised productivity in innovative industrial technologya€!

LINK: <https://academic .oup .com/q je/article-abstract/130/4/1825/1914932?redirectedFrom=fulltext>

Simon J A ng er, Christopher Roth, Nina Roussille, & Benjamin Schoefer: Worker Beliefs About Rents 
& Outside Options: a€~We measure workersa€™ beliefs about rents and outside options in a 
representative sample of German workers, and compare these beliefs with proxies for actual outside 
options. While subjective worker rents are largea€”14% of salary on averagea€”they do not
stem from workersa€™ subjective wage premia at their current firm, but are entirely derived from 
non-wage amenities. When comparing workersa€™ subjective outside options against objective measures 
of pay premia from matched employer-employee data, we find that many workers mistakenly believe 
their current wage is representative of the external labor marketa€’’objectively low-paid
(high-paid) workers are overpessimistic (overoptimistic) about their outside options. If workers 
had correct beliefs about outside options, 13% of jobs would not be viable at current wages, 
concentrated in the low-wage segment of the labor market. Finally, we show that in an equilibrium 
model, misinformation about outside options gives employers monopsony powera€!

LINK: <https://eml.berkelev.edu/~schoefer/schoefer_files/JRRS Beliefs_Rents_Outside_Options 
July2021.pdf>

Paul Krugman: What Europe Can Teach Us About Jobs: a€~An under-discussed aspect of the current 
economic scene: Europea€™ s comparative success in getting workers idled by the pandemic back into 
the labor forcea€L [While] the United States is experiencing what many call the Great Resignation^! 
European nations have been much more successful than we have at getting people
back to work. In France, in particular, employment and labor force participation are now well above 
prepandemic levels. What explains this difference?a€! While the United Statesa€! mainlya€! helped 
displaced workers through enhanced unemployment benefits. Europea€! mainly relied on job retention 
schemesa€!. Anecdotally, one factor behind Americansa€™ unwillingness to return to
their old jobs is that enforced idleness during the pandemic gave many people a chance to 
reconsider their life choicesa€!. Europe is by no means a workera€™ s paradise. But some jobs that 
are grueling and poorly paid here are less awful on the other side of the Atlantica€!. U.S. elite 
opinion, especially but not only on the right, has long assumed that making jobs better would 
backfire, because
higher labor costs would reduce employment. But European experience says otherwisea€!. And nowa€! 
pro-worker policies also seem to be helping European economies achieve faster employment recovery 
than wea€™re managing herea€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes .com/2021/11/29/opinion/united-states-europe- jobs .html>

Claire Berlinski: The New Caesarism: a Lexicon, Part III: a€~How to cook a New Ceasara€!. 14 rules 
for destroying a liberal democracya€!. Rule number one: Rewrite history. The early warning sign of 
Caesar ascendent is the deliberate fostering of nostalgia for an authoritarian past. If the lessons 
of history suggest this path leads to disaster, then history, not the path, must be changed. The
revisionist storyline is in essence always the same. The people have been robbed of their greatness 
by a series of catastrophes and betrayals. An authoritarian or tyrannical past is bathed in 
nostalgia. The acknowledgement of responsibility for historic crimes is detested as self-hatred, or 
a lack of patriotism that is dangerous to the health of the politya€!. Rule number two: Exploit 
ethnic, racial,
religious, and class divisions. Rule number three: Magnify fear of foreigners and outsidersa€!. 
Rule number four: Enter Caesara€”the voice of the a€oereal peoplea€D in their struggle against a 
nebulous class of a€ceelites.a€Da€! Rule number five: Conflate entertainment and politics. Rule 
number six: Create chaos, confusion, and a sense of permanent emergency. Rule number seven: Destroy
confidence in the idea of objective trutha€!. Rule number eight: Humiliate or destroy people who 
are better fit to be leadersa€!. Rule number nine: Gain complete control of the media and turn it 
into a non-stop propaganda machinea€!. Rule number ten: Spread it around! Reward loyalists with 
juicy government contracts, tax loopholes, and tenders. Investors will always prefer profits to 
political
fights. Rule number eleven: Punish the unsubmissive with punitive taxes and spurious lawsuits. Rule 
number twelve: Stack the courts. Rule number thirteen: Take control of the central bank and make 
foreign banks absorb the losses for your bad policy decisionsa€!. Rule number fourteen: Jigger the 
constitution so that opponents have no hope of coming to power through democratic meansa€!.
And voilA : Youa€™re done. Elections still happen, but they are denuded of everything that makes 
elections meaningful. Hail Caesar!a€!

LINK:

THE
COSMOP
GLOBALI


Claire Berlinski: The New Caesarism: a Lexicon, Part III: a€~How to cook a New Ceasara€!. 14 rules 
for destroying a liberal democracya€!. Rule number one: Rewrite history. The early warning sign of 
Caesar ascendent is the deliberate fostering of nostalgia for an authoritarian past. If the lessons 
of history suggest this path leads to disaster, then history, not the path, must be changed. The
revisionist storyline is in essence always the same. The people have been robbed of their greatness 
by a series of catastrophes and betrayals. An authoritarian or tyrannical past is bathed in 
nostalgia. The acknowledgement of responsibility for historic crimes is detested as self-hatred, or 
a lack of patriotism that is dangerous to the health of the politya€!. Rule number two: Exploit 
ethnic, racial,
religious, and class divisions. Rule number three: Magnify fear of foreigners and outsidersa€!. 
Rule number four: Enter Caesara€”the voice of the a€oereal peoplea€D in their struggle against a 
nebulous class of a€ceelites.a€Da€! Rule number five: Conflate entertainment and politics. Rule 
number six: Create chaos, confusion, and a sense of permanent emergency. Rule number seven: Destroy
confidence in the idea of objective trutha€!. Rule number eight: Humiliate or destroy people who 
are better fit to be leadersa€!. Rule number nine: Gain complete control of the media and turn it 
into a non-stop propaganda machinea€!. Rule number ten: Spread it around! Reward loyalists with 
juicy government contracts, tax loopholes, and tenders. Investors will always prefer profits to 
political
fights. Rule number eleven: Punish the unsubmissive with punitive taxes and spurious lawsuits. Rule 
number twelve: Stack the courts. Rule number thirteen: Take control of the central bank and make 
foreign banks absorb the losses for your bad policy decisionsa€!. Rule number fourteen: Jigger the 
constitution so that opponents have no hope of coming to power through democratic meansa€!.
And voilA : Youa€™re done. Elections still happen, but they are denuded of everything that makes 
elections meaningful. Hail Caesar!a€!

LINK:

THE
COSMOP
GLOBALI

The Cosmopolitan Globalist

The New Caesarism: a Lexicon, Part III

This is the third extract of a chapter from my book, Stitch by Stitch: The Unraveling of the 
Western World. (If youa€™ re confused, ita€™ s because Ia€™ ve given the book various titles as 
Ia€™ ve worked on it. I think Ia€™ ve settled on Stitch by Stitch, but in the past Ia€™ ve called 
ita€!
Read more

3 years ago A- 3 likes A- Claire Berlinski
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

