Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) This remains the best single place to go to get an immediate, timely handle on what each 
montha€™ s Bureau of Labor Statistics report brings us in the way of news about the state of the 
American labor market and the American economy. This months report is especially puzzling. The 
household survey unemployment rate down to 4.2%. Disappointing payroll employment growth at barely
over 200,000. Private sector employment up. Public sector employment down. There should not be this 
much divergence between a payroll survey that is close to comprehensive and a household survey that 
is a very good near-random sample by all the standards of survey research. And yet there are these 
differences. They arise from the fact that even though the payroll survey is near
comprehensive, it has powerful and changing biases in its failure of full comprehension. I think we 
badly need to spend more money figuring out exactly how these biases are evolving:

Kathryn Zickuhr & Carmen Sanchez Cumming: Equitable Growtha€™s Jobs Day Graphs: November 2021 
Report Edition'. a€™ On December 3, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics released new data on the 
U.S. labor market during the month of November. Below are five graphs compiled by Equitable Growth 
staff highlighting important trends in the data. Total
nonfarm employment increased by 210,000 in November, and the employment rate for prime-age workers 
rose to 78.8 percent. The unemployment rate declined to 4.2 percent in November, remaining higher 
for Black workers (6.7 percent) and Latinx workers (5.2 percent) compared to Asian American workers 
(3.8 percent) and White workers (3.7 percent). The overall
employment rate rose to 65.0 percent for men and 53.8 percent for women, still below pre-pandemic 
levels for both groups. Private-sector employment continued to make gains in November, but 
public-sector employment gains have faltered. Despite recent gains, the jobs recovery remains 
fragile. Employment in many industries has increased more slowly than in recent
months, and remains below pre-pandemic levelsa€l

LINK: 
chttps://equitablegrowth.org/equitable-growths-jobs-day-graphs-november-2021-report-edition-2/>

2) I want to hoist this back again to the top. I think it is really, really important and really, 
really good. Many employers have decideda€”and make sticka€”the principle that they simply do not 
bargain: they post a wage for the job, and then even if they get a very good match for the 
positioni/CE they would rather let a good worker well-matched walk then bargain over the wage with 
somebody
who has already taken the job. This economizes on administrative effort, yes. But it has always 
seemed to me that it is more a matter of social power than of economic logic. One bargains with 
equals or neither equals. One commands those who are subordinated!1/s

Marta Lachowska, Alexandre Mas, Raffaele Saggio, & Stephen Woodbury: Wage Bargaining Is an 
Important, Yet Unavailable, Tool for Many U.S. Workers to Increase Their Incomes'. a€™ This paper 
examines the behavior of dual jobholders to test a simple model of wage bargaining and wage 
posting. We estimate the sensitivity of wages and separation rates to
wage shocks in a workera€™ s secondary job to assess the degree of bargaining versus wage posting 
in the labor market. We interpret the evidence within a model where workers facing hours 
constraints in their primary job may take a second, flexible-hours job for additional income. When 
a secondary job offers a sufficiently high wage, a worker either bargains with the
primary employer for a wage increase or separates. The model provides a number of predictions that 
we test using matched employer-employee administrative data from Washington State. In the 
aggregate, wage bargaining appears to be a limited determinant of wage setting. The estimated wage 
response to improved outside options, which we interpret as bargaining, is
precisely estimated, but qualitatively small. Wage posting appears to be more important than 
bargaining for wage determination overall, and especially in lower parts of the wage distribution. 
Observed wage bargaining takes place mainly among workers in the highest wage quartile. For this 
group, improved outside options translate to higher wages, but not higher
separation rates. In contrast, for workers in the lowest wage quartile, wage increases in the 
secondary job lead to higher separation rates but no significant wage increase in the primary job, 
consistent with wage posting. We also find evidence in support of the hours-constraint model for 
dual jobholding. In particular, work hours in the primary job do not respond to wages
in   the secondary job, but hours and separations in the secondary job are sensitive to wages in 
the primary job due to income effectsa€l

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/wage-posting-or-wage-bargaining-a-test-using-dual-jobhol
ders/>

3) This a€oeVisual EconomyaCD is, I think, one of the greatest recent Equitable Growth initiatives:

Equitable Growth: a€™ For the second month in a row, our top visual looks at how income impacts the 
likelihood of voting in midterm AND presidential elections. Interested in seeing other key graphics 
on 31 different economics topics? Check out A Visual Economy_ 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/a-visual-economy/>a€!
LINK:

Equitable Growth @ equitablegrowth

For the second month in a row, our top visual looks at how income impacts the likelihood of voting 
in midterm AND presidential elections. Interested in seeing other key graphics on 31 different 
economics topics? Check out a #VisualEconomy:

High-income individuals are far more likely to vote, in both midterm
and presidential elections

Percent of individuals who voted in U.S. elections, 2014-2020, at three levels of income

Midterm elections

Source: U.S. Census Bureau, ’Current Population Survey Voting and Registration Supplement’ (n.d.).


Note: Percentages omit respondents who did not answer the voting question.

Q Equitable Growth

9:02 PM a'™ Dec 1,2021

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) Paul Krugman continues to remain the paragon for not just useful and applicable macroeconomic 
theory, not just for opening-up new literatures for research, not just for teaching students who 
will be future professional economists, but for explining whatis going on in the economy to the 
broad public sphere:

Paul Krugman: Why Workers Are Quitting: a€~Unlike the a€oeskills gapa€D invoked to explain 
persistent unemployment after the 2008 crisis, this time labor shortages seem to be real. Workers 
are quitting at record rates, an indication that they feel confident about finding new jobsa€!. So 
workers are clearly feeling empowered, even though many fewer Americans are
employed than in the past. Why? Earlier this year many people insisted that enhanced unemployment 
benefits were reducing the incentive to accept jobs. But those extra benefits were eliminateda€L 
Another storya€! says that the extensive aid families received during the pandemic left manya€! 
[with] the financial space to be choosier about their next job. A less upbeat
story says that some employees are still afraid to go back to work, and/or that many cana€™ t go 
back to work because their child care arrangements are still disrupted. But therea€™ s at least one 
more possibilitya€!. The experience of the pandemic may have led many workers to explore 
opportunities they wouldna€™ t have looked at previouslya€!. People have a
strong status quo biasa€i. I can easily believe that there were many workers who should have quit 
their lousy jobs in, say, 2019, but didna€™ t because they werena€™ t really considering the 
alternatives. And ita€™ s at least possible that the disruptions of the pandemic led to a great 
rethinka€!. [That] is actually a good thinga€”a small silver lininga€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/ll/05/opinion/great-resignation-quit-job.html>

2) This is, I think, correct. The strong balance of the evidence is still on the side of a€oeteam 
transitorya€D as far as the very moderate inflation of 2021 is concerned. If we still see moderate 
inflation in late 2022, come back and talk to me then about the appropriate Federal Reserve 
response:

Michael Hiltzik: Why Do We Fear Inflation?: a€~Therea€™ s a right way and a wrong way to think 
about inflation. Herea€™ s a right waya€!. There are no signs that the inflation surge showing up 
in the latest statistics is caused by sustained overheating of the U.S. economy. The signs point to 
several short-term factors coming together all at oncea€!

LINK: <https://www.latimes 
.com/business/story/2021-11-26/right-way-and-wrong-way-to-think-about-inflation>

3) The very smart Nathan Newman is interesting here, but wrong. As a matter of fact, Republican 
politicians do not have a plan for shifting more of the collective surplus from the globalized 
economy to the United States and distributing it to blue-collar workers in export and 
import-competing sectors:

Nathan Newman: Education Polarization in Elections: People are Voting Their Class Interests: a€~Our 
Two Parties Reflect Two Class Strategies for Addressing Stagnating Incomesa€!. Americans coulda€! 
either seek to expropriate some of the burgeoning growth among emerging economies or go after the 
wealth of the superelite, the global top 1% holding 43% of all
global wealth in 2020. Arguably, our two political parties have increasingly sorted themselves 
along the line of those two strategiesa€!. Workers who have found themselves directly in 
competition with developing world workersa€! have allied with a portion of the economic elite 
willing to help them extract some additional income and jobs from those emerging
economies, including via trade wars, energy policy, agricultural policy, and other economic and 
occasionally military actions, all in exchange for support for the Republican Party policies that 
help that elite keep their wealtha€!. Workers whose industries are largely outside global 
competition, such as service work or public employment, or in what has been dubbed the
a€oecreative economya€Da€; require extracting some of the income of the economic elitea€!. As an 
analysis by the Peterson Instituted™ s Marcus Nolan detailed, white voters in regions with 
employment impacted by the doeChina shockdD seemed to adopt doeharsher attitudes towards immigrants 
and racial minoritiesdn and even to gravitate towards more
fundamentalist versions of Christianityd!

LINK:


Left Future

Education Polarization in Elections: People are Voting Their Class Interests

Why did so many non-college whites lurch towards Trump in the 2016 and 2020 elections - and 
conversely why are more educated whites trending towards the Democrats? Many progressive analysts 
are a bit anguished at what they perceive to be an inversion of traditional class politics in 
voting, which for some means that the new split in voting has to be aboua€!

Read more

a year ago A- Nathan Newman dY§

4) Just think: I all the right-wing grandees and worthies who have had their anti-Fox News 
Road-to-Damascus moment ahadt all had that moment together back in the mida€“1990s. Think of how 
much healthier and stronger and richer America would be:

David French: The Fox News Distortion Field & Other Media Maladies'. a€~Ita€™ s now been a little 
more than a week since my friends, colleagues, and Dispatch co-founders Steve Hayes and Jonah 
Goldberg announced their resignations from Fox News. After days of online vitriol (and support), 
the dust has settled a bit, and ita€™ s worth reflecting a bit on what
they did and why it mattereda€!. Fox is the 800-pound gorilla of conservative mediaa€!. And of 
course Fox doesna€™t just dominate online, it dominates on television^!. Fox is conservative media, 
and almost everything that is not Fox is some variation on the Fox producta€!. That reality, 
combined with Foxa€™ s own aggressive defense of its brand, is one reason
why so very little right-wing a€oemedia criticisma€D is aimed at the largest, most powerful, and 
most profitable cable network in the landa€!. The cultural and political consequences in the 
right-wing grassroots are considerablea€!. Activists dona€™t know what they dona€™t know in part 
because telling them the truth in right-wing spaces carries a costa€”and not
just in reader disapproval. Fox, the most potent player in the market, will be displeased, and when 
it is displeased the ceiling on your career gets a little bit lowera€!

LINK:


The French Press

The Fox News Distortion Field and Other Media Maladies

Ita€™ s now been a little more than a week since my friends, colleagues, and Dispatch co-founders 
Steve Hayes and Jonah Goldberg announced their resignations from Fox News. After days of online 
vitriol (and support), the dust has settled a bit, and ita€™ s worth reflecting a bit on what they 
did and why it mattereda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 315 likes A- 514 comments A- David French

5) my friend Noah Smith thinks that it is easy, nay trivial, to make massive, massive improvements 
in Twittera€™ s ability to avoid misinformation and reduce generating polarization. I think he is 
correct. It shows how very strong desire to scrape the last dollar from the bottom of the 
advertising barrel is the Twitter has not made these changes yet:

Noah Smith: How to Fix Twitter: a€~Three changesa€”l) dropping blocked usersa€™ tweets from thread 
view, 2) allowing people more control over who can reply to their tweets, and 3) allowing people to 
opt out of being quote-tweeteda€”will remove much of the platforma€™ s shoutiness and toxicity, 
without restricting dissent or speech on the platform overall. In
addition, Twitter should implement the dislike buttona€!

LINK:

How to fix Twitter

Jack Dorsey is stepping down as CEO of Twitter, to be replaced by Parag Agrawal. Ita€™ s not clear 
whether this will cause much of a change in the companya€™ s direction a€” Tim Cook and Dara 
Khosrowshahi dona€™ t seem to have radically altered the courses charted by Steve Jobs and Travis 
Kalanick, for instance. And ita€™ s an open question whether the companya€™ sa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 43 likes A- 63 comments A- Noah Smith

6) Excellent on a€oepopularisma€n and a€oeSister Souljaha€D moments, from the brillian Jamelle 
Bouie. I do, however, have a few quibbles of my own about the history, and our memory of it:



Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

The "Sister Souljah" Moment, in Reality; & BRIEFLY NOTED: For 2021-12-03 Fr

First: I find myself genuinely of two minds about this 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2021/10/Q9/opinion/democrat-shor-politics-bill-clinton.html>, from the 
very smart Jamelle Bouie. Yes, there is no such thing as idle presidential rhetoric. Yes, Bill 
Clinton took a cheap shot at Sister Souliah. Yes, I do not expect the very smart Jamelle Bouie to 
support the a€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong

Jamelle Bouie: Bill Clinton, Race & the Politics of the 1990s\ a€~Clinton concluded his remarks 
with a now-notorious denunciation of the rapper and activist Sister Souljah, an attack by proxy on 
Jackson, who had brought Souljah to the eventa€!. a€oeWhat Clinton got out of the Sister Souljah 
affair ,a€D noted the historian Kenneth Oa€™ Reilly, a€oewere votes,
particularly the votes of the so-called Reagan Democrats like the North Philadelphia electrician 
who said a€~the day he told off that [expletive] Jackson is the day he got [mine].a€™a€na€! If 
Shora€™ s analysis is correct, then this is what it could be like to change course. Progressives 
would complain, as they did in 1992, buta€”a proponent of this approach might
saya€”Clinton still won 85 percent of the Black vote. And once in office, he would try to reverse 
course: to moderate and to show his commitment to the people who put him in the White Housea€!. But 
there is no such thing as idle presidential rhetorica€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes .com/2021/10/09/opinion/democrat-shor-politics-bill-clinton.html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now


a year ago A- 1 like A- Brad DeLong

Jamelle Bouie: Bill Clinton, Race & the Politics of the 1990s\ a€~Clinton concluded his remarks 
with a now-notorious denunciation of the rapper and activist Sister Souljah, an attack by proxy on 
Jackson, who had brought Souljah to the eventa€!. a€oeWhat Clinton got out of the Sister Souljah 
affair ,a€D noted the historian Kenneth Oa€™ Reilly, a€oewere votes,
particularly the votes of the so-called Reagan Democrats like the North Philadelphia electrician 
who said a€~the day he told off that [expletive] Jackson is the day he got [mine].a€™a€na€! If 
Shora€™ s analysis is correct, then this is what it could be like to change course. Progressives 
would complain, as they did in 1992, buta€”a proponent of this approach might
saya€”Clinton still won 85 percent of the Black vote. And once in office, he would try to reverse 
course: to moderate and to show his commitment to the people who put him in the White Housea€!. But 
there is no such thing as idle presidential rhetorica€!

LINK: chttps ://www.ny times .com/2021/10/09/opinion/democrat-shor-politics-bill-clinton,html>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

