Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Dan Spokojny & Thomas Scherer: Foreign Policy Should Be 
£vzJence-Bay£j<https://warontherocks.com/2021/07/foreign-policy-should-be-evidence-based/>

• Bloomberg: Delta Varianta€™ s Spread in Nanjing Tests Chinaa€™ s Covid Containment Efforts'. 
a€~Deltaa€™ s Spread Is Testing Even Aggressive a€~Covid Zeroa€™ Defenses. Beijing sees first local 
case
in 6 months as China challenged. Variant has breached Australiaa€™ s strict quarantine defensesa€! 
LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-Q7-28/delta-s-spread-is-testing-china-s-aggressive-
covid-playbook>

•  Dpnnis Affpranf- Mppt the C’nrnnrntinns That Went Rack nn Thpir WnrH Nnt tn gimnnrt the 
gprtitinn Cnuruv a^~Thpv nrnmisp.d nnt tn snnnnrt Rp.nnhlir.ans who vntpd not tn rp.rtifv the 
plpctinn rpsults And thp.n


they changed their minds and hoped Americans wouldna€™t noticea€! LINK: 
<https://thebulwark.com/meet-the-corporations-who-went-back-on-their-word-not-to-support-the-seditio
n-caucus/>

• Jeffrey C. Ely: Kludged'. a€~A model which illustrates a limitation of adaptive processes: 
improvements tend to come in the form of kludgesa€! a marginal adaptation that compensates for, but 
does not eliminate,
fundamental design inefficiencies. When kludges accumulate, the result can be perpetually 
suboptimal behaviora€! <https://www.scholars.northwestern.edu/en/publications/kludged>

• Moriah Bergwerk & al.: Covida€“ 19 Breakthrough Infections in Vaccinated Health Care Wbrtos<https 
://w w w.nejm .org/doi/full/10.1056/NE JMoa2109072>

Andrea Matranga @andreamatranga

After watching a bunch of @italiasquisita videos of Italian food pros reacting to youtube videos of 
foodfluencers cooking Italian stuff, I have concluded there are three main ways foreigners screw up 
Italian food.
2:13 AM r™ Jul 29,2021

13Likes3Retweets

Beatrice Cherrier @Undercoverhist

Today's questions: -any literature on "tractability traps" in econ (in given period, Econs took 
natural resources/household heterogeneity/non-linear dynamics/etc out of their models to solve them 
& focus on other mechanisms;
these choices stuck for decades & created blindspots)

2:08 PM r™ Jul 29,2021

22Likes3Retweets

Paragraphs:

Janan Ganesh: Vaccination Race Reveals Two Distinct Populisms: a€~US Republicans have a more 
anarchic vision than some parties they are often grouped witha€I. Last month Rodrigo Duterte warned 
Filipino vaccine­
dodgers that he would inject it a€oein your butta€Da€!. Other members of the strongman club are 
more demure but not less insistenta€!. Viktor Orbana€!. The Law and Justice party of Polanda€!. Two 
populismsa€!. The
first  kind is serious about the business of governments!. This paternalist spirit has no place in 
the other populism. President Jair Bolsonaro of Brazil embodies it, as do the US Republicansa€!. 
Populism as cussed and near
anarchic defiance of received opinion. It is ruthless in the pursuit of power but lax to the point 
of dereliction in its exercise. On both counts, Donald Trump is the apotheosis of the movement. He 
elicited foreign help to remain
presidents!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/8513d0c3-553f-48ae-aeac-09974eaac28e>

Peter Turchin: A Theory for the Formation Of Large Agrarian Empires: S~Between 3000 BCE and 1800 CE 
there were at least 60 agrarian ScemegaempiresSD that controlled at the peak an area equal to or 
greater than
one million of squared kilometersS!. Over 90 percent of megaempires originated at steppe 
frontiersS’’zones of interaction between nomadic pastorialists and settled agriculturalistsS! 
synthesize recent developments from
theories of cultural evolution with insights from previous work by anthropologists on nomad/farmer 
interactionsS!

LINK: 
<https://sfi-edu.s3.amazonaws.eom/sfi-edu/production/uploads/sfi-com/dev/uploads/filer/e4/52/e452a78
b-eda8-4f4a-935d-d4f3204a8cf0/08-05-024.pdf>

Peter Drucker: Adventures of a Bystander: S™ If there was one article of the faith to which all the 
Polanyis suscribeda€”from Karla€™ s father ona€”it was that the a€celaissez-fairea€D Liberals of 
the nineteenth-century
Manchester School were wrong in their assertion that the market is the only alternative to serfdom. 
Indeed the market creed of the Manchester Liberals may be called the hereditary enemy of the House 
of Polanyi. All
Polanyis searched for another alternative, whether [cousin Odon Pola€™ s] early fascism, Adolpha€™ 
s romantic Brazil, [Laura] Mousiea€™ s S central sociology,a€D Michaela€™ s stoic desire-free 
individual, or
Karla€™    s a€oesocial principles of economic integration.a€D But the more Karl delved into 
prehistory, primitive economics, and classical antiquity, the more proof did he find for the hated 
and despised market creed of
Ricardo and Bentham, and also of Karla€™ s contemporary bogeymen, Ludwig von Mises and Frederick 
Hayek of the Austrian School. So Karl retreated into footnotes, into more and more anthropological 
studies, and into
academic busynessa€!. It was my willingness in The Future of Industrial Man to settle instead for 
an adequate, bearable, but free society that Karl at the time criticized and rejected as a tepid 
compromises!. But just as the
failure                                                                                             
      of a whole generation of brilliant thinkers to find theS! new synthesis between Catholicism 
and ProtestantismS! foreshadowed the end of the Age of Infallible Religion fifty years later, so 
the failure of the brilliant
Polanyis to find the alternative beyond capitalism and communism might well foreshadow the end of 
the Age of the Infallible SocietyS!

Ed Rampell (2013): An Interview with Richard Wolff: S~[Richard Wolff:] Many companies, including 
famous names like Apple computers, if you go back and look at the early days you may be surprised 
to find out that they
were co-ops. The original founders were often workers dissatisfied by being mere employees in 
somebodyS™ s company, so they got together with others, often at young ages, and pooled their 
enthusiasm and energy and
setup  a different kind of enterprise. Very common in Silicon Valley. Every year, hundreds, in some 
years thousands, of engineers quit their jobs in big companies like IBM, Oracle or Cisco, and get 
together with friends and
say, Sceokay, we want to start a different kind of business. WeS™ re all going to take our laptops 
and gather at HarryS™ s garage, and hereS™ s what we want: We donS™ t want to come to work every 
day in a suit and

tie or for some executive who doesnS™ t understand anything about computers telling us what to do. 
We donS™ t want any of the rigmarole; itS™ s stifling, it kills our creativity. WeS™ d like to go 
to a place where there
are no bosses, where weS™re all equal. Where we can wear Hawaiian shirts and Bermuda shorts and 
bring our toddlers ,SD And thatS™ s what theyS™ ve done. And in many cases theyS™ ve been very 
strict: All
decisions have to be made by consensus. Everybody is equal. No chiefs, no Indians, weS™re all equal 
hereS !S!

LINK: <https://www.counterpunch.org/2013/04/16/cooperatives-and-workers-self-directed-enterprises/> 
<https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=AsNF7dzy3cs>

Jonathan V. Last: The Damnation of George P. Bush: S'George P. Bush leaned into this entire affair 
so hard that he sold merch boasting about the betrayal of his familyS!. This is from June. Six 
months after the January
insurrection. What did this abasement and betrayal get George P.? A fat load of jack squat. Surely 
George P. wasnS™t foolish enough to think that Trump would go so far as to endorse him. But he 
probably hoped that, by
toadying  as shamelessly as possible, he might keep Trump on the sidelines and out of endorsing in 
the race. At the least, he must have hoped that Trump wouldnS™t weigh in until much later in the 
race, when, if George P.
had                                                                                                 
 good poll numbers, maybe Trump would be nervous about endorsing someone else. But you must 
understand that this election, the Republican primary, isnS™ t until May 1,2022. ItS™ s more than 
nine months away.
Trump endorsing this early effectively puts an end to the race. It freezes all of the party 
establishment and money in place, because now to be for George P. is to be against Trump. AinS™t no 
Texas Republicans fixina€™ to
do that there foolishnessa€!. A great many Republicans still believe that if they just get along, 
theya€™ 11 go along. That if they keep their heads down, or truckle under, they can keep running 
their game. That so long as
theya€™re not like those icky Never Trumpers, the revolution wona€™t come for them. To go against 
Trumpism is to court defeat. To abase yourself before it is to add dishonor to the bargain. The 
funny parta€”and really,
this is the single weirdest irony of our entire nationalist odysseya€”is that Trump frequently 
ended his rallies by reading a€oeThe Snake .a€D Donald Trump literally told the Republican party 
who he was and what he would
do to them. It was not subtext. It was the actual text. He read it from a paper. Over and over 
again. Most of the party, it turned out, wanted a snake. They embraced the nihilism because it 
promised a chance to hurt their
enemies. But men like George P. Bush refused to believea€’’even at this late datea€”that the story 
could possibly be true. Let his shame be a reminder, a warning, and a lessona€!

LINK: <https://thebulwark.com/the-damnation-of-george-p-bush/>


are no bosses, where wea€™re all equal. Where we can wear Hawaiian shirts and Bermuda shorts and 
bring our toddlers ,a€D And thata€™ s what theya€™ ve done. And in many cases theya€™ ve been very 
strict: All
decisions have to be made by consensus. Everybody is equal. No chiefs, no Indians, wea€™re all 
equal herea€!a€!

LINK: <https://www.counterpunch.org/2013/04/16/cooperatives-and-workers-self-directed-enterprises/> 
<https://www.youtube. com/watch?v=AsNF7dzy3cs>

Jonathan V. Last: The Damnation of George P. Bush'. a€~George P. Bush leaned into this entire 
affair so hard that he sold merch boasting about the betrayal of his familya€!. This is from June. 
Six months after the January
insurrection. What did this abasement and betrayal get George P.? A fat load of jack squat. Surely 
George P. wasna€™t foolish enough to think that Trump would go so far as to endorse him. But he 
probably hoped that, by
toadying  as shamelessly as possible, he might keep Trump on the sidelines and out of endorsing in 
the race. At the least, he must have hoped that Trump wouldna€™t weigh in until much later in the 
race, when, if George P.
had                                                                                                 
 good poll numbers, maybe Trump would be nervous about endorsing someone else. But you must 
understand that this election, the Republican primary, isna€™ t until May 1,2022. Ita€™ s more than 
nine months away.
Trump endorsing this early effectively puts an end to the race. It freezes all of the party 
establishment and money in place, because now to be for George P. is to be against Trump. Aina€™t 
no Texas Republicans fixina€™ to
do that there foolishnessa€!. A great many Republicans still believe that if they just get along, 
theya€™ 11 go along. That if they keep their heads down, or truckle under, they can keep running 
their game. That so long as
theya€™re not like those icky Never Trumpers, the revolution wona€™t come for them. To go against 
Trumpism is to court defeat. To abase yourself before it is to add dishonor to the bargain. The 
funny parta€”and really,
this is the single weirdest irony of our entire nationalist odysseya€”is that Trump frequently 
ended his rallies by reading a€oeThe Snake .a€D Donald Trump literally told the Republican party 
who he was and what he would
do to them. It was not subtext. It was the actual text. He read it from a paper. Over and over 
again. Most of the party, it turned out, wanted a snake. They embraced the nihilism because it 
promised a chance to hurt their
enemies. But men like George P. Bush refused to belie vea€’’even at this late datea€”that the story 
could possibly be true. Let his shame be a reminder, a warning, and a lessona€!

LINK: <https ://thebulwark .com/the-damnation-of-george-p-bush/>

Diane Lim: Will the Infrastructure Bill Fail to Create Jobs Where We Most Need Them?'. a€~Two 
months. Thata€™ s how long our most recent economic recessiona€”what some call the a€oePandemic 
Recessiona€Da€”
lasted, as officially called by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). That February to 
April 2020 a€oepeak to trougha€D is the shortest recession the NBER has ever recorded (going back 
to the mida€“1800s),
and also means we have been back in economic recovery mode for 15 months now!a€! Policies focus on 
an economic recovery strategy as the COVIDa€“19 public health crisis has mostly been beaten back 
where vaccine
rollout has been adopted. But does the latest policy effort focused on physical infrastructure 
(predominately roads and bridges) funding make sense given the economic condition it is intended to 
treat?a€! Consumer demand is
largely back, especially in the leisure and hospitality sectora€!. Are these next, very large 
installments of government spending necessary to get us back to full employment?a€! The trouble 
with the administration leading
with   the physical infrastructure investments and not the family investments in caregiving and 
other a€oehuman infrastructurea€D is that it might not create the kinds of jobs in the industries 
and occupations where our
economy  is still operating below our full capacitya€!

LINK: 
<https://www.avisonyoung.us/sightline/-/article/2021/07/28/will-the-infrastructure-bill-fail-to-crea
te-jobs-where-we-most-need-them->

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

