Subscribe now

FIRST: Sourcing the Energy for NIMBYism

Confer Karl Polanyi: The Great Transformation: The Political and Economic Origins of Our Time 
<https: //archive .org/details/greattransformat0000pola_o914>, passim, on how the market economy 
transforms land into a a€oefictitious commoditya€n, and how that then powers a societal reaction 
against that idea. Nobody believes that the best use of land is the one that passes the maximum 
profitability test in the eyes of distant rootless cosmopolites. This does
not mean that NIMBYism is a sensible reaction. It is not. But it is a guide to where NIMBYism gets 
its energy:

Addison del Mastro: No Housing Please, Wea€™re a Community. a€~[Andy:] a€oel think part of what 
people on the right are reacting toa€! is the apparent tendency on the left to try and eliminate 
the layers of society between the individual and the federal governmental local institution [s]a€!. 
As they have declined so to, I feel, has our sense of communitya€l. NIMBYs sense [this] at a 
fundamental, almost subconscious level. And
so, recognizing a problem but not its underlying cause, they lash out at new development projects 
in the (in my opinion) misguided belief that they are arresting a further loss of that sense of 
community.a€Da€I This supposition rings very true to mea€!

LINK:

IORTHJSOUTI


.The Deleted Scenes

No Housing Please, We're a Community

I received a really interesting, insightful comment on a subscribers-only piece from a few weeks 
ago, on the tension between community and continuity on the one hand, and development and growth on 
the other. I had mentioned in passing the right-wing meme a€oel will not live in a pod4€D which 
refers to the supposed notion that liberals want to cram everyone ia€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 7 likes A- 3 comments A- Addison Del Mastro
Two additional points:

1. It is not a€oethe lefta€D; it is, rather, a€oethe systema€D that eliminates all intermediary 
organizations. The original German phrase in Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (1848): Manifesto of 
the Communist Party <https://0ll.libertyfund.0rg/page/marx-manifest#b0urge0is> is a€oeAlles 
StAPndische und Stehende verdampfta€!a€na€”a€nall that is solid melts into air a€!a€Da€” every 
thing that firmly exists and all the elements of the society of
orders evaporatea€!a€na€”a€Dall traditional estates and status-markers and all fixed patterns are 
steamed awaya€!a€D The left and the right do, however, have different reactions to the coming of 
market societya€™ s steaming away of all intermediary structures and sources of social power that 
are not based on property rights recognized by the market economy. The left works to moderate 
market- (and other-)created wealth inequalities and to
give individuals equal entitlements based on their status as citizens. The right works to shore up 
traditional hierarchies, liberties, privileges, and other sources of social powera€”no matter how 
unequal and unfair they may bea€”in a rearguard action against the solvent of the market economy.

2. It is important to register how bonkers this reaction is. Where a region has become desirable to 
the wealthy, blocking new development greatly strengthens the forces keeping people of the kinds 
who used to live there from moving in, and greatly accelerates the pressure on landlords to push 
those who do not now live there who do not have iron-clad property rights out. Where a region has 
become undesirable, blocking new infrastructure and retail
development accelerates its decline in amenities, and thus eventually accelerates the dissolution 
of community.

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Gideon Rachman: Ukraine & the Start of a Second Cold War 
<https://www.ft.com/content/34481fbd-4ca7-4bb3-bef5-e68fefed7438>

• Michele Jamrisko: Has Inflation Peaked? Signs Are Flashing in Chips, Shipping, Fertilizer 
<https://www.bloomberg.eom/news/articles/2022-06-06/peak-inflation-signs-are-flashing-in-chips-shipp
ing-fertilizer#xi4v7vzkg>

•  Elaine Weiss (2013): Mismatches in Race to the Top Limit Educational Improvement: Lack of Time, 
Resources, and Tools to Address Opportunity Gaps Puts Lofty State Goals Out of Reach 
<https://www.epi.org/publication/race-to-the-top-goals/>

• Bob Yirka: Making Blockchains More Efficient: Calculate a Useful Task as Part of the Consensus 
Afechtzni5m<https://techxplore.com/news/2022-06-blockchains-efficient-task-consensus-mechanism.html>


•  William D. Cohan: The SPAC Stars ofa€™21: Where Are They Now?'. a€~SPAC-mania, a consensual 
hallucination in which everyone, from Ackman to A-Rod, got in on the SPAC craze. It may have been 
easy to raise all those billions, but it turned out to be much harder to put them to worka€! 
<https://puck.news/the-spac-stars-of-21-where-are-thev-now/? cio id=f6c60600ef33f033>

•  Ed Dolan: Trust, State Capacity, & the Epidemiological Mystery of Covid: a€~Trust played an 
important role in the response to the CO VID pandemic but it finds a larger role for state 
capacitya€! 
<https://www.niskanencenter.org/trust-state-capacitv-and-the-epidemiological-mvsterv-of-covid/>

• Paul Krugman: The Coming Rage of the Money Hawks <https ://www.nytimes 
.com/2022/05/27/opinion/inflation-prices-stagflation .html>

• Daron Acemoglu: Understanding the New Nationalism 
<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentarv/new-nationalism-three-factors-reaction-to-globalizatio
n-bv-daron-acemoglu-2Q22-06>

•  Sigal Samuel: Liberiaa€™ s Stunningly Effective Way to Reduce Shootings & Other Crimes: a€~The 
program Borh had been running for 15 years: Sustainable Transformation of Youth in Liberiaa€! 
<https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/23141405/violence-crime-cbt-therapv-cash-shootings>

•  Mohamed A. El-Erian: Saudi Arabia Is Swinging Againa€”Butfor How Long?: a€~Saudi Arabiaa€! 
regaining its swing-producer role. But, in view of growing hostility toward fossil fuels, this 
development is unlikely to alter the marketa€™ s longer-term dynamicsa€! 
<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentarv/oil-market-saudi-arabia-swing-producer-role-bv-mohamed
-a-el-erian-2022-06>

•  Diane Coyle: Rethinking Supply Chains: a€~Other considerations besides economic efficiency 
matter, and that hands-on craft knowledge cannot be transmitted online. Unfortunately, problems 
that have been four decades in the making cannot be solved overnighta€! LINK: 
<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentarv/rethinking-global-supplv-chain-model-bv-diane-covle-20
22-06>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Helen Lewis: Terms You Need to Know to Understand the Modern Internet: a€™ My piece on the 
a€oeorphan takea€D went down so well. Current contenders include the mimophant, the euphemism 
treadmill and pluralistic ignorance. Are there are any concepts that, when you heard about them, 
made you go a€ceohhhhhhha€D in deep recognition?a€!



The Bluestocking, vol 237

Happy Friday! Ia€™ m considering a series on a€oeterms you need to know to understand the modern 
interneta€Da€”since my piece on the a€oeorphan takea€D went down so well. Current contenders 
include the mimophant, the euphemism treadmill and pluralistic ignorance. Are there are any 
concepts that, when you heard about them, made you go a€ceohhhhhhha€D in deep recognition^!
Read more

8 months ago A- 10 likes A- 6 comments A- Helen Lewis

• Ross Barkan: The Jews & Italians Against Liberalism'. a€~a€oeThey feel the pressure, like 
everything is fading away,a€D one local explained. a€oelta€™ s all in danger: the house you always 
wanted is in danger, the kids are in danger, the neighborhood is in danger. Ita€™ s all slipping 
away.a€Ua€! In 1985, the Barnard sociologist Jonathan Rieder published a book that is little-known 
today. Canarsie: The Jews and Italians of Brooklyn Against
Liberalism^}

Political Currents by Ross Barkan

The Jews and Italians Against Liberalism

An ill wind blew through the land. Life, suddenly crackling, was not what it once was. The young, 
they said, did not respect the old, and the nation they knew now did not resemble the nation of 
their memories, when chaos did not seem to swallow up so much. Crime was up, gas prices were up, 
and the rage they felt was no longer confineda€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 14 likes A- 5 comments A- Ross Barkan

• John Quiggin: Memo RBA: We Ought to Live with Inflation, More of If. a€~The RBAa€! should reset 
its inflation target to 4%, or better still dump inflation targeting in favour of nominal GDP 
targetinga€!
John Quiggin's Blogstack

Memo RBA: we ought to live with inflation, more of it

Thata€™ s the headline for my latest piece in The Conversation. The article initially ran under a 
different headline, chosen by the publishers with an eye to maximising the number of search terms, 
but this failed miserably, and my preferred headline was restored. The insistence of publishers on 
choosing headlines has been a ca€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 4 likes A- John Quiggin

•  Ryan Avent: Does Not Compute'. a€~Te issue isna€™t just one in which some individuals receive 
bad information, but rather one in which we all engage with each other a little differently, we are 
all part of the problema€!. These networks want us to perform, and that we can instead choose not 
to. We can be silent, or gracious, or botha€!. We can do better. We have to, if we want to get 
through thisa€!
The Bellows

Does not compute

There are days when I think that the history of our era, whenever it is written, will say that we 
were a society with manageable problems until the internet came along and ruined everything. Ia€™ m 
not completely convinced of this; not yet. But there are days when I think it, and more of them all 
the timea€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 12 likes A- 2 comments A- Ryan Avent

•  Jonathan V. Last: How Long Will the New Republican Regime Last?'. a€~Three boxesa€! a Republican 
needs to checka€! today: Personal loyalty to Donald Trump .Tolerance of corruption by favored 
groups and persons. Tolerance for the actions of Vladimir Putin. Thata€™ s it. Thata€™ s the 
Republican program now. And if youa€™re not onboard with those three positions, then all the ACU 
scores in the world wona€™ t save youa€!


How Long Will the New Republican Regime Last?

Two things: (1) You can get a signed copy of Tim Millera€™ s book! Order it here if you havena€™ t 
already! (2) TNB is tonight at 8:00 p.m. Ia€™ m going to lob your questions to Ted Johnson, Cathy 
Young, and Will Saletan. Go here to submit your questions nowa€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 49 likes A- 110 comments A- Jonathan V. Last

•  John Ganz: A Real War. a€~The great irony is how often a€cerealisma€D ends up being attack on 
actual realitya€!. To focus on what we are actually seeing makes us dangerous sentimentalistsa€!


A Real War

a€oeThe fact is, people have lost all remembrance of a real war. The Crimean, the Italian, and the 
Austro-Prussian war were all of them mere conventional wars a€” wars of Governments which made 
peace as soon as their military machinery had broken down or become worn out. A real war, one in 
which the nation itself participates, we have not seen in the heart oa€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 58 likes A- 3 comments A- John Ganz

•  Josh Barro: Are There Any Adults at the Washington Post?'. a€~Post management has a relevant 
interest in disciplining [Weigel]a€! Felicia Sonmeza€! has gone on a days-long public diatribea€!. 
Your workplace is not Fleetwood Maca€!

Are There Any Adults at the Washington Post?

Dear readers, I hope you had a good weekend. If youa€™re not a paid subscriber, you missed 
Fridaya€™ s Mayonnaise Clinic, which was all about Fire Island (the island), about which many 
straight people have questions because of a€oeFire Islanda€D (the movie). I encourage you to check 
out my primer on what the place is all abouta€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 101 likes A- 55 comments A- Josh Barro


Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

I really do not think it can be called a€cepoliticsa€D. I think it is properly called: delusions 
about the character of the moral universe. If it is possible to generate sustained broad-based 
prosperity through proper monetary policya€”if we are wrong to, in the words of Winston 
Churchilla€™ s private secretary P.J. Grigg:

distrust utterly those economists who have with great but deplorable ingenuity taught that it is 
not only possible but praiseworthy for a whole country to live beyond its means on its wits and who 
in Mr. Shaw's description teach that it is possible to make a community rich by calling a penny 
tuppence, in short who have sought to make economics a vade mecum for political spivs...

a€”if it is in fact that it is the case that the market on its own gets it wrong and ought to be 
managed, then one should presumably manage the distribution of wealth as will as the level of total 
spending, and the fact that the market has rewarded you does not mean that you are worthy of 
reward. And the thought that you have been unjustly enriched by the market is something that rich 
people do not wish to think:

Paul Krugman: The Coming Rage of the Money Hawks’. a€~I called inflation wrong last year. Much of 
current inflation reflects huge price increases in sectors strongly affected either by pandemic 
distortions or, lately, by Russiaa€™ s invasion of Ukraine, but at this point measures that try to 
exclude these exceptional factors are also running higha€!. But the economy is probably cooling off 
as the Federal Reservea€™ s monetary
tightening gains tractiona€!. Furthermore, there is no hint in the data that inflation is becoming 
entrencheda€!. Workers expect to see raises of only about 3 percent over the next year, barely 
above historical normsa€!. Officials at the Federal Reserve have also noticeda€!. Monetary hawks 
are enraged. A few days ago the billionaire investor Bill Ackman attracted a lot of attention with 
a tweet declaring that markets are crashing because
investors dona€™t believe the Fed will do its joba€!. To understands [you need to be aware that 
there is a substantial group of economic commentators who always believe the Fed is printing too 
much money. They believed this during the depths of the Great Depression; they believed this in the 
aftermath of the 2008 global financial crisisa€!. Monetary permahawks are motivated by politicsa€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2022/05/27/opinion/inflation-prices-stagflation.html>

There is a certain strong disconnect here. The a€oeeconomic anxietya€D that fuels the new (and the 
old) nationalism is not generated by a€oemultinational corporations that profit from arbitraging 
artificially low wages and unacceptable labor standards in emerging marketsa€d. It is generated by 
peoplea€™ s dislike of the fact that their lives retain stability, their communities remain 
familiar, their incomes match what they believe they deserve, and even their
ability to keep or to find a new good job hinges on their activities being part of a value chain 
that satisfied some maximum-profitability test administered by some rootless cosmopolite who may be 
thousands of miles away. Claiming that it is a€oemultinational corporationsa€D and a€oetrade 
dealsa€D rather than the entire neoliberal capitalist order of which those are a small part almost 
surely leads to destructive protectionism.

Daron Acemoglu: Understanding the New Nationalism’. a€~The post-Cold War project of globalization 
also created the conditions for resurgent nationalism around the world. With their international 
credibility at low ebb, Western policymakers will need to rethink how they engage economically and 
politically with countries that have embraced ita€!. Many of the affected countries have historical 
grievancesa€!. Globalizationa€l
deepen[ed] inequalities in many countries (often in unfair ways, by enriching those with political 
connections); it also eroded longstanding traditions and social normsa€!. Political leaders have 
become increasingly skilled and unscrupulous in exploiting nationalisma€!. Trade arrangements must 
no longer be dictated by multinational corporations that profit from arbitraging artificially low 
wages and unacceptable labor standards in
emerging marketsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentary/new-nationalism-three-factors-reaction-to-globalizatio
n-by-daron-acemoglu-2022-06>

Absolutely beautifully said. +a'z!:

John Ganz: A Real War. a€~The great irony is how often a€cerealisma€D ends up being attack on 
actual reality: in place of the concrete, historical reality, it tells us there are permanent, 
abstract forces at play: all states are always at all times seeking a€cepowera€D or some such 
constant. The existence of these constants, the inevitability of power-seeking, war, self-interest, 
makes what is actually happening before our eyes into
something else: we are not seeinga€! cities destroyeda€! children being burned, instead we are 
seeing a a€oeproxy wara€D or a€oea great power struggle ,a€D To focus on what we are actually 
seeing makes us dangerous sentimentalists, but to see the great forces behind all of it, that makes 
us good, hard-headed a€cerealists.a€da€! Cynicism is also democratic in its way: it makes everyone 
who can adopt a cynical attitude, which costs
nothing  at all, feel like they are devilishly clever, too, sharing the same state secrets as the 
high ministers: a€oeita€™ s really all about X.a€D But the war has a concrete reality and ita€™ s 
made up of bombs, shells, tanks, and bullets. The physical reality of the war is this: the farther, 
in terms of ground, the Russian forces advance the more they more they will shell, the more they 
will burn, the more they will massacre, and the more they
will rape. The more Ukrainian territory they occupy, the more opportunity for atrocitya€!

LINK:



A Real War

a€oeThe fact is, people have lost all remembrance of a real war. The Crimean, the Italian, and the 
Austro-Prussian war were all of them mere conventional wars a€” wars of Governments which made 
peace as soon as their military machinery had broken down or become worn out. A real war, one in 
which the nation itself participates, we have not seen in the heart oa€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 58 likes A- 3 comments A- John Ganz

Since Twitter turns saints into normal people, normal people into assholes, and assholes into 
Nazis, people need to either develop very good filtersa€’’internal or externala€”or simply never 
tweet. It is that simple:

Josh Barro: Are There Any Adults at the Washington Post?’. a€~Ia€™ m less sympathetic to Dave 
[Weigel]a€!. This joke isna€™ t funnya€! offends peoplea€! doesna€™ t serve a professional 
purposea€!. Post management has a relevant interest in disciplining hima€! even though the 
monthlong suspension they awarded him is excessivea€!. Felicia Sonmeza€! has gone on a days-long 
public diatribea€!. Sonmez is explicit: She wages
these fights in public because management is more responsive to that than when employees complain 
privatelya€!. Airing internal workplace disputes in public like this is not okaya€!. Your workplace 
is not Fleetwood Maca€!. If I ran the Post, I would hand out punishments, including suspensions, 
like candy, until all this nonsense stopped. A crackdown on this sort of behavior would not be 
anti-worker. It would be pro-worker, because
it  is miserable to work in the sort of organization where ita€™ s hard to focus on your work 
because you have to worry about whoa€™ s going to attack you in public, undermine your decisions, 
or intervene from some other random business group to attack the strategy ita€™ s your job to 
implements!

LINK:

Are There Any Adults at the Washington Post?

Dear readers, I hope you had a good weekend. If youa€™re not a paid subscriber, you missed FridayS™ 
s Mayonnaise Clinic, which was all about Fire Island (the island), about which many straight people 
have questions because of SoeFire IslandSD (the movie). I encourage you to check out my primer on 
what the place is all abouta€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 101 likes A- 55 comments A- Josh Barro

An absolutely wonderful, glorious way to get young mena€™ s lives on track in Liberia, headed by 
Johnson Borh. It doesna€™t take a village. It takes only a tiny amount of resources, applied at the 
right time in the right way. And applied by the right people. All honor and praise to 
a€oeSustainable Transformation of Youth in Liberiaa€D!

Of course, the great worry is that something that works extremely well when it is a work of 
charisma will turn into an unproductive money-sink when it becomes a work of bureaucracy. One of 
the secrets of the large bureaucratic modern corporation as it developed in 1870 was its grasping 
of the mysteries of how to scale without losing too much of the efficiencies and energies. But the 
lessons are very hard to apply across different scopes:

Sigal Samuel: Liberiaa€™ s Stunningly Effective Way to Reduce Shootings & Other Crimes: a€~Chris 
Blattman, Margaret Sheridan, Julian Jamison, and Sebastian Chaskela€!. Johnson Borha€! showed him 
around the capital city of Monrovia. Since Blattman studies crime and violence, Borh took him to 
visit the pickpockets, drug sellers, and others living on the margins of society. Along the way, 
they kept running into guys who were
sitting on street corners, eking out a meager living by shining shoes or selling clothes. When 
these men spotted Borh, theya€™ d run to give him a hug. Blattman recalls that when he asked the 
men how they knew Borh, theya€™ d say something like, a€oel used to be like them,a€D and point to 
the nearby pickpockets or drug sellers. a€oeBut then I went through Borha€™ s program.a€D Thata€™ s 
how Blattman learned about the
program Borh had been running for 15 years: Sustainable Transformation of Youth in Liberia. It 
offered men who were at high risk for violent crime eight weeks of cognitive behavioral therapy. 
CBT, as ita€™ s called, is a popular, evidence-based method of dealing with issues like anxiety, 
but Borh adapted the therapeutic strategy to deal with issues like violence and crimea€!

LINK: <https://www.vox.com/future-perfect/23141405/violence-crime-cbt-therapy-cash-shootings>


SUBJECT: Project Syndicate Column Draft

What Should, & What Will the Federal Reserve Do on Thursday?

On Wednesday and Thursday June 15 and 16, the Federal Reserve's Federal Open Market Committee has 
one of its two-day meetings chttps 
://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarvpolicy/fomcpresconf20210616.htm>. What policy actions should it 
take? What policy actions will it take?

The second question is easy to answer. There is a high probability that the policy action that the 
Federal Reserve will take is to follow its previously outlined forward guidance, and raise its 
target for the short-term safe nominal interest rates that it controls by 0.5%-points, from the 
0.75%-l .0% range chttps://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DFF> to the 1.25%-1.5% range 
chttps://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/DTB3>.

FRED   — Federal Funds Effective Rate
6

2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       2020       
2022


There is great value in validating previous forward guidance: the Federal Reserve can shape 
expectations of future interest rates and thus steer the economy via "jawboning" only if its 
forward guidance is trusted, and building and maintaining that trust is a major objective of 
policy. The Federal Reserve should deviate from previous forward guidance only if there is 
substantial evidence that the economy is on the wrong track. There is no such evidence. Bond­
market expectations of the underlying long-run CPI inflation trend remain under 2.5% per year 
<https ://fred .stlouisfed.org/series/T5 YIFR#0>, lower than over the pre-2014 period when few 
people and no rational people feared that inflation was on the verge of deviating from its target 
in an upward direction.

Image not found

Some ask: won't the Federal Reserve see that the bond-market's expectation of inflation over the 
next five years is for a 3.0% per year CPI <https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/T5 YIE#>, not the 
2.5% per year CPI inflation that is its target, and so take steps to tighten monetary policy more 
than was previously expected?

— 5-Year Breakeven Inflation Rate


8

-3                                                                                        ~——

2004      2006      2008      2010      2012      2014      2016      2018      2020      2022

Image not found

The answer is: no. The Federal Reserve does not want to hit its inflation target year-by-year. It 
wants to maintain confidence in the economy's nominal price-level anchor. As long as that 
confidence is retained, the Federal Reserve has short-run policy freedom to do whatever is needed 
to maximize employment and growth. And deviating from forward guidance by raising interest rates 
faster than it had planneda€’’hitting the economy on the head with a brick to
reduce demand for and thus employment and growth in the construction, export, and import-competing 
sectorsa€’’definitely does not maximize employment and growth.

The first question is harder to answer. Right now bond-market expectations are, extracting what we 
think are duration risk premiums, for the Federal Funds rate to average about 2.75% per year over 
the next two years and about 2.5% per year over the next ten. Starting from where we are now, that 
suggests an expectation that the Federal Reserve will raise the Federal Funds rate to 3.5% over the 
course of the next year, hold it there, and then put it on a gradual
glide path down to perhaps 2%a€”until something else happens to the macroeconomy. That would be 
three 0.5%-point interest-rate increases and four 0.25%-point interest rate increases over the next 
seven meetings. I would very much prefer that the Federal Reserve not dribble its interest-rate 
increases out in a manner that leaves people without firm knowledge about how far it thinks it will 
ultimately need to go. I think that the best policy is for the Federal
Reserve to immediately move the Federal Funds rate to neutral plus-or-minusa€”plus, if it thinks 
that demand is higher than is sustainable if the Fed is to maintain the credibility of the nominal 
inflation anchor in the long run; minus, if it thinks that demand is lower than sustainable.

The most basic and general of Optimal Control Theory principles is that if your control is not at 
the optimal levela€”if the nose of your sailboat is not pointing where you want to goa€”you should 
turn the nose as fast as possible, until you don't know whether your next course correction will be 
to the port or to the starboard. In monetary policy, that would mean that each month the Federal 
Reserve should change its target so that people do not know whether the
next move is up or down. I have heard arguments that this Optimal Control Theory principle does not 
apply. They have all struck me as word salad. And I have not been able to understand why people 
think they apply.

But we go to monetary policy with the Federal Reserve procedures we have. For the Federal Reserve 
to raise interest rates by only 0.25%-points or by zero on Thursday would break its forward 
guidance in a context in which it really wishesa€”I really wisha€”the Federal Funds rate right now 
were not lower but were considerably higher. There is no  argumentfor doing that. For the Federal 
Reserveto raise interest rates by 0.75% would, if the ground had been
prepared, be better. Indeed, were I czar and had the ground been prepared I would call for a 
2.0%-point increase in the Federal Funds rate on Thursday to get it to what we think is its optimal 
level of neutral-plus. But the ground has not been prepared. And breaking forward guidance is a 
costly thing that is rarely worth doing.

A 90% chance of a Federal Funds rate up by 0.5%-points on Thursday. A 10% chance of up by 
0.75%-points.
Subscribe now


2004      2006      2008      2010      2012      2014      2016      2018      2020      2022

Image not found

The answer is: no. The Federal Reserve does not want to hit its inflation target year-by-year. It 
wants to maintain confidence in the economy's nominal price-level anchor. As long as that 
confidence is retained, the Federal Reserve has short-run policy freedom to do whatever is needed 
to maximize employment and growth. And deviating from forward guidance by raising interest rates 
faster than it had planneda€’’hitting the economy on the head with a brick to
reduce demand for and thus employment and growth in the construction, export, and import-competing 
sectorsa€’’definitely does not maximize employment and growth.

The first question is harder to answer. Right now bond-market expectations are, extracting what we 
think are duration risk premiums, for the Federal Funds rate to average about 2.75% per year over 
the next two years and about 2.5% per year over the next ten. Starting from where we are now, that 
suggests an expectation that the Federal Reserve will raise the Federal Funds rate to 3.5% over the 
course of the next year, hold it there, and then put it on a gradual
glide path down to perhaps 2%a€”until something else happens to the macroeconomy. That would be 
three 0.5%-point interest-rate increases and four 0.25%-point interest rate increases over the next 
seven meetings. I would very much prefer that the Federal Reserve not dribble its interest-rate 
increases out in a manner that leaves people without firm knowledge about how far it thinks it will 
ultimately need to go. I think that the best policy is for the Federal
Reserve to immediately move the Federal Funds rate to neutral plus-or-minusa€”plus, if it thinks 
that demand is higher than is sustainable if the Fed is to maintain the credibility of the nominal 
inflation anchor in the long run; minus, if it thinks that demand is lower than sustainable.

The most basic and general of Optimal Control Theory principles is that if your control is not at 
the optimal levela€”if the nose of your sailboat is not pointing where you want to goa€”you should 
turn the nose as fast as possible, until you don't know whether your next course correction will be 
to the port or to the starboard. In monetary policy, that would mean that each month the Federal 
Reserve should change its target so that people do not know whether the
next move is up or down. I have heard arguments that this Optimal Control Theory principle does not 
apply. They have all struck me as word salad. And I have not been able to understand why people 
think they apply.

But we go to monetary policy with the Federal Reserve procedures we have. For the Federal Reserve 
to raise interest rates by only 0.25%-points or by zero on Thursday would break its forward 
guidance in a context in which it really wishesa€”I really wisha€”the Federal Funds rate right now 
were not lower but were considerably higher. There is no  argumentfor doing that. For the Federal 
Reserveto raise interest rates by 0.75% would, if the ground had been
prepared, be better. Indeed, were I czar and had the ground been prepared I would call for a 
2.0%-point increase in the Federal Funds rate on Thursday to get it to what we think is its optimal 
level of neutral-plus. But the ground has not been prepared. And breaking forward guidance is a 
costly thing that is rarely worth doing.

A 90% chance of a Federal Funds rate up by 0.5%-points on Thursday. A 10% chance of up by 
0.75%-points.
Subscribe now

