One Picture: French Nuclearization:


100%

90%

80%

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Mix electrique frangais de 1960 a 2019

10 ans


(Ti           cn

CT i

cn  CFJ

Fossiles  ■ Bioenergies    Nucleaire    Eolien    Solaire    Hydraulique (y compris pompage)

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Alan Cole: Five Reasons the Sanctions Are Working: a€~In lieu of a military response, Biden and 
his allies are waging economic war on Putina€™ s Russia. Ita€™ s not a close fighta€! 
<https://fullstackeconomics.com/five-reasons-the-sanctions-are-working/>

•  Roger Cohen: How Ukrainians Are Using Social Media to Speak Out About the War: a€~Technology, 
blamed of late for every ill from the death of truth to the spread of loneliness, restores feeling 
and revives human connection as the war unfolds. Brave civilians brandishing newly acquired rifles 
against armored divisions cannot leave the onlooker colda€!

<https: //w ww.nytimes .com/2022/03/01/world/europe/zelensky-ukraine-war-outrage ,html>

•  Sahil Kapur: _a€™ a€oela€™ 11 be the majority leader.a€D Mitch McConnell knifes Rick Scotta€™ s 
agenda for a GOP Senate. a€oeWe would not have as part of our agenda a bill that raises taxes on 
half the American people and sunsets Social Security and Medicare within five yearsa€Da€!

Sahil Kapur @sahilkapur

NEW: "I'll be the majority leader." Mitch McConnell knifes Rick Scott's agenda for a GOP Senate "We 
would not have as part of our agenda a bill that raises taxes on half the American people and 
sunsets Social Security and Medicare within five years." nbcnews.com/politics/congra€!
9:07 PM r™ Mar 1,2022


418Likes 118Retweets

•  Lev Menand: a€™ You might be wondering: Why hasna€™ t the ruble fallen further following US EU 
UK sanctions against the Russian Central Bank? After all, dona€™ t these sanctions prevent currency 
stabilization by freezing Russiaa€™ s $630 bn+ of reserves? Yes but: Russia still has positive fx 
flows and the Russian Central Bank has enlisted
exporters to act as currency stabilization agents by requiring them to sell 80 % of their fx for 
rubles, meaning when they receive dollars they sell most of them from rublesa€l

Lev Menand @LevMenand

You might be wondering: Why hasn't the ruble fallen *further* following US EU UK sanctions against 
the Russian Central Bank? After all, don't these sanctions prevent currency stabilization by 
freezing Russia's $630 bn+ of reserves? 1/n

US Dollar Russian Ruble 104.4 +20.5                                  110

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

1:26 PM a"™ Mar 1.2022

859Likes361Retweets

Paragraphs:

Cory Doctorow: Amazona€™ s $31b a€ceAd Businessa€misna€™ t: a€~Looking at Amazona€™ s quarterly 
financialsa€l $31b ad divisiona€!. As Marketplace Pulse succinctly put it, a€oeEverything on Amazon 
is an Ada€da€! the first 3a€“7 thumbnails are a€oesponsored results,a€D On a product page the top 
bar, the bottom third, and large swathes of the right bar
and main body are for salea€!. Amazon retail business today isa€l a chokepoint capitalist 
marketplace with customers corralled on one side and merchants on the other, with a gate in between 
where it collects rent to let one side talk to othera€! the opposite of a a€oecustomer-centrica€n 
business. As Trung Phan reminds us, Amazon launched with a much-vaunted
a€oecollaborative filtera€D whose recommendations were driven by users, not sellersa€!

LINK: <https://pluralistic .net/2022/02/27/not-an-ad/#shakedowns>

Marco del Negro & al.: Drivers of Inflation: The New York Fed DSGE Modela€™ s Perspective: a€~After 
a sharp decline in the first few months of the COVIDa€“19 pandemic, inflation rebounded in the 
second half of 2020 and surged through 2021a€l. The New York Fed DSGE model[a€~s]a€l main finding 
is that the recent rise in inflation is mostly accounted for by
a large cost-push shock that occurred in the second quarter of 2021a€l. Based on the modela€™ s 
reading of historical data, this shock is expected to fade gradually over the course of 2022, 
returning quarterly inflation to close to 2 percent only in mida€“2023a€l

LINK: 
<https://libertvstreeteconomics.newvorkfed.org/2022/03/drivers-of-inflation-the-new-york-fed-dsge-mo
dels-perspective/>

Joe Weisenthal: Five Things You Need to Know to Start Your Day: a€~In the last few days, Russia has 
seen itself lose access to hundreds of billions in foreign currency reserves. While people usually 
think of money as something that you have, the reality in the modern fiat system is that money is 
usually something you are owed. Your money is someone elsea€™ s
liability. This is something Russia is seeing right now dramatic fashiona€!

LINK: <https ://www.bloomberg 
.com/news/newsletters/2022-03-01/five-things-you-need-to-know-to-start-your-day?cmpid=BBD030122_MKT>


Chad Orzel: State of the State of the Union: a€~Sometime in the early 2000s, though, W. Bush broke 
me. The combination of policies that I found appalling and his speaking style just became 
intolerablea€!. Way back in the 80a€™ s, the State of the Union seemed like an important and 
borderline solemn civic ritual, and watching it felt like part of my duty as an engaged
and educated adult. These days, ita€™ s just tawdry political theater, and I want nothing to do 
with it. And Ia€™ m probably in the top quartile of political engagement, relative to the 
population as a whole. I dona€™ t know how we find a way back from thata€!

LINK:


AN △ <*

Counting Atoms

State of the State of the Union

When I was a kid, I remember watching the State of the Union address every year. My father was a 
sixth-grade teacher, and also extremely interested in politics, so it was definitely going to be 
on, and by the mid-80a€™ s I was paying enough attention to politics on my own that I would also 
tune in. I remember laughing about Tip Oa€™ Neill appearing to just opa€!

Read more

a year ago A- Chad Orzel

Nicholas Gruen: The Wages off Another Low Dishonest Decade & Some Other Reading/Listening'. a€~In 
1937a€! Walter Lippmann had published The Good Society. He begana€! by lamenting the naA"vete of 
[his] firsta€! publisheda€l just before the outbreak of WWI. His words speak to our own timea€!. 
"The general scheme of the human future seemed fairly clear to
me then.a€! I had no premonition that the long peace which had lasted since Waterloo was soon toa€! 
end. I did not understand the prophetic warning of my teachera€! that there might be a war which 
would unsettle the foundations of societya€“indeed I was unable to imagine such a war and I did not 
know what were the foundations which might be unsettled. For in that
generation most men had forgotten the labors that had made them prosperous, the struggles that had 
made them free, the victories that had given them peace. They took for granted, like the oxygen 
they breathed and the solid ground beneath their feet, the first and last things of western 
civilisationa€!a€D

LINK:

Nicholas Gruen

The wages of another low dishonest decade and some other reading/listening

Ukraine And here was I thinking things were like we were back in the 1930s. Well, it has been like 
that. But this weeka€™ s events make me think of an earlier time. In 1937 prominent American 
political commentator Walter Lippmann had published The Good Societya€!

Read more

a year ago A- 11 likes A- Nicholas Gruen

John Spencer: The Eight Rules of Urban Warfare & Why We Must Work to Change Them'. a€~l. The urban 
defender has the advantagea€!. 2. The urban terrain reduces the attackera€™ s advantages in 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, the utility of aerial assets, and the attackera€™ s 
ability to engage at distancea€!. 3. The defender can see and engage the

attacker comincr because the attacker has limited cover and concealmenta^! 4 Rnildinas serve as 
fortified bunkers that must he neaotiateda^! S Attackers must use exnlosive force to nenetrate 
hnildinasa^! 6 The defender maintains relative freedom of maneuver within the urban terminal! 7 The 
nnderaronnd serves as the defendera^™ s refnaeea^! 8 Neither the


Counting Atoms

State of the State of the Union

When I was a kid, I remember watching the State of the Union address every year. My father was a 
sixth-grade teacher, and also extremely interested in politics, so it was definitely going to be 
on, and by the mid-80a€™ s I was paying enough attention to politics on my own that I would also 
tune in. I remember laughing about Tip Oa€™ Neill appearing to just opa€l
Read more

a year ago A- Chad Orzel

Nicholas Gruen: The Wages off Another Low Dishonest Decade & Some Other Reading/Listening'. a€~In 
1937a€! Walter Lippmann had published The Good Society. He begana€! by lamenting the naA"vete of 
[his] firsta€! publisheda€! just before the outbreak of WWI. His words speak to our own timea€!. 
"The general scheme of the human future seemed fairly clear to
me then.a€! I had no premonition that the long peace which had lasted since Waterloo was soon toa€! 
end. I did not understand the prophetic warning of my teachera€! that there might be a war which 
would unsettle the foundations of societya€“indeed I was unable to imagine such a war and I did not 
know what were the foundations which might be unsettled. For in that
generation most men had forgotten the labors that had made them prosperous, the struggles that had 
made them free, the victories that had given them peace. They took for granted, like the oxygen 
they breathed and the solid ground beneath their feet, the first and last things of western 
civilisationa€!a€D

LINK:

Nicholas Gruen

The wages of another low dishonest decade and some other reading/listening

Ukraine And here was I thinking things were like we were back in the 1930s. Well, it has been like 
that. But this weeka€™ s events make me think of an earlier time. In 1937 prominent American 
political commentator Walter Lippmann had published The Good Societya€!

Read more

a year ago A- 11 likes A- Nicholas Gruen

John Spencer: The Eight Rules of Urban Warfare & Why We Must Work to Change Them'. a€~l. The urban 
defender has the advantagea€!. 2. The urban terrain reduces the attackera€™ s advantages in 
intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance, the utility of aerial assets, and the attackera€™ s 
ability to engage at distancea€!. 3. The defender can see and engage the
attacker coming, because the attacker has limited cover and concealmenta€!. 4. Buildings serve as 
fortified bunkers that must be negotiateda€i. 5. Attackers must use explosive force to penetrate 
buildingsa€!. 6. The defender maintains relative freedom of maneuver within the urban terraina€!. 
7. The underground serves as the defendera€™ s refugeea€!. 8. Neither the
attacker nor the defender can concentrate their forces against the othera€!

LINK: chttps://mwi .usma.edu/the-eight-rules-of-urban-warfare-and-why-we-must-work-to-change-them/>

Steve Saideman: a€~This war is still quite young and Russia can still reach its objectives (at 
greater cost than expected). What we have learned once again is that: -modern war is complex, -it 
really is about logistics and about morale -bad news rarely goes up the chain well -cognition is 
key (the late Robert Jervis is right again) -nationalism matters but in ways that folks
keep forgetting, -having a comedian as President means much in a war of narratives -having 
equipment is one thing, knowing what to do with it is something else -easy to learn the wrong 
lessons from past wars. Did Putin think that his tanks would have same kind of fast run through 
Kiev that US had through Baghdad? -easy to make early reckless assessments!a€!

LINK:

Steve Saideman @smsaideman

This war is still quite young and Russia can still reach its objectives (at greater cost than 
expected). What we have learned once again is that: -modern war is complex, -it really is about 
logistics and about morale -bad news rarely goes up the chain well 1/x
4:31 PMr™ Feb 26,2022

17 8Likes21 Retweets
Leave a comment
Give  a gift subscription

Become a subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in email; or pay, for extras-at-the-bottom and to 
support this efforta€”I would like to collect enough from it to hire an RA....
Share

