<https://voutu.be/FdQhUqVOKjk>
Share

Join the Robert Schalkenbach Foundation for a virtual book launch celebrating the release of The 
Annotated Works of Henry George: Protection or Free Trade (Vol. IV) 7 PM EDT, Thursday, June 
3,2021:

<https ://schalkenbach .org/book-release/>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

a€oel well recall the daya€U, wrote Henry George in his The Science of Political Economy, a€oewhen, 
checking my horse on a rise that overlooks San Francisco Baya€Ua€”a view much like this one behind 
me, although it
looks very different now; indeed it looks different:

the commonplace reply of a passing teamster to a commonplace question, crystallized, as if by 
lightning-flash, my brooding thoughts into coherency, and I there and then recognized the natural
ordera€!. Yet at that time I had never heard of the Physiocrats, or read a line of Adam Smitha€!. I 
printed a little book, Our Land and Land Policy^}. A scholarly lawyer A.B. Douthitt told me that
what                                                                                         I 
hada€! was what the French a€ceEconomistsa€D a hundred years before had proposed.a€D

George was discussing what sociologist of knowledge Robert Merton called a€oemultiplesa€n: people 
thinking along the same lines, at first independently, but then discovering that what they knew or 
almost knew has been
arrived at by something else. This is the a€oedeepest of pleasuresa€D, George wrote, looking inside 
himself: a€oeto hear of others who have seena€D a truth when a€oeyou have seen a truth that others 
around you do not
seea€d.

Henry George, born in Philadelphia, left school at 14 in 1854. A year later he was in the Pacific 
on the Hindoo, out of Philadelphia on its way to Melbourne and Calcutta. He wound up on the Pacific 
coast of North America.
He would stay for 22 years. Only in 1880 did he leave California, to write and speak and debate and 
talk in the North Atlantic intellectual sphere. In between, he was self-educated from his own 
observations and from the
books he found in the California-in-the-1870s context.

This, I think, accounts for economistsa€™ relative neglect of George.

He was always extremely happy to discover that he agreed with Francois Quesnay or Adam Smith or 
Alfred Marshall, but he did not draw on them. Thus all of Georgea€™ s works are written in an 
intellectual dialect that is
not-quite-economese. We recognize the ideas in it. But there expression seems a little unfamiliar 
to us. And so for points where we could cite Smith or Ricardo or Quesnay or Marshall or George, we 
cite the orthodox
economists because our dialect is directly descended from theirs. We thus give Georgea€”and 
Quesnay, who is in much the same positiona€”short shrift.

Plus there is the fact that George was definitely in-economists-face bigtime:

Political economya€™ s professors and teachers have almost invariably belonged to or been dominated 
by that class which tolerates no questioning of social adjustments that give to those who do not
labor the fruits of labora€™ s toil. They have been like physicians employed to make a diagnosis on 
condition that they shall discover no unpleasant truth. Given social conditions such as those that
throughout the civilized world today shock the moral sensea€! in the colleges and universitiesa€! 
it is idle to expect any enunciation of truths unwelcome to the powers that bea€!

and:

It is true, as Macaulay said, that if large pecuniary interests were concerned in denying tbe 
attraction of gravitation, that most obvious of physical facts would have disputersa€!

But even though Henry George did not feed much into the currents of academic discussion that led to 
todaya€™ s discipline of economics, he did have enormous intellectual influence in America. It is 
an important fact that
Progress and Poverty had enormous rhetorical force in its daya€”a much more readable and, except 
for would-be professors in dusty rooms, a more convincing book than the works of the economists. 
Henry George Jr.
claimed   in 1905 that two million copies of Progress and Poverty had been printed. The 
best-selling book of the 1800s in the United States was, of course, the Bible, the second 
best-selling was Uncle Tomd€™ s Cabin. Ben-
Hur comes, I believe, third. Progress and Poverty is fourtha€’’outstripping the book that I think 
is number five, Edward Bellamya€™ s 1887 very badly written utopian novel Looking Backward. We know 
the impact of Uncle
Tomd€™ s Cabin.-a^Uso this is the little ladv who started this big wara€D goes the apocryphal storv 
of Abraham Lincolna€™ s meeting with Harriet Beacher Stowe in 1862.


Bellamy had an impact. George had a bigger one.

One of the interesting puzzles in North Atlantic political economy around 1900 is that the United 
States had a Progressive Era but Great Britain did not. In the mid-1920s John Maynard Keynes, in 
his The End of Laissez-
Faire, pointed out that most of British public discussion about economics was based on a general 
belief that economists taught or perhaps should teach laissez-faire as a general rule, and he 
pointed to the extraordinary reach
of Jane Marceta€™ s Conversations on Political Economy and Harriett Martineaua€™ s Illustrations of 
Political Economy in creating that belief. America had George and Bellamy as the mass-market 
writers on political
economy. Britain had Marcet and Martineau. It is not stupid to think that perhaps that made the 
difference.

We, however, not here to talk about land-value taxation. We are not here to talk about Henry 
Georgea€™ s role in trying to advance our democracy by instituting the secret ballota€”Jill Lepore 
says that we owe it more to him
than to anybody else <https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2008/10/13/rock-paper-scissors>. We are 
here to talk about protection^’’tariffs, and quotasa€”or free trade. So let us start by listening 
to Henry George about
how  in arguing for freer trade he is swimming against the current, rolling the Sisyphean stone up 
the hill, for he is in very bad intellectual company. In America, the advocates of free trade had 
been future Confederates
strongly attached to their natural right to sell tariff-free to British factories and thus collect 
every possible cent from the cotton they sweated out of their slaves with the lash. And in America 
the advocates of free trade, as
Matthew Downhour quoted George in the article he wrote for Liberal Currents last week 
<https://www.liberalcurrents.com/applying-the-lessons-of-georges-protection-or-free-trade/>:

have, for the most part, not only professed no special interest in the well-being of the working 
classes and no desire to raise wages, but have denied the justice of attempting to use the powers of
government for this purpose. The doctrines of free trade have been intertwined with teachings that 
throw upon the laws of nature responsibility for thea€! poverty of the laboring class, and foster a
callous indifference to their sufferingsa€!. While protesting against restrictions upon the 
production of wealth they have ignored the monstrous injustice of its distribution^!

So let us start by listening to Henry George on how tariffs are in fact an act of economic 
wara€”but an economic war waged by a government against its own economy:

Trade is not invasion. It does not involve aggression on one side and resistance on the othera€!. 
We saya€! the United States [forced trade] upon Japan. Buta€! what was done was not to force the
people to trade, but to force their governments to let thema€!. Trade does not require force. Free 
trade consists simply in letting people buy and sell as they want to buy and sell. It is protection 
that
requires force, for it consists in preventing people from doing what they want to do. Protective 
tariffs are as much applications of force as are blockading squadrons, and their object is the 
samea€”to
prevent trade .The difference between the two is that blockading squadrons are a means whereby 
nations seek to prevent their enemies from trading; protective tariffs are a means whereby nations
attempt to prevent their own people from trading. What protection teaches us, is to do to ourselves 
in time of peace what enemies seek to do to us in time of wara€!

Milton Friedman called that the most rhetorically brilliant argument for free trade ever. I suspect 
that Friedman was less pleased by what came at the end of the book. For George cautioned:

What have we proved? Merely that it is the tendency of free trade to increase the production of 
wealtha€L But from this it does not follow that the abolition of protection would be of any benefit 
to the
working class. The tendency of a brick pushed off a chimney top is to fall to the surface of the 
ground. But it will not fall to the surface of the ground if its fall be intercepteda€!. The 
tendency of
anything that increases the productive power of labor is to augment wages, but it will nota€l [if] 
laborers are forced by competition to offer their services for a mere livinga€!

Milton Friedman believed to his dying day that anything that increased the productive power of 
labor did augment wages unless government regulation to establish and maintain monopoly power in 
the economy interfered.
But Henry George disagreed. He saw, in fact:

Existing conditionsa€! preventing] the working classes from getting the benefit of this tendency a€ 
I

In fact, George said, even the claim that freer trade is good for the working class was made only 
in countries that were at least semi-democracies:

In countries where the working classes have little or no influence upon government it is never even 
pretended that protection raises wages . It is only in countries like the United States, where it is
necessary to cajole the working class, that such a preposterous plea is made. And here the failure 
of protection to raise wages is shown by the most evident factsa€!

And all this posed a deep and serious problem for free-traders:

The problem we must solve [is] to explain why free trade or labor-saving invention or any similar 
cause fails to produce the general benefits we naturally expect, [it] is a problem of the 
distribution of
wealth. When increased production of wealth does not proportionately benefit the working-classes, 
it must be that it is accompanied by increased inequality of distribution. In themselves free trade
and labor-saving inventions do not tend to inequality of distribution. Yet it is possible that they 
may promote such inequality a€!

Georgea€™ s solution was the single tax, the unimproved land rent tax. The root problem was people 
who took without working by means of control of resources that no human had made. The solution was 
to take those
earnings that were paid not for human effort but for natural scarcity made actual and chargina a 
price in the marketplace, and recycle those earnings back to the people.

Now Henry George was 100% right in identifying the problem. Wolfgang Stolper and Paul Samuelson 
writing in 1941 is now the standard reference <https ://ww w.jstor.org/stable/2967638>. Consider a 
trading economy in
which there are two countries each of which produces the same two goodsa€”call them food and 
craftsa€’’using two factors of production, labor and land, with food being the more land-intensive 
good. Labor will be the
relatively scarce factor in one country and the relatively abundant factor in the other. A 
reduction in tariffs will raise wages in the country where labor was the relatively abundant 
factor, and in which freer trade will raise
exports of labor-intensive craft goods. It will reduce them in the country where labor was the 
relatively scarce factor by subjecting the craftwork sector to foreign competition and reducing the 
price of craft goods.

As Dani Rodrik likes to point out, the distributional effects from trade policy swamp the 
production-increasing effectsa€”although the production-increasing effects are there. And so freer 
trade can raise worker wages only if
it diminishes the market-social power of the owners of non-labor factors of production. And that, 
by necessity, can be the case only half the time.

Now you soften or harden this conclusion by bringing in other considerations.

(1) A market economy is a tremendously effective societal calculating and organizational machine 
for crowdsourcing and then coordinating solutions to the problems that the market economy sets 
itself. It was Friedrich von
Hayeka€™ s genius to most clearly see this. But the principal problem that the market economy sets 
itself is to maximize the satisfaction of the desires of those who own valuable property, like 
landa€”to provide them with
the greatest amount of the necessities, conveniences, and luxuries of life that they think they 
need.

(2) Have other goals than the convenience of property-owners? The market economy will satisfy other 
goals only as a byproduct of satisfying that one.

(3) Thus the market economy, by itself, will not be very good at generating rapid economic growth:

(a) The rich who own valuable property are likely to be shorter-sighted, and prefer to live well by 
importing foreign luxuries than to divert earnings from exports to importing technology-embodying
capital goods to boost production.

(b) The market does not really a€oeseea€D the advance of technological knowledge either in 
blueprints and such that can be covered by patents or in the tacit experience of communities of
engineering and organizational practice that learn by doing and from experience.

(c) Let me give another quote from Protection or Free Trade'.

Inequality in the distribution of wealth tends to lessen the production of wealth on the one side, 
by lessening intelligence and incentive among workers; and, on the other side,
by augmenting the number of idlers and those who minister to them, and by increasing vice, crime 
and waste. Now, if increase in the production of wealth tends to increase
inequality in distribution, not only shall we be mistaken in expecting its full effect from 
anything which tends to increase production, but there may be a point at which
increased inequality of distribution will neutralize increased power of production, just as the 
carrying of too much sail may deaden a ship's waya€!

Of course, a democracya€”or any other kind of political societya€’’will not be happy with a market 
economy that ruthlessly crowdsources solutions to the problem of making the rich as comfortable as 
possible, and then
ruthlessly implements them. People demand more than just the elimination of all rights that are not 
property rights, and the devaluation of those property rights that are not necessary to produce the 
things for which the current
rich currently have a serious jones. People think that they have a right to stable 
employments’’that their job, and their ability to quickly get another equivalent job if their old 
jobs end, should not be hostage to their region

and their industry passing some maximum-profitability test administered by a group of financiers 
thousands of miles away. People think that they have a right to an income level they deserve by 
virtue of who they are and how
they played by the rules to get to their position, and that the economy needs to be arranged to 
provide that level of income. People think that their community is in some sense theirs, and that 
the economy should be arranged

to shape it to their liking.

As Hungarian-Jewish-Toronton moral philosopher Karl Polanyi put it, the market economy turns land, 
labor, and finance into commodities to be moved about to satisfy the maximum-profitability test. 
And people do not like
that, and react. They may grudgingly accept the market economy. They will not accept a market 
society. And free-trade movements that do not inquire deeply, deeply into distribution will run 
into trouble, bigtime.

The original political economists were very, very concerned with distribution. Think of old Adam 
Smith, who wrote that a society so unequal that the bulk of the people were poor could not be a 
prosperous or a happy society:

Servants, labourers, and workmena€! make up the far greater parta€!. What improves the 
circumstances of the greater part can never be regarded as an inconveniency to the whole. No 
society can
surely be i-i,ourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are poor and 
miserablea€!. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of 
the people,
should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably well fed, 
clothed, and lodgeda€!


(3) Thus the market economy, by itself, will not be very good at generating rapid economic growth:

(a) The rich who own valuable property are likely to be shorter-sighted, and prefer to live well by 
importing foreign luxuries than to divert earnings from exports to importing technology-embodying
capital goods to boost production.

(b) The market does not really a€ceseea€D the advance of technological knowledge either in 
blueprints and such that can be covered by patents or in the tacit experience of communities of
engineering and organizational practice that learn by doing and from experience.

(c) Let me give another quote from Protection or Free Trade'.

Inequality in the distribution of wealth tends to lessen the production of wealth on the one side, 
by lessening intelligence and incentive among workers; and, on the other side,
by augmenting the number of idlers and those who minister to them, and by increasing vice, crime 
and waste. Now, if increase in the production of wealth tends to increase
inequality in distribution, not only shall we be mistaken in expecting its full effect from 
anything which tends to increase production, but there may be a point at which
increased inequality of distribution will neutralize increased power of production, just as the 
carrying of too much sail may deaden a ship's waya€!

Of course, a democracy a€”or any other kind of political society a€’’will not be happy with a 
market economy that ruthlessly crowdsources solutions to the problem of making the rich as 
comfortable as possible, and then
ruthlessly implements them. People demand more than just the elimination of all rights that are not 
property rights, and the devaluation of those property rights that are not necessary to produce the 
things for which the current
rich currently have a serious jones. People think that they have a right to stable 
employments’’that their job, and their ability to quickly get another equivalent job if their old 
jobs end, should not be hostage to their region

and their industry passing some maximum-profitability test administered by a group of financiers 
thousands of miles away. People think that they have a right to an income level they deserve by 
virtue of who they are and how
they played by the rules to get to their position, and that the economy needs to be arranged to 
provide that level of income. People think that their community is in some sense theirs, and that 
the economy should be arranged

to shape it to their liking.

As Hungarian-Jewish-Toronton moral philosopher Karl Polanyi put it, the market economy turns land, 
labor, and finance into commodities to be moved about to satisfy the maximum-profitability test. 
And people do not like
that, and react. They may grudgingly accept the market economy. They will not accept a market 
society. And free-trade movements that do not inquire deeply, deeply into distribution will run 
into trouble, bigtime.

The original political economists were very, very concerned with distribution. Think of old Adam 
Smith, who wrote that a society so unequal that the bulk of the people were poor could not be a 
prosperous or a happy society:

Servants, labourers, and workmena€! make up the far greater parta€!. What improves the 
circumstances of the greater part can never be regarded as an inconveniency to the whole. No 
society can
surely be i'-i,ourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are poor and 
miserablea€!. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of 
the people,
should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably well fed, 
clothed, and lodgeda€!

However, ever since political economy began to divorce itself from its fundamentalist utilitarian 
Benthamite roots that all economic arrangements are damned if they do not produce the greatest good 
for the greatest number, it
has tended to fall into an equally hardline fundamentalist position on the other side.

What is that position? It is that questions of distribution are questions of value that are beyond 
economicsa€™ s scope, that economics is concerned only with efficiency, and after things that 
hobble market efficiency are taken
away, then all the economist can say is: a€oethe market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be 
the name of the marketa€D. In large part, I think, because Henry George was off setting his thought 
in its intellectual
concrete  in San Francisco, he escaped this tendency. Instead, his watchword was always: a€oethe 
market was made for man, not man for the marketa€D. That point of view has very powerful virtues.

Milton Friedman told you, and I tell you: Henry Georgea€™ s Protection or Free Trade is still well 
worth reading.
Thank you.

2761 words

References

Matthew Downhour: Applying the Lessons of Georgea€™s 'Protection or Free Trade" 
<https://www.liberalcurrents.com/applving-the-lessons-of-georges-protection-or-free-trade/>

Henry George: The Science of Political Economy <https://books.google.com/books ?id=ssBNAQAAMAAJ>

Henry George: Our Land and Land Policy <https://books .google.com/books?id=haGde!4mwOMC>

Henry George, Jr.: The Life of Henry George, by His Son <https: //books .google .com/books 
?id=TAUPA A A AQ AA J>

John Maynard Keynes: The End of Laissez-Faire <https: //w ww.panarchv.org/keynes/laissezfaire 
.1926.html>

Kimberly J. Largent: Harriet Beecher Stowe: The Little Woman Who Wrote the Book that Started This 
Great War 
<https://ehistorv.osu.edu/articles/harriet-beecher-stowe-little-woman-who-wrote-book-started-great-w
ar>

Mark J. Perry: Some Economic Lessons About Trade for Donald Trump from Milton Friedman and Henry 
George 
<https://www.aei.org/carpe-diem/some-economic-lessons-about-trade-for-donald-trump-from-milton-
friedman-and-henry-george/>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

