Forthcoming at: <https://www.project-syndicate.org/columnist/j-bradford-delong>

Back in 1992, Larry Summers and I warned that pushing the U.S. inflation target down from 4% per 
yeara€”a level that then did not seem to be causing any discontent
whatsoevera€”to 2% risked causing big problems. Monetary policy might then hit the zero lower 
bound. And then what would we do? Alan Greenspan then pushed the U.S.
inflation  target down to 2%. And ever since we have had big problems.

I have long thoughta€”and I have long thought that this was general near-consensusa€”that many of 
our problems would go away if we could re-jigger asset market Markets so
that a federal funds rate of 5% was not too high to be consistent with full employment in the late 
stage of a business cycle. There would be three ways to accomplish this: (1) raise
the inflation target back from the 2% of Greenspan to the 4% of Volker, (2) boost investment demand 
so that a late-cycle federal-funds rate of 5% is consistent with strong
investment, or (3) flood the market with safe Treasury assets so that the safe-asset price premium 
U.S. Treasury rate falls and the warranted late-cycle federal-funds rate rises.

When Joe Biden won the election and proposed his $1.9 trillion relief, rescue, support, and 
stimulus spending proposal, I saw it as a very good thing: a substantial chunk of the
money would go to people who could really use it in this this plague year, it would ensure that the 
economy rapidly reattained full employment, and it would help with (3) as well.
Whata€™ s not to like? It was true that I would greatly prefer if a much larger chunk of the $1.9 
trillion were to go public investment. But unless and until I could be confident that
ten Repubian senators would work on and support such a public-investment push, making the 
unattainable best the enemy of the attainable good would simply be a complete waste
of time, at best.

Yet now I see a lot of people whom I greatly respect and admire making noises of opposition, or at 
least discontent, with respect to the $1.9 Biden relief, rescue, support, and
stimulus. Now I am not talking about the professional Republicans. And I am not talking about the 
Bourbons of economicsa€’’those who take great care to learn nothing, and never
mark their beliefs to market. But there are many others: right now in my tickler-to-review file I 
see Olivier Blanchard and Larry Summers fearing that the Federal Reserve will not
be able to contain inflationary pressures without causing recession; I see Harold James, Markus 
Brunnermeier, and Jean-Pierre Landau worrying about a a€oenew and dangerous
worldwide inflationary consensusa€D; I see Michael Straina€”perhaps the last honorable economist 
still calling himself a Republicana€”saying that Federal Reserve interest rate
increases should be avoided because a€oeconfidence in the Feda€™ s ability to fine-tune the economy 
is misplaced. When the unemployment rate goes up a little, it tends to go up a
lota€!a€D

But when I translate this, it is: we fear that the Federal Reserve will have to raise the federal 
funds rate back into the range that we used to consider normal in order to keep the lid
on inflationary pressures generated by Bidena€™ s $1.9 trillion. But that is a possibility, not a 
certainty. I think it is at least as likely that we will be glad that $1.9 trillion was spent
to fill in holes in aggregatre demand. And if the past fifteen years of discussion on a€oesecular 
stagnationa€D and a€oeglobal savings glutsa€D have led otherwise than to the
conclusion that a higher warranted federal funds rate would be a good thing, I have not understood 
it at all.

Thus I find myself very puzzled at the opposition, and the discontent, from other than the usual 
suspects. Is it that they do not trust the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates when
necessary, and so wish to keep the warranted federal funds rate at the zero lower bound always for 
fear that someday, sometime the warranted rate will exceed the market rate? But
that makes no sense to me.

696 words

Olivier Blanchard: In Defense of Concerns Over the $1.9 Trillion Relief Plan 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/defense-concerns-over-19-trillion-
relief-plan>

Joseph Gagnon: Inflation Fears & the Biden Stimulus: Look to the Korean War, not Vietnam: 
a€~Olivier J. Blanchard and Lawrence H. Summers raise concerns that... the Federal
Reserve may not be able to contain inflation without creating a financial crisis or tipping the 
economy into recession. Paul Krugman and Wendy Edelberg and Louise Sheiner are
less concerned... [but] ignore the possibility that a successful vaccination campaign that reopens 
important service industries might unlock a flood of spending from the large
backlog                                                                               of household 
savings last yeara€! LINK: 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/inflation-fears-and-biden-stimulus-look-k
orean-war-not-vietnam>

Joseph Gagnon: Inflation Fears & the Biden Stimulus: Look to the Korean War, not Vietnam: 
a€~Inflation may surge temporarily. But, as long as the spending boom is viewed as a
temporary readjustment and the Federal Reserve maintains its commitment to controlling inflation 
over the longer run, inflation should drop quickly. To demonstrate its anti-
inflationary resolve, the Fed would need to raise interest rates quickly and significantly. But the 
increase need not be commensurate with the increase in inflation, nor need it be high
enough to cause a recessiona€! LINK: 
<https://www.piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/inflation-fears-and-biden-stimulus-look-k
orean-war-not-vietnam>

Harold James, Markus Brunnermeier & Jean-Pierre Landau: Whoa€™ s Right on Inflation?: a€~As in the 
1970s, a severe economic shock has forced governments to pursue
massive fiscal and monetary expansion, thereby sowing fears of future inflation. But not all shocks 
are the same, and the key question now is whether we can be confident that the
current state of exception will end. Some EU member statesa€’’especially in the a€oefrugal 
northa€Da€”are beginning to worry about a new and dangerous worldwide

inflationary consensus. And some Americans... have begun to voice similar concerns. The key 
question is whether we can be confident that the state of exception will end. If we

can clearly identify that moment, we need not worry about inflation. But if one exception begets 
more exceptions expectations will shift, and inflation will increasingly factor into

our vision of the future. That will create political uncertainty and acute polarization between 
countries run by fearful hawks and those run by self-confident dovesa€! LINK:

<https://www.project-svndicate.org/commentarv/threat-of-unanchored-inflation-expectations-bv-harold-
james-et-al-2021-03>

Dion Rabouin: Top Central Bankers Turn Their Backs on Inflation Fears: a€~"I dona€™t think we are 
worrying about reflation and ita€™ s going to be a while before we worry
about inflation," European Central Bank president Christine Lagarde said in a webcast interview. 
"If you consider how far we are from our goala€!we are very far away." "As we
look forward, we will probably see an increase in [inflation] readings. That is not going to mean 
very much. It will not be larger or persistent," Fed chair Jerome Powell said during
a separate webcast interview hours latera€! LINK: 
<https://www.axios.com/inflation-central-banks-fears-stance-9691c621-9734-49bl-b842-ccfd453a9a5c.htm
l>

Michael Strain: Biden Stimulus Proposal Risks Shortening the Recovery: a€~In the face of this... 
trend inflation above target, occasional spikes in monthly inflation data, and...
bubbles. the Fed could quickly begin to feel that it had fallen behind the curve. In this 
situation, the Fed might try to slow the pace of the expansion without ending it. But

confidence in the Feda€™ s ability to fine tune the economy is misplaced. When the unemployment 
rate goes up a little, it tends to go up a lota€! LINK:

<https://www.nationalreview.com/corner/bidens-stimulus-risks-shortening-the-recovery/>

Lawrence Summers: Bidena€™ s Covid Stimulus Plan Is Big & Bold but Has Risks, too 
<https://www.washingtonpost.eom/opinions/2021/02/04/larrv-summers-biden-covid-
stimulus/>


