Subscribe now

From Churchilla€™ s book Great Contemporaries <https://archive 
.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.158845/mode/2up>
Share


When the usurper and tyrant is reduced to literary controversy, when the Communist instead of bombs 
produces effusions for the capitalist Press, when the refugee War Lord fights his battles over 
again, and the discharged executioner becomes chatty and garrulous at his fireside, we
may rejoice in the signs that better days are come.

I have before me an article that Leon Trotsky alias Bronsteinl has recently contributed to John 
oa€™ Londona€™ s Weekly2 in which he deals with my descriptions of Lenin, with the Allied 
Intervention in Russia, with Lord Birkenhead and other suggestive topics. He has written
this article from his exile in Turkey while supplicating England, France and Germany to admit him 
to the civilizations it has beena€”and still isa€”the object of his life to destroy.

Russiaa€”his own Red Russiaa€”the Russia he had framed and fashioned to his hearta€™ s desire 
regardless of suffering to others or hazard to himselfa€”has cast him out. All his scheming, all 
his daring, all his writing, all his harangues, all his atrocities, all his achievements,
have led only to thisa€”that another a€~comrade,a€™ his subordinate in revolutionary rank, his 
inferior in wit, though not perhaps in crime, rules in his stead, while he, the once triumphant 
Trotsky whose frown meted death to thousands, sits disconsolatea€”a skin of malice
stranded for a time on the shores of the Black Sea3 and now washed up in the Gulf of Mexico.4

But he must have been a difficult man to please. He did not like the Czar,5 so he murdered him and 
his family. He did not like the Imperial Government, so he blew it up. He did not like the 
Liberalism of Guchkov6 and Miliukov,? so he overthrew them. He could not endure the
Social Revolutionary moderation of Kerensky and Savinkov, so he seized their places.

And when at last the Communist regime for which he had striven with might and main was established 
throughout the whole of Russia, when the Dictatorship of the Proletariat was supreme, when the New 
Order of Society had passed from visions into reality, when the hateful
culture and traditions of the individualist period had been eradicated, when the Secret Police had 
become the servants of the Third International,8 when in a word his Utopia had been achieved, he 
was still discontented. He still fumed, growled, snarled, bit and plotted.

He had raised the poor against the rich. He had raised the penniless against the poor. He had 
raised the criminal against the penniless. All had fallen out as he had willed. But nevertheless 
the vices of human society required, it seemed, new scourgings. In the deepest depth he sought
with desperate energy for a deeper. Buta€”poor wretcha€”he had reached rock-bottom. Nothing lower 
than the Communist criminal class could be found. In vain he turned his gaze upon the wild beasts. 
The apes could not appreciate his eloquence. He could not mobilize the
wolves, whose numbers had so notably increased during his administration. So the criminals he had 
installed stood together, and put him outside.

Hence these chatty newspaper articles. Hence these ululations from the Bosphorus.9 Hence these 
entreaties to be allowed to visit the British MuseumlO and study its documents, or to drink the 
waters of Malvernll for his rheumatism, or of Nauheim for his heart, or of Homburg for
his gout, 12 or of some other place for some other complaint.

Hence these broodings in Turkish shades pierced by the searching eye of Mustafa Kemal. 13 Hence 
these exits from France, from Scandinavia. Hence this last refuge in Mexico.

It is astonishing that a man of TrotskyaC™ s intelligence should not be able to understand the 
well-marked dislike of civilized governments for the leading exponents of Communism. He writes as 
if it were due to mere narrow-minded prejudice against new ideas and rival political
theories. But Communism is not only a creed. It is a plan of campaign. A Communist is not only the 
holder of certain opinions; he is the pledged adept of a well-thought-out means of enforcing them. 
The anatomy of discontent and revolution has been studied in every phase and
aspect, and a veritable drill book prepared in a scientific spirit for subverting all existing 
institutions.

The method of enforcement is as much a part of the Communist faith as the doctrine itself. At first 
the time-honoured principles of Liberalism and Democracy are invoked to shelter the infant 
organism. Free speech, the right of public meeting, every form of lawful political agitation
and constitutional right are paraded and asserted. Alliance is sought with every popular movement 
towards the left. The creation of a mild Liberal or Socialist regime in some period of convulsion 
is the first milestone. But no sooner has this been created than it is to be overthrown.
Woes and scarcity resulting from confusion must be exploited.

Collisions, if possible attended with bloodshed, are to be arranged between the agents of the New 
Government and the working people. Martyrs are to be manufactured. An apologetic attitude in the 
rulers should be turned to profit. Pacific propaganda may be made the mask of
hatreds never before manifested among men. No faith need be, indeed may be, kept with 
non-communists. Every act of goodwill, of tolerance, of conciliation, of mercy, of magnanimity on 
the part of Governments or Statesmen is to be utilized for their ruin.

Then when the time is ripe and the moment opportune, every form of lethal violence from mob revolt 
to private assassination must be used without stint or compunction. The citadel will be stormed 
under the banners of Liberty and Democracy; and once the apparatus of power is in
the hands of the Brotherhood, all opposition, all contrary opinions must be extinguished by {200} 
death. Democracy is but a tool to be used and afterwards broken; Liberty but a sentimental folly 
unworthy of the logician. The absolute rule of a self-chosen priesthood according to
the dogmas it has learned by rote is to be imposed upon mankind without mitigation progressively 
for ever.

All this, set out in prosy text-books, written also in blood in the history of several powerful 
nations, is the Communista€™ s faith and purpose.

To be forewarned should be to be forearmed! I wrote this passage nearly seven years ago: but is it 
not an exact account of the Communist plot which has plunged Spainl4 into the present hideous 
welter against the desires of the overwhelming majority of Spaniards on both sides?

It is probable that Trotsky never comprehended the Marxian creed: but of its drill-book he was the 
incomparable master. He possessed in his nature all the qualities requisite for the art of civic 
destructiona€”the organizing command of a Carnot, 15 the cold detached intelligence of a
Machiavelli, 16 the mob oratory of a Cleon,17 the ferocity of Jack the Ripper,18 the toughness of 
Titus Oates.19 No trace of compassion, no sense of human kinship, no apprehension of the spiritual, 
weakened his high and tireless capacity for action. Like the cancer bacillus he grew,
he fed, he tortured, he slew in fulfilment of his nature.

He found a wife20 who shared the Communist faith. She worked and plotted at his side. She shared 
his first exile to Siberia in the days of the Czar.21 She bore him children.22 She aided his 
escape. He deserted her.23

He found another kindred mind24 in a girl of good family who had been expelled from a school at 
Kharkov25 for persuading the pupils to refuse to attend prayers and to read Communist literature 
instead of the Bible. By her he had another family.26 As one of his biographers (Max
Eastman)27 puts it: a€~If you have a perfectly legal mind, she is not Trotskya€™ s wife, for 
Trotsky never divorced Alexandra Ivovna Sokolovski, who still uses the name of Bronstein.a€™

Of his mother28 he writes in cold and chilling terms. His fathera€”old Bronsteina€”died of typhus 
in 1920 at the age of 83.29 The triumphs of his son brought no comfort to this honest hard-working 
and believing Jew. Persecuted by the Reds because he wasa bourgeois;by the
Whites because he was Trotskya€™ s father, and deserted by his son, he was left to sink or swim in 
the Russian deluge, and swam on steadfastly to the end. What else was there for him to do?

Yet in Trotsky, in this being so removed from the ordinary affections and sentiments of human 
nature, so uplifted, shall we say, above the common herd, so superbly fitted to his task, there was 
an element of weakness especially serious from the Communist point of view. Trotsky
was ambitious, and ambitious in quite a common worldly way. All the collectivism in the world could 
not rid him of an egoism which amounted to a disease, and to a fatal disease. He must not only ruin 
the State, he must rule the ruins thereafter.

Every system of government of which he was not the head or almost the head was odious to him. The 
Dictatorship of the Proletariat to him meant that he was to be obeyed without question. He was to 
do the dictating on behalf of the proletariat. a€~The toiling masses ,a€™ the
a€~Councils of Workmen, Peasants and Soldiers,a€™ the gospel and revelation of Karl Marx, the 
Federal Union of Socialist Soviet Republics, etc., to him were all spelt in one word: Trotsky.

This led to trouble.

Comrades became jealous. They became suspicious. At the head of the Russian Army which he 
reconstructed amid indescribable difficulties and perils, Trotsky stood very near the vacant Throne 
of the Romanovs. The Communist formulas he had used with devastating effect upon
others, were now no impediment to him. He discarded them as readily as he had discarded his wife, 
or his father, or his name. The Army must be remade; victory must be won; and Trotsky must do it 
and Trotsky profit from it. To what other purpose should revolutions be made?

He used his exceptional prowess to the full. The officers and soldiers of the new model army were 
fed, clothed and treated better than anyone else in Russia. Officers of the old Czarist regime were 
wheedled back in thousands. a€~To the devil with politicsa€”let us save
Russia.a€™ The salute was reintroduced. The badges of rank and privilege were restored. The 
authority of commanders was re-established. The higher command found themselves treated by this 
Communist upstart with a deference they had never experienced from the Ministers of
the  Czar. The abandonment by the Allies of the Russian Loyalist cause crowned these measures with 
a victory easy but complete.

In 1922 so great was the appreciation among the military for TrotskyaC™ s personal attitude and 
system that he might well have been made Dictator of Russia by the armed forces, but for one fatal 
obstacle. He was a Jew. He was still a Jew. Nothing could get over that. Hard fortune
when you have deserted your family, repudiated your race, spat upon the religion of your fathers, 
and lapped Jew and Gentile in a common malignity, to be baulked of so great a prize for so 
narrow-minded a reason! Such intolerance, such pettiness, such bigotry were hard indeed to
bear.

And this disaster carried in its train a greater. In the wake of disappointment loomed catastrophe. 
For meanwhile the comrades had not been idle. They too had heard the talk of the officers. They too 
saw the possibilities of a Russian army reconstituted from its old elements. While
Lenin lived the danger seemed remote. Lenin indeed regarded Trotsky as his political heir. He 
sought to protect him. But in 1924 Lenin died: and Trotsky, still busy with his army, still 
enjoying the day-to-day work of administering his department, still hailed with the acclamations
which had last resounded for Nicholas II, turned to find a hard and toughly-wrought opposition 
organized against him.

Stalin the Georgian was a kind of General Secretary to the governing instrument. He managed the 
caucus and manipulated the innumerable committees. He gathered the wires together with patience and 
pulled them in accordance with a clearly-perceived design. When Trotsky
advanced hopefully, confidently indeed, to accept the succession to Lenin, the party machine was 
found to be working in a different direction.

In the purely political arena of Communist activities Trotsky was speedily outmanA“uvred. He was 
accused on the strength of some of his voluminous writings of a€~ Anti-Leninism.a€™ He does not 
seem to have understood that Lenin had replaced God in the Communist mind.
He remained for some time under the impression that any such desirable substitution had been 
effected by Trotsky. He admitted his heresy and eagerly explained to the soldiers and workers the 
very cogent reasons which had led him to it.

His declarations were received with blank dismay. The OGPU30 was set in motion. Officers known to 
be under an obligation to Trotsky were removed from their appointments. After a period of silent 
tension he was advised to take a holiday. This holiday after some interruptions
still continues.

Stalin used his success to build a greater. The Politbureau,31 without the spell of Lenin, or the 
force of Trotsky, was in its turn purged of its remaining elements of strength. The politicians who 
had made the Revolution were dismissed and chastened and reduced to impotence by the
party manager. The caucus swallowed the Cabinet, and with Stalin at its head became the present 
Government of Russia. Trotsky was marooned by the very mutineers he had led so hardily to seize the 
ship.

What will be his place in history? For all its horrors, a glittering light plays over the scenes 
and actors of the French Revolution. The careers and personalities of Robespierre, of Danton,32 
even of Marat,33 gleam luridly across a century.

But the dull, squalid figures of the Russian Bolsheviks are not redeemed in interest even by the 
magnitude of their crimes. All form and emphasis is lost in a vast process of Asiatic liquefaction. 
Even the slaughter of millions and the misery of scores of millions will not attract future
generations to their uncouth lineaments and outlandish names.


And now most of them have paid the penalty of their crimes. They have emerged from the prison-cells 
of the Cheka, to make their strange unnatural confessions to the world. They have met the death in 
secret to which they had consigned so many better and braver men.

But Trotsky survives. He lingers on the stage. He has forgotten his efforts, which Lenin 
restrained, to continue the War against Germany rather than submit to the conditions of 
Brest-Litovsk. He has forgotten his own career as a War Lord and the opportunist remaker of the 
Russian
Army. In misfortune he has returned to Bolshevik Orthodoxy. Once again he has become the exponent 
of the purest sect of Communism. Around his name gather the new extremists and doctrinaires of 
world-revolution. Upon him is turned the full blast of Soviet malignity. The same
vile propaganda which he used with so much ruthlessness upon the old regime, is now concentrated 
upon himself by his sole-surviving former comrade.

All Russia from Poland to China, from the North Pole to the Himalayas, is taught to regard him as 
the supreme miscreant seeking in some way or other to add new chains to the workers, and bring the 
Nazi invader34 into their midst. The name of Lenin, the doctrine of Karl Marx,
are invoked against him at the moment when he frantically endeavours to exploit them.

Russia is regaining strength as the virulence of communism abates in her blood. The process may be 
cruel, but it is not morbid. It is a need of self-preservation which impels the Soviet Government 
to extrude Trotsky and his fresh-distilled poisons. In vain he screams his protests
against a hurricane of lies; in vain he denounces the bureaucratic tyranny of which he would so 
blithely be the head; in vain he strives to rally the underworld of Europe to the overthrow of the 
Russian Army he was once proud to animate. Russia has done with him, and done with
him forever.

He will perhaps have leisure to contemplate his handiwork. No one could wish him a better 
punishment than that his life should be prolonged, and that his keen intelligence and restless 
spirit should corrode each other in impotence and stultification. Indeed we may foresee a day
when his theories, exploded by their application, will have ceased even to be irritating to the 
active, hopeful world outside, and when the wide tolerance which follows from a sense of security, 
will allow him to creep back, discredited and extinct, to the European and American
haunts, where so many of his early years were spent. It may be that in these future years, 35 he 
will find as little comfort in the work which he has done, as his father found in the son he had 
begotten.

Notes:

1. Leon Trotsky, born Lev Davidovich Bronstein (1879a€“1940).

2. Leon Trotzky [sic], a€oeMr. Churchill Is Wrong,a€D John oa€™ Londona€™ s Weekly 21, no. 522 
(April 20,1929). John oa€™ Londona€™ s Weekly was a leading literary magazine published from 1919 
until 1954.

3. In February 1929, Trotsky was deported from the USSR and began four yearsa€™ exile on 
BAUyAUkada, largest of the Princea€™ s Islands in the Sea of Marmara. His house looked out over the 
sea. In 1933 he moved to France and then to Norway before settling in Mexico.

4. In 1936, Trotsky settled in the CoyoacAjn district of Mexico City, where he spent the last four 
years of his life.

5. Nicholas II.

6. Alexander Ivanovich Guchkov (1862a€“1936), war minister in the Russian provisional government 
from February until April 1917; after the Bolshevik Revolution in October 1917, he gave financial 
support to the White Guard and afterward emigrated to Germany and then to
Paris, where he died.

7. Paul Nikolayevich Milyukov (1859a€“1943) was a politician who hoped to retain a constitutional 
monarchy after the revolution of February 1917; he became foreign minister in the first provisional 
government. His overt calls on April 20,1917, to stand by Russiaa€™ s wartime
alliances led to demands for his resignation, which occurred on May 2. After the Bolshevik 
Revolution, he became an adviser to various leaders of the White movement and ultimately emigrated 
to France, where he spent the rest of his life.

8. Also called the Comintern, this was an international Communist organization established in 
Moscow in 1919. It was dissolved in 1943.

9. The Turkish strait, twenty miles long, which divides Europe from Asia at Istanbul, between the 
Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea. Churchill refers here to the time Trotsky was in exile on 
BAUyA^kada.

10. Karl Marx famously worked in the reading room of the British Library, which was formerly housed 
in the British Museum.

11.An English spa town in Worcestershire.

12. Bad Nauheim and Bad Homburg are German spa towns in the state of Hesse.

13.Mustafa Kemal, known as AtatAUrk (188la€“ 1938), a successful military commander during the 
First World War, notably as commander of a division at Gallipoli in 1915. After the war, he became 
the founder of modern Turkey and its first president, 1923a€“38: this period
included the four years when Trotsky was living in Turkey.

14. A reference to the Spanish Civil War, 1936a€“39, which was in effect a struggle between 
communism and fascism.

15. Nicolas LA©onard Sadi Carnot (1796a€“1832), a French physicist and military engineer who became 
known as the father of thermodynamics.

16. NiccolA2 di Bernardo dei Machiavelli (1469a€“1527), Italian philosopher reputed to be a teacher 
of evil, whose works The Prince and Discourses on Livy founded modern political philosophy.

17. Cleon (d. 422 B.C.), an Athenian statesman during the Peloponnesian War (431a€“404 B.C.) who 
was represented as a demagogue by his contemporaries Thucydides (ca. 460a€“395 B.C.) and 
Aristophanes (ca. 446a€“386 B.C.).

18. An unidentified serial killer, active in the east end of London in 1888, who typically murdered 
prostitutes.

19.Titus Oates (1648a€“1705), who fabricated the Popish Plot in 1678, a fictitious Jesuit 
conspiracy to murder King Charles II (reigned 1660a€“85) and replace him on the throne with his 
Roman Catholic brother, James. His false accusations sent some thirty-five people to their
deaths before the deception was exposed.

20. Aleksandra Lvovna Sokolovskaya (1872a€“ca. 1938), a Marxist revolutionary whom Trotsky met and 
married in prison in 1899. She was last seen in a Siberian labor camp about 1935 and is thought to 
have died during the Soviet Uniona€™ s Great Purge.

21. In 1900, Trotsky was sentenced to four yearsa€™ exile in Siberia.

22. They had two daughters, Zinaida Volkova (1901a€“33) and Nina Nevelson (1902a€“28); both were 
born in Siberia.

23. Trotsky escaped from Siberia in 1902, leaving his family behind.

24. Natalia Ivanovna Sedova (1882a€“1962), whom Trotksy married in 1903; they stayed together until 
his death.

25. The second largest city in Ukraine.

26. They had two sons, Lev Lvovich Sedov (1906a€“38) and Sergei Lvovich Sedov (1908a€“37).

27. Max Forrester Eastman (1883a€“1969), an American writer sympathetic to left-wing politics. The 
time he spent in the Soviet Union in 1923a€“24 made him critical of Lenin and Stalin, but there he 
began a long friendship with Trotsky. See Max Eastman, Leon Trotsky: The
Portrait of a Youth (New York: Greenberg, 1925).

28. Anna Bronstein (1850a€“1910).

29. David Leontyevich Bronstein (1847a€“1922), a well-to-do farmer, died at the age of 
seventy-five.

30. Political police, successor to the Cheka and forerunner of the KGB.

31. The Politburo was the executive committee of each national Communist party.

32. Georges Jacques Danton (1759a€“94), a leading figure in the early stages of the French 
Revolution.

33. Jean-Paul Marat (1743a€“93), one of the more extreme leaders of the French Revolution.

34. Trotsky died one year before the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941.

35. In 1940, more than a decade after this essay was first published, and three years after it 
appeared in Great Contemporaries, a€oethese future yearsa€D abruptly ended for Trotsky. On August 
20, a Spanish Communist, acting as a Soviet agent, assaulted him with an ice ax at his
home in Mexico City; Trotsky died the following day. The agent was caught and spent twenty years in 
jail; when he was released, he was reported to have fled to Moscow and to have been awarded the 
Order of Lenin.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


16. NiccolA2 di Bernardo dei Machiavelli (1469a€“1527), Italian philosopher reputed to be a teacher 
of evil, whose works The Prince and Discourses on Livy founded modern political philosophy.

17. Cleon (d. 422 B.C.), an Athenian statesman during the Peloponnesian War (431a€“404 B.C.) who 
was represented as a demagogue by his contemporaries Thucydides (ca. 460a€“395 B.C.) and 
Aristophanes (ca. 446a€“386 B.C.).

18. An unidentified serial killer, active in the east end of London in 1888, who typically murdered 
prostitutes.

19.Titus Oates (1648a€“1705), who fabricated the Popish Plot in 1678, a fictitious Jesuit 
conspiracy to murder King Charles II (reigned 1660a€“85) and replace him on the throne with his 
Roman Catholic brother, James. His false accusations sent some thirty-five people to their
deaths before the deception was exposed.

20. Aleksandra Lvovna Sokolovskaya (1872a€“ca. 1938), a Marxist revolutionary whom Trotsky met and 
married in prison in 1899. She was last seen in a Siberian labor camp about 1935 and is thought to 
have died during the Soviet Uniona€™ s Great Purge.

21. In 1900, Trotsky was sentenced to four yearsa€™ exile in Siberia.

22. They had two daughters, Zinaida Volkova (1901a€“33) and Nina Nevelson (1902a€“28); both were 
born in Siberia.

23. Trotsky escaped from Siberia in 1902, leaving his family behind.

24. Natalia Ivanovna Sedova (1882a€“1962), whom Trotksy married in 1903; they stayed together until 
his death.

25. The second largest city in Ukraine.

26. They had two sons, Lev Lvovich Sedov (1906a€“38) and Sergei Lvovich Sedov (1908a€“37).

27. Max Forrester Eastman (1883a€“1969), an American writer sympathetic to left-wing politics. The 
time he spent in the Soviet Union in 1923a€“24 made him critical of Lenin and Stalin, but there he 
began a long friendship with Trotsky. See Max Eastman, Leon Trotsky: The
Portrait of a Youth (New York: Greenberg, 1925).

28. Anna Bronstein (1850a€“1910).

29. David Leontyevich Bronstein (1847a€“1922), a well-to-do farmer, died at the age of 
seventy-five.

30. Political police, successor to the Cheka and forerunner of the KGB.

31. The Politburo was the executive committee of each national Communist party.

32. Georges Jacques Danton (1759a€“94), a leading figure in the early stages of the French 
Revolution.

33. Jean-Paul Marat (1743a€“93), one of the more extreme leaders of the French Revolution.

34. Trotsky died one year before the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941.

35. In 1940, more than a decade after this essay was first published, and three years after it 
appeared in Great Contemporaries, a€oethese future y earsa€D abruptly ended for Trotsky. On August 
20, a Spanish Communist, acting as a Soviet agent, assaulted him with an ice ax at his
home in Mexico City; Trotsky died the following day. The agent was caught and spent twenty years in 
jail; when he was released, he was reported to have fled to Moscow and to have been awarded the 
Order of Lenin.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Subscribe now

