<https: //w ww.icloud .com/keynote/OXM VrM2I4 wSkvRh 1 s JyypONhQ>

<https: //github .com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/delongtoday-2021 -04-09 ,pptx>


DeLongTODAY: Inflation as t

<http://delonqtodav.com>

This is the DeLongTODAY Briefing. I am Brad DeLong, an economics professor at the University of 
California at Berkeley, and a sometime Deputy Assistant Secretary of the U.S. Treasury. This is the 
weekly DeLongTODAY briefing. Here I hold forth here on the Leigh Bureaua€™ s vimeo platform on my 
guesses as to what I think you most need to know about what our economy is doing to
us right now.

I promised Wes Neff when he agreed to provide the infrastructure for this that I and my briefings 
would be: lively, interesting, curious, thoughtful, and relatively brief.
Relatively.

I promised I would provide briefings on a mix of: forecasting, politics, macroeconomic analysis, 
history, and political economy.
Today is a political economy briefing.

But firsta€!

What is going on in the Senate with respect to passing phase II of Bidena€™ s Rescue, Rebuild, 
Rebalance winter-spring 2021 New Deal II?

But First: Prospects for Infrastructure-Building &
Corporate Tax Reform?


What is going on in the U.S. Senate,
anyway?

•  Chatter: Biden infrastructure & corporate-tax plan dead in the
water

•  Sen. Joe Manchin (D-WV)

•  Manchin onnosed to filibuster carve-outs

NEWS ANALYSIS

With Warning to Democrats, Manchin
Points the Way for Bidens Agenda

The West Virginia Democrat's latest plea for bipartisanship
suggested that, to win over a critical swing vote in his own party,
President Biden will first have to reach out to Republicans.

f O * O * I 96


• Manchin opposed to Reconciliation

• Manchin wants “bipartisanship”...


•  I think this is probably wrong:

•  I think Manchin is issuing a polite ultimatum to Republicans

• Dem obligation to reach out balanced by Repub obligation
to stop always saying “no”...

Manchin 111. Democrat of West Virginia, with reporters
His calls for bipartisanship arc less an msurmountabk- c

i a

By Jim Tankersley and Carl Hulse

Most of the chatter I see is that parts II & III are dead in the water: that Joe Manchin wond™ t 
support eliminating the filibuster or even chopping additional loopholes in it, and will not 
support using Reconciliation because he believes it is essential that the Senate work in a 
bipartisan fashion. Therefore there is no path to anything like Bidend™ s infrastructure and 
corporate-tax proposals.

But this, I think, leaves out one important thing: Joe Manchin has a memory. Joe Manchin remembers 
Barack Obama going 90% of the way from his original position to the Republican position on 
health-cared’’going all the way to RomneyCare, in factd”and getting 0 Republican votes for the 
Affordable Care Act. Manchin remembers Obama going 90% of the way from his original position
to the Republican position on Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid cutsd”and getting 0 
Republican votes. And the Republicans making it clear that if he went 100% of the way, he would 
still get 0 Republican votes because the important thing was to deny victories to the Black 
Democratic President.

What, in the context of that historyd’’which Manchin remembers, even if the yammerheads on TV and 
elsewhere do notd”does Manchind™ s writing doeSenate Democrats must avoid the temptation to abandon 
our Republican colleagues on important national issuesdidD mean? Does it mean that Minority Leader 
McConnell has a veto over everything?

I do not think so. I think what it means is this: In Manchind™ s view, Biden and Schumer and Pelosi 
are under an obligation to put forward plans that are acceptable on policy grounds to ten 
Republican senatorsd”that is, things that they would vote for if they did not mind displeasing 
McConnell by voting for them. Then those 10 Republican senators have an obligation to vote for them 
if
they want Manchin to continue to speak up for them in the Democratic caucus. And if the 10 
Republicans do not live up to that obligation? Then, I think Manchin thinks, the Democrats will 
have lived up to their obligation to include dee our Republican colleaguesdD while the Republicans 
will not have lived up to the obligation to doestop saying nodd. Then the Democrats will settle
within their own caucus what should be done.

Now they may not be able to settle. What they do will have to be acceptable to Joe Manchin, and to 
Joe Manchind™ s long-term worries about not busting-up senatorial procedure. And what they do will 
have to be acceptable to Bernie Sanders. Can that gulf be bridged? Maybe, maybe not. But Joe 
Manchin and company are keenly aware that Biden has to be a success and has to be perceived
as a success. And Bernie Sanders is keenly aware that refusing to settle for half-a-loaf in order 
to keep the issue live has been a catastrophic strategy in the past: much better to take 
half-a-loaf, and then use that as a starting point from which you can ask for the rest of the loaf.

It it's impossible to know what is going on inside the Senate unless you are a senatord”and often 
even the senators do not know what cards their colleagues are holding and whether they are 
bluffing. But my guess is that there is, right now, a 20% change that ten Republican senators will 
cross the aisle, a 60% chance the the Democrats will do Bidend™ s entire deald’’including the 
corporate
tax increasesd’’through Reconciliation, a 20% chance that the Democrats will not hang together and 
that small parts of Bidend™ s entire deal will be enacted piecemeal, and a 10% chance that nothing 
will get off the launchpad.

But these are only my guesses.

I was, however, very heartened to see that Jim Tankersley is thinking along similar lines. He is 
smart, and hard-working. And that gives me considerable confidence in my point of view here.

Jim Tankersley: With Warning to Democrats, Manchin Points the Way for Bidena€™ s Agenda: d~The West 
Virginia Democratd™ s latest plea for bipartisanship suggested that, to win over a critical swing 
vote in his own party, President Biden will first have to reach out to Republicansd!. The chances 
that such a compromise will materialize are slimdl.
Manchind™ s calls for bipartisanship were less an insurmountable obstacle for Democrats than a road 
map for Mr. Bidend! reaching out to Republicans to explore possible areas of compromise while 
laying the groundwork to steer around them if no such deal materializesd!. Bidend! aim[s] at 
increasing the pressure on Republicans to compromised’’and, if they
will   not, giving Mr. Manchin and other moderate Democrats whose backing Mr. Biden needs the 
political cover to accept an all-Democratic pland!.

People are, right now, asking me about inflation. One who did ask was Neil Irwin. Let me let my 
answer to him stand in for my general answer:

Brad DeLong: d~The Federal Reserved™ s inflation target has been that inflation should averaged”not 
ceiling, but averaged”2 percent per year using the P.C.E., 2.5 percent per year using the core 
C.P.I. Had inflation in fact matched that average since the beginning of the Great Recession, the 
core C.P.I. would now be 296 on a 1982-84=100 basis. It is actually 270. If the Fed had hit its
inflation target, the price level now would be 9.6 percent higher than it is. When the cumulative 
excess of C.P.I. core inflation over 2.5 percent per year reaches +9.6 percent, come and ask me 
again whether Federal Reserve policy is excessively inflationary. Until then, we certainly have 
other much more important economic problems to worry about than the risks of excessive and damaging
inflationd!

Why is this the answer I gave?
Let me back upd!

The Phillips Curve: It used to be that a 1%-point lower unemployment rate (relative to the natural 
rate) means that inflation would be 0.6%-points higher in a yeard”and, if the unemployment rate 
stayed low, 1.2%-points higher after two years. Now those numbers are 0.15%-points and 
0.30%-points. That, however, is on the upside: high unemployment no longer reduces inflation, but 
until
2018                                                                                                
                                                                               or so there was no 
real evidence that lower unemployment did not increase inflation. However, we got that evidence in 
2018 and 2019: the predictions of the inflationistas that, finally, there would be debasement of 
the currency proved 100% false.

Phillips-Curve Slope

Figure 3 The decrease in the slope of the Phillips curve (0)


1.2

Note: Dotted blue lines show +/-1 standard deviation.

Source: Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015).

Moreover, back in the old days an increase in recent past inflation would change expectations of 
future long-term inflation substantially. That, too, ended in the 1980s.

Expectations Gearing to Past Inflation

Figure 2 The anchoring of long-term expectations (P)

0.30

0.25


I’

\


-0.05 -I

1     I      1

T     T     T     1      T      1

1     T     T     1“

1961   1965   1969   1973   1977   1981   1985   1989   1993   1997   2001   2005   2009   2013

Note: Dotted blue lines show +/-1 standard deviation.

Source: Data are from figure 1.

It is in this context that I must observe that the models economists use for their thinking about 
aggregate inflation are still the models that economists settled on in the mid-1980s. It is the 
Phillips-Curve equations: Inflation today is equal to expected inflation plus labor market 
tightness pressure term plus a supply shock disturbances term:

Using a Model That Has Not Fit for 30 Years...

•  It used to be that a 1 %-point lower unemployment rate (relative to the natural rate) means that
inflation would be 0.6%-points higher in a year

•  The predictions of the inflationistas that, finally, there would be debasement of the currency 
proved
100% false.

•  Moreover, back in the old days an increase in recent past inflation would change expectations of

loitn-ro 1r\nn_torm inflation ciibctantial That frxn                                     m th o 1 
Q2Hc


1UIU1V                     11111C111V711 □ UUDIU11L1U11J. A ilUl^ IW^ V11UVU ±11 U1V 17UVD.

= n* + 0t(ut -      4- et

< = (1          + fint_x

•  This model has not described the inflation process since 1990

•  Yet equations (1) and (2) are still how economics is taught, and how a great many economists 
think.

And expected inflation today is a weighted average of expected inflation last year and what 
inflation actually was last year:

Inflation Burbles...

— Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: All Items Less
Food and Energy in U.S. City Average

15.0

12.5

10.0


0.0

1970          1980          1990          2000          2010          2020

That has not described the inflation process since 1990. There has, truth been told, little to 
study in terms of inflation since the 1980s. It burbles along at a low levela€”a€oeeffective price 
stabilitya€D as Alan Greenspan called it. There was a€oeopportunistic disinflation^□ in the 
1990sa€”Alan Greenspan not putting his foot on the monetary gas and so allowing core-CPI inflation 
to
gradually decline from 4% to 2.5%/year over that decade. But that, plus recession-time shortfalls 
of inflation below 2%/year, have been the only thing that inflation in the U.S. has done for a 
generation. Yet equations (1) and (2) are still how economics is taught, and how a great many 
economists think.

Thus since 1988 the slope of the simplest possible Phillips curve has been effectively zero, with 
an estimated regression coefficient of just -0.03. Even with unemployment below what economists 
have presumed was the natural rate, inflation has not accelerated. Likewise, even when unemployment 
far exceeded every estimate was the natural rate, between 2009 and 2014, inflation did not fall,
deflation did not set in. It is true that we did not have any evidence, between 2001 and 2017, 
about what happens when unemployment is below the natural rate. But we got that evidence in 2018 
and 2019. And it confirmed the belief that unemployment below what is certainly the natural rate of 
unemployment, if there is a natural rate of unemployment, does not generate any significant amount
of inflationary pressure.

And yet we find that, once again, that the public spherea€”at least the Great & Good public 
spherea€”is roiled by discussions of inflation, and by fears of renewed inflation. The Federal 
Reserve FOMC, for example, seems to be genuinely split:

Greg Robb: Fed Officials Split on Outlook for Inflation: a€~Federal Reserve officials seemed 
divided evenly into two camps about the outlook for inflation, according to minutes of their March 
meeting released on Wednesday. a€ceSeverala€D Fed officials said that supply bottlenecks and strong 
demand would push up price inflation a€oemore than anticipated ,a€D
the minutes said. At the same time, a€ceseverala€D other Fed officials expressed belief that the 
factors that had contributed to low inflation over the past decade a€oecould again exert more 
downward pressure on inflation than expected.a€D The Fed upgraded its forecast for growth and 
employment and forecast that headline inflation would rise to 2.4% rate this
yeara€”above the 2% targeta€”but then settle down to 2.1% by 2023. Despite these changes, the 
Feda€™ s median forecast was for no liftoff in interest rates through 2023. The central bank cut 
its policy interest rates to zero last March. The Fed said it would maintain this easy stance until 
the economy returns to full employment, and inflation has risen to 2% and was
on   track to rise moderately above 2% for some timea€!

LINK: chttps://www.marketwatch.com/story/fed-officials-split-on-outlook-for-inflation-11617820245>

Neil Irwin <https://www.nvti.mes.com/2021/03/24/upshot/economy-inflation,html> asked ten economists 
what they thought of the prospects for inflation and a€ceoverheatinga€D. Olivier Blanchard pleaded 
a€oeKnightian uncertainty a€! uncertainty about multipliers, uncertainty about the Phillips curve, 
uncertainty about the dovishness of the Fed, uncertainty about how much of the $1.9
trillion package will turn out to be permanent, uncertainty about the size and the financing of the 
infrastructure plan. All I know is that any of these pieces could go wronga€!a€D Lawrence H. 
Summers sees a€oea one-third chance that inflation expectations meaningfully above the Feda€™ s 2 
percent targeta€! [and] become entrenched, a one-third chance that the Fed will bring about
substantial financial instability or recession in order to contain inflation, and a one-third 
chance that this will work out as policymakers hopea€!. The first scenarioa€! [is] a Vietnam-like 
experience where inflation expectations ratchet upwardsa€! anda€! become unanchoreda€! In the 
second scenarioa€! expansiona€! [is] murdered by the Feda€!. I cana€™ t think of a time when we have
experienced a big downshift without having a recession. In the successful scenarioa€! we would 
enjoy a period of very rapid growth, followed by a downshift to moderate growth, with inflation 
expectations remaining anchored in the 2 percent rangea€!a€D

What Is the Real Principal Risk?

•  Olivier Blanchard: “Knightian uncertainty... uncertainty about multipliers, uncertainty about the
Phillips curve, uncertainty about the dovishness of the Fed, uncertainty about how much of the $1.9
trillion package will turn out to be permanent, uncertainty about the size and the financing of the
infrastructure plan. All I know is that any of these pieces could go wrong...”

• Lawrence H. Summers:

•  “A one-third chance... inflation expectations meaningfully above the Fed’s 2% target.... a 
Vietnam-
like experience where inflation expectations ratchet upwards...

•  “A one-third chance that the Fed will bring about substantial financial instability or recession 
in

nrdpr tn rnntain inflatinn pvn^ncinn murdprpd hv thp Fpd I can’t think nf a timp whpn WP


•  Olivier Blanchard: Knightian uncertainty... uncertainty about multipliers, uncertainty about the

Phillips curve, uncertainty about the dovishness of the Fed, uncertainty about how much of the $1.9
trillion package will turn out to be permanent, uncertainty about the size and the financing of the
infrastructure plan. All I know is that any of these pieces could go wrong...”

• Lawrence H. Summers:

•  “Aone-third chance... inflation expectations meaningfully above the Fed’s 2% target.... a 
Vietnam-
like experience where inflation expectations ratchet upwards...

•  “A one-third chance that the Fed will bring about substantial financial instability or recession 
in

order to contain inflation... expansion... murdered by the Fed.... I can’t think of a time when we
have experienced a big downshift without having a recession.

•  “In the successful scenario... very rapid growth, followed by a downshift to moderate growth, 
with

inflation expectations remaining anchored in the 2 percent range...”

•  The prime-age employment-population ratio is at 77%, far below the 80.5% it was at the end of 
2019
and even further below the 81.7% it was in 2000. The experience of the U.S. economy in the 2010s is
that, without extraordinary stimulus, that ratio grows at 0.5%/year...

Now this puzzles me. To say that things could go wrong under the current policy with respect to 
inflation needs to be balanced by the observation that things are wrong now: The prime-age 
employment-population ratio is at 77%, far below the 80.5% it was at the end of 2019 and even 
further below the 81.7% it was in 2000. The experience of the U.S. economy in the 2010s is that, 
without
extraordinary stimulus, that ratio grows at 0.5%/year. We expect much faster growth this year as 
the plague ebbs. But another thing that could go wrong is a premature stalling of employment 
growth. And if one claims Knightian uncertainty, one then has no argument against any policy 
whatsoevera€”one only has an argument for a willingness to be flexible, and I have not found a 
single person
who    is not willing to be maximally flexible and have policy be completely data dependent.

And Summersa€! the Vietnam-era inflation required not just excessively loose fiscal policy, but 
then the mistake of excessively loose monetary policy coupled with wage-and-price controls at the 
end of Nixona€™ s first terma€”policy mistakes that then-Fed Chair Arthur Burns could never provide 
a reasoned justification fora€”the oil-price increase of the 1973 Yom Kippur War, the U.S.
governments™ s viewing that oil-price increase with benign neglect because it got money to the Shah 
of Iran he could use to buy weapons, a substantial and permanent productivity growth slowdown to 
collapse the wedge between wage boosts and price increases, strong unions to coordinate higher 
wage-growth demands, and then another oil shock, this time the Ayatollah shock.
a€ceVietnama€D was only one of seven adverse factors, and not the largest. Moreover, there seems to 
be a category error here: fast growth followed by a moderate recession may well leave you in a 
better place then slow growth because you prematurely hit the economy on the head with a brick.

I find myself in an uneasy position here. My strong instinct is to be thinking that I should agree 
with Larry and Olivier. But I find that I cannot.

I find myself, instead, agreeing with people like Julia Coronado, who finds herself puzzled by the 
worry: a€oeFor years economists [have] pined for a better mix of monetary and fiscal policy and now 
we have it and there is a narrative among some that it has to end in disaster. I am more 
optimistica€! far more focused on how quickly the labor market returns to health than any threat 
from
inflations !a€D I find myself agreeing with Wendy Edelberg, who Soebelieve[s] the level of economic 
activity will temporarily rise above its sustainable level for a time and inflation will rise above 
the FedS™ s targets! [but] that isnS™t in and of itself problematical. Everything I seeS! points to 
a several-quarter-long surge in the economy. We S” policymakers, households,
businessesS”need to appreciate its temporary nature and adjust accordingly SISD I find myself 
agreeing with Claudia Sahm, who says: SceltS™ s the spiral that matters. It could happen, but it 
would take a while and not only do we know how to disrupt a wage-price spirals SSD

The focus on inflation risk is the product of a different era. It comes from a time when successive 
US administrations (those of Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon) were desperate for a persistently 
high-pressure economy, and when the Fed chair (Arthur Burns) was eager to accommodate presidential 
demands. Back then, a cartel that controlled the global economyS™ s key input (oil) was
capable of delivering massive negative supply shocks. As I said, you needed seven things, all going 
wrong, to produce the 1970s. Right now it is not at all clear that we have more than one.

As I told Neil Irwin:

Brad DeLong: SceThe Federal Reserves™ s inflation target has been that inflation should 
averageS”not ceiling, but averageS”2 percent per year using the P.C.E., 2.5 percent per year using 
the core C.P.I. Had inflation in fact matched that average since the beginning of the Great 
Recession, the core C.P.I. would now be 296 on a 1982-84=100 basis. It is actually 270. If the Fed 
had hit its
inflation target, the price level now would be 9.6 percent higher than it is. When the cumulative 
excess of C.P.I. core inflation over 2.5 percent per year reaches +9.6 percent, come and ask me 
again whether Federal Reserve policy is excessively inflationary. Until then, we certainly have 
other much more important economic problems to worry about than the risks of excessive and damaging
inflations !SD

I stand by that. The most recent data I have seen suggests that people getting stimulus checks are 
predominantly paying down debt or adding to savings rather than spending. That would mean that 
multipliers are even smaller in this case.
So I find myself still worried much more about stalled employment growth than inflation as the risk 
that we should focus on.

IS™ m Brad DeLong. This is the DeLongTODAY briefing. Thank you very much for watching.


businessesa€”need to appreciate its temporary nature and adjust accordinglya€!a€D I find myself 
agreeing with Claudia Sahm, who says: a€oelta€™ s the spiral that matters. It could happen, but it 
would take a while and not only do we know how to disrupt a wage-price spirala€!a€D

The focus on inflation risk is the product of a different era. It comes from a time when successive 
US administrations (those of Lyndon Johnson and Richard Nixon) were desperate for a persistently 
high-pressure economy, and when the Fed chair (Arthur Burns) was eager to accommodate presidential 
demands. Back then, a cartel that controlled the global economya€™ s key input (oil) was
capable of delivering massive negative supply shocks. As I said, you needed seven things, all going 
wrong, to produce the 1970s. Right now it is not at all clear that we have more than one.

As I told Neil Irwin:

Brad DeLong: a€oeThe Federal Reservea€™ s inflation target has been that inflation should 
averagea€”not ceiling, but averagea€”2 percent per year using the P.C.E., 2.5 percent per year 
using the core C.P.I. Had inflation in fact matched that average since the beginning of the Great 
Recession, the core C.P.I. would now be 296 on a 1982-84=100 basis. It is actually 270. If the Fed 
had hit its
inflation target, the price level now would be 9.6 percent higher than it is. When the cumulative 
excess of C.P.I. core inflation over 2.5 percent per year reaches +9.6 percent, come and ask me 
again whether Federal Reserve policy is excessively inflationary. Until then, we certainly have 
other much more important economic problems to worry about than the risks of excessive and damaging
inflationa€!a€n

I stand by that. The most recent data I have seen suggests that people getting stimulus checks are 
predominantly paying down debt or adding to savings rather than spending. That would mean that 
multipliers are even smaller in this case.
So I find myself still worried much more about stalled employment growth than inflation as the risk 
that we should focus on.

Ia€™ m Brad DeLong. This is the DeLongTODAY briefing. Thank you very much for watching.

