Subscribe now

CONDITION: I Think This Makes It Impossible for Xi Jinping to Ever Retirea€!

Igor Sushko: a€~Former President & General Secretary of China, Hu Jintao , Xi #Jinping's 
predecessor, has been physically removed from Communist Party Congress and has since disappeareda€!

Igor Sushko @igorsushko

#China: Former President & General Secretary of China, Hu #Jintao, Xi #Jinping's predecessor, has 
been physically removed from Communist Party Congress and has since disappeared.

8:52 AM F™ Oct 22,2022

3,072Likes 1,296Re tweets
Share

Must-Read: The (Slight, So Far) Extent of U.S.-China Decoupling:

Chad Brown Jones: Four years into the trade war, are the US and China decoupling?: Imports declined 
immediately after tariffs were imposed, falling further beginning in March 2020 as global trade 
collapsed in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, and have since recovered only slowly.a€!US imports 
from China (red line) remain well below the pre-trade war trend (dashed line), as defined 
(conservatively) by US imports from the worlda€!. China is now the
source of only 18 percent of total US goods imports, down from 22 percent at the onset of the trade 
war. In comparison, current US imports from the rest of the world are 38 percent higher than 
pre-trade war levels and are even above trend (blue line). With a few exceptions, these imports 
were not hit with new US tariffs. They have also recovered strongly following the onset of the 
pandemica€!

Figure 1

US imports from China have only recently returned to pre-trade war levels,
while imports from the rest of the world are above trend


Value of US goods imports from China and rest of world, 2016-2022 (June 2018 = 100)

150                                  July 2018

US starts trade war

March 2020

Global trade collapses as
the pandemic hits

Rest of world

125

Pre-trade war trend


100

75

I                           I

I                           I

I                           I

50    1                               I                            


Aug 2016

0PHE

Jan 2018           Jan 2019           Jan 2020           Jan 2021           Jan 2022 Aug 2022

Notes: Indexed value of US monthly imports, not seasonally adjusted, 12-month trailing sums. 
Pre-trade war trend based on US imports
from the world from August 2016 through June 2018.

Source: Constructed by the author with US import data from US Bureau of the Census.

In comparison, current US imports from the rest of the world are 38 percent higher than pre-trade 
war levels
and are even above trend (blue line). With a few exceptions, these imports were not hit with new US 
tariffs.[3]

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

& Very Briefly Noted:


•  Andrew Keen: MoisA©s NaAm on the Global Spread of Authoritarianism and Its Dangers: a€~The 
author of The Revenge of Power: How Autocrats Are Reinventing Politics for the 21st Centurya€!

•  Susan Shirk: China in Xia€™ s a€oeNew Eraa€DThe Return to Personalistic Rule: a€~Deng 
Xiaopinga€! sought to prevent a€oethe overconcentration of powera€Da€! fixed terms of office, term 
limits, and a mandatory retirement age; delegating authoritya€! to government agenciesa€! holding 
regular meetingsa€! to decentralize authority, regularize political life and check dictatorial 
power. The centerpiecea€! wasa€! regular peaceful leadership
successiona€!. Xi Jinping is taking China back to a personalistic dictatorship...

• Minxin Pei: China: From Tiananmen to Neo-Stalinism: a€~The development strategy formulated by 
Deng Xiaoping to modernize the Chinese economy under one-party rule generated endemic corruption 
and regime decaya€! failed to institute genuine and enforceable political reformsa€!. China's great 
leap backward since 2012 may dim the hopes of gradual evolutionary regime transition, but the 
pitfalls of strongman rule, dissipating economic
dynamism under state capitalism, and escalating strategic competition with the United States will 
most likely reduce the long-term odds of the survival of the Chinese Communist Partya€!

•  Minxin Pei: China: Totalitarianism's Long Shadow: a€~he Leninist party-state has in recent years 
reverted to a form of neo-Stalinist rulea€!. Democratizing a post-totalitarian regime is far more 
difficult than democratizing an authoritarian regime because post-totalitarian regimesa€! possess 
far greater capacity and resources to resist and neutralize the liberalizing effects of 
modernization. However, the medium-term success of these regimes may
only ensure their eventual demisea€!. Socioeconomic transformation^! empowers social forces and 
greatly increase the odds of revolutionary change when these regimes undergo liberalization^!

•  Michael Davis: Hong Kong: How Beijing Perfected Repression: a€~A complete hollowing out and 
abandonment of the city's liberal-democratic constitutional model that Beijing had promised to let 
standa€!. Does this hollowing out of constitutional guarantees represent the oft-discussed PRC 
alternative to Western liberal democracy?a€!

•  Yuen Yuen Ang: How Resilient Is the CCP?: a€~The CCP still commands a high-capacity and 
selectively adaptive bureaucracy; it has tightened political control; and U.S. animosity toward 
China has inadvertently helped Xi rally the party and nation behind him. Yet Xi's concentration of 
personal power has reintroduced the risk of succession battles and amplifies the effects of his 
ideology and decisions, which are felt not only within the PRC but
around the worlda€!

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Visit the Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality chat

