Subscribe now

<https://www.ft.com/content/Qfcle32d-3dcl-4869-a9d0-fad83095af8a>


Free Market a€” the boundary between state and the economy

A timely and erudite history traces our ambiguous attitudes towards moneymaking and laissez faire 
trade

Philip Coggan

OCTOBER 20 2022

How much of a role should the state play in a nationa€™ s economy? And how should society view 
those who seek to profit from selling goods and services? As Jacob Soil shows in his intellectual 
history, these two questions have puzzled philosophers and economists for more than two millennia. 
And very much in the news today as an attempt by the British government to reshape the economic 
role of the state has led to political and financial turmoil.

An ambivalent attitude towards moneymaking can be traced back to Cicero, the great Roman orator, 
who was an enthusiast for agricultural trade but deeply suspicious of the merchant classes. The 
same ambivalence can be found in the New Testament where Jesus tells a rich man to a€oesell 
whatsoever thou hast and give to the poora€D. But in the parable of the talents, a master berates 
the servant who buries his savings, rather than investing them wisely. The
early history of the Church is marked by tension between those who, like the Franciscans, believed 
in vows of poverty and the steady wealth accumulation of the Church establishment, which benefited 
from donations from nobles hoping to buy their salvation.

China achieved the most striking growth performance of the past 50 years with heavy state 
participation

As Soil, a professor of philosophy, history and accounting at the University of Southern 
California, demonstrates, the concept of a a€oefree marketa€D has also been used in an ambiguous 
fashion. Ancient empires, from the Romans to the Mongols, recognised that greater trade led to 
increased taxes, which helped to finance their military machines. But the overriding aim was to 
service the state; there was nothing libertarian about this philosophy. The Medieval
towns and professions of Europe were granted privileges by their rulers, but effectively the 
monarchs granted them monopolies in return for tax revenues.

The early modern era followed a similar pattern. Trade expanded as European nations extended their 
reach into the Americas and Asia. But state-owned businesses, such as the Dutch and English East 
India companies, led the way. Adam Smith may be the patron saint of libertarian economists but he 
was a great enthusiast for the Navigation Acts, which attempted to enforce an English shipping 
monopoly.

The term a€oelaissez fairea€D was coined in the 18th century by Jacques Claude Marie Vincent de 
Gournay, a French economist. But French governments more regularly followed the approach pioneered 
by Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Louis XIVa€™ s first minister, who believed the state should support and 
protect the nationa€™ s industries. Colberta€™ s advice was enthusiastically adopted by Alexander 
Hamilton, the Treasury secretary of the infant US republic,
and by most European nations as they industrialised in the 19th century. Britain may have followed 
a a€oefree tradea€D model in the second half of the 19th century but Victorian governments were 
happy to intervene elsewhere in the economy, regulating the hours of factory workers and 
restricting child labour.

Solla€™ s book is both erudite and incisive and his aim is to emphasise that the libertarian 
free-market school which emerged in the 20th century, in the writings of Friedrich Hayek and Milton 
Friedman, was an intellectual aberration. Indeed, despite the attention paid to such campaigners, 
the author points out that a€oemost advanced industrial economies follow a relatively similar 
recipe of liberal social democracy with general free-market mechanisms and
wide government oversight and participation in the economya€D. China achieved the most striking 
growth performance of the past 50 years with a model that involved heavy state participation in the 
economy.

In his final chapters, Soil might have benefited from a discussion of where the boundaries of 
successful state intervention might sit. The Swedish government spent 67 per cent of gross domestic 
product in 1993; was that too high? And which industries does it make sense to nationalise 
(utilities, for example) and which sit best within the private sector? Sadly none of these 
questions are answered in Free Market.

States are bound to play a huge role in national economies over the coming decades; electorates in 
democracies will demand it and authoritarian governments will insist on it. Finding the right 
balance between the state and the private sector may be the key to economic success.

Free Market: The History Of An Idea by Jacob Soli, Basic Books $36/A£25,336 pages
Philip Coggan is the author of a€~More: The 10,000-Year Rise of the World Economy&€™
Subscribe now

Leave a comment

