FIRST: Very Good Reviews from People Who Are Not My Friends! Department

Subscribe now

WONDERFUL TLS Review of Slouching} <bit.ly/3pP3Krk> from the extremely thoughtful Paul Seabright:

Paul Seabright: Trouble in paradise: Why is economic progress so little cause for celebration? 
<https://www.the-tls.co.uk/articles/slouching-towards-utopia-j-bradford-delong-book-review-paul-seab
right/>: a€~DeLong is surely righta€l. Our ancestors... would have been astonished to see [our] 
material abundancea€l no less astonished by our inability to be satisfied.... DeLonga€™ s book 
deserves a wide readership.  DeLong is an

engaging writer, full of unexpected informational. I learnt something on almost every page. As a 
set of thought-provoking essays on themes related to its overall topic, Slouching Towards Utopia is 
hard to fault....

Yet there is much the book doesna€™t give us.... We are even left in some doubt as to how much 
DeLong is convinced by his own answer[s].... That is not a criticism as sucha€”his question is 
tough.... But it tells us something about... DeLong... a charming companion, full of entertaining 
stories. ask[ing] deep questions in newly engaging ways. We dona€™t want the experience to end. But 
thata€™ s partly because we sense

wea€™re not getting the answers we thought he was offering...

I blush. I think both of the paragraphs I have constructed from excerpts from his review are 
correct.

We are well on the way to solving the problem of baking, a sufficiently large economic pie to 
create the potential for everybody to have enough. But as far as solving the problems of slicing, 
and tasting the piea€’’equitably distributing it, and utilizing our enormous technological wealth 
to empower all of us to live, lives in which we are safe and secure and healthy and happya€”we are 
nowheresville. That would have surprised (most of) our predecessors: solving
the problem of scarcity was thought to be the big problem. Once that was solved, governance would 
no longer have to take the form of an A©lite elbowing competing potential A©lites out of the way 
and running a force-and-fraud wealth-extraction con on humanity. Governance could take the form of 
writing economy-social software for human interactions to run on top of the technology-driven 
forces-of-production hardware, and that software-writing exercise
ought to have beena€”was seen by Utopians as inevitably beinga€’’straightforward.

Why do the problems of slicing and tasting the economic pie continue to flummox us when we have 
made so much progress at solving the problem of baking a sufficiently large pie? This I think the 
book has nailed. And I have already given enough overview thumbnails on this weblog to have become 
tired of repeating myself.

So let me just say that the overview is all very well, but there is a great deal to be learned by 
telling the stories of the individual failures to slice and tastea€”to equitably distribute and 
properly utilize our immense and increasing technology-driven wealth. And to get my selection from 
these stories, please buy and read the book: <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>!
Share

One Image:

The first ever (to my knowledge) maxing-out of the CPU cores on my MIPro MacBookPro. It was not 
associated with a runaway program on the way to a crash. The user interface stuttereda€l and then 
recovereda€!:

Core 2 — Efficiency

Core 3 — Performance            Core 4 — Performance

Core 5 — Performance            Core 6 — Performance


No. I do not know what was going on. No. Dona€™ t blame me for Applea€™ s chip-computer naming 
a€ceschemea€D.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


Must Read:

GUKG5 Index |

09/23/1980 PB 09/23/2022

96) Actions * 97) Edit *

Chg ID Net             □ Mov Avgs Z

Key Events

Line Chart

ID 30 IM 6M YTD 1Y           5Y Max Daily ▼ £ Table


Price Change 1 Day Net 0.508

T High on 09/23/22        0.508

- Average             -0.001

1 Low on 09/17/92       -0.600

■ SMAVG(5O)           0.046

I SMAVG (200)          0.017

r 0.400

-0.200


Might the fiscal theory of the price level be coming for Liz Truss and the other Tory Tiny 
Englanders?:

Tony Yates: a€oeClassic emerging market fiscal crisis pans out something like this: a€~Populist 
government begins fiscal plan leaving a large hole between spending and revenues usually prompted 
by perception of what the electorate want, which is not always fiscal coherence, in this case 
prompted by ideology, or delusion, hope. Markets, who are going to be the ones the government come 
to to borrow to plug the hole between
spending and revenues, thinka€”what is your exit plan? You don't seem to have one. You cannot pile 
debt up indefinitely. Why not? Because that debt has to be serviced with interest, either as a 
discount on the loan up front, or explicitly. It has to be rolled over too and refinanced.

Concern rises that the government won't be able to service the debt at some point; higher level 
concern arises about others' concern [and so on]. The interest rate charged today, well ahead of 
time before any debt limit is reached, risesa€! because a small premium gets built in to compensate 
the investor/lender for the chance that the exit is a messy default [or a messy high inflation to 
lower the real value of the debt]. Not necessarily a high
probability event, but could happen.

That increase in interest rates increases the hole between spending and revenue because one 
component of spending is spending on interest. This makes the fiscal situation look even worse, and 
brings forward the time when there would be an unholy reckoning if the government does not change 
course. So interest rises a bit more as the chance of a default has gone up a bit more. And so on. 
Dampening this viscious cycle is the chance of
a change of government or the Tories deposing Truss and Kwarteng before time. Amplifying it is the 
threat of a trade war, which would, if it crystallized, tank government revenues and increase 
spendinga€!.

For the interests of the country at large, it would be great to have clarity and detail on how 
Labour would undo this mess [leave aside what else they might do, redistribution, other funded 
changes]. That would lower the risks of this getting nasty. Likewise any faction in the Tory party 
that finds fiscal irresponsibility disagreeable should organize and clarify what it would do 
differently, and allow usa€”and marketsa€”to assess its
influence over the course of the events.

Time for, surely, the Deficit Research Group?

Leave a comment

Other Things I Note:

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Books Inc.: J. BRADFORD DELONG at Books Inc. Berkeley - Books Inc. - The West's Oldest 
Independent Bookseller Tuesday, September 27, 2022 - 7:00pm :: 1491 Shattuck Ave., Berkeley, CA 
94710a€!

•  Greg Ip: Markets Brace for Hard Landing as Fed Delivers Sobering Message: a€~Wall Street sees 
inflation-taming efforts as likely to result in a recessiona€!

•  Bill McBride: a€~Merrill: "We now look for a hard(er) landing.... Our baseline outlook for the 
US economy continues to include a recession in 1H 2023.  We project real GDP to fall 1.0% in the 
four quarters ending 4Q 2023 and for the unemployment rate to rise to 5.6% in December 2023a€!

• Teri Kanefield: Trump's Special Master Lawsuit Backfires

•  Dan Pfeiffer: All (Elected) Republicans are MAGA Republicans: a€~Every elected Republican is 
advancing the MAGA agendaa€! posing an existential threat to our countrya€™ s democracy and 
peoplea€™ s freedoma€!

•  Dr. Frizzle: a€~The first singular use The first use of a€cetheya€O is so old, it predates the 
letter combination a€cetha€C in favor of the thorn, a€ceAza€D When William and the Werewolf, in 
1375 CE, used the singular a€oetheya€D as a pronoun, it was spelled a€ceAzeia€Da€!


•  Jonathan Korman: a€~Having long had an unwholesome interest in understanding fascism, I had a 
hard time understanding its radical indifference to policy. I find myself understanding the texture 
of it nowa€!. Fascism is not a policy ideology deeply concerned with economics like communism or 
neoliberalism. Fascism is a social & governance ideology like liberal democracy or Dominionism.  It 
is an oversimplification to say that

authoritarianism is gangster logic applied to politics, but it is a useful oversimplification^!

•  Mark Thompson: a€~a€oeSeveral reliable, well-informed sources confirmed the idea that Hitler's 
anti-Semitism was not so genuine or violent as it sounded, and that he was merely using 
anti-Semitic propaganda as a bait to catch masses of foUowersa€!a€D- first NYT article about 
Hitler, 1 l/21/1922a€!

•  Steve Schmidt: a€~Imagine hearing Trump for the first time. Now imagine hearing Hitler in 1930 
Munich. The speeches are very similar. They scapegoat & stigmatize. They bluster & threaten. 
Theya€™re built around racial animus & feara€!

• Adam Davidson: a€~We KNOW Trump's golf courses are losing money. His own audited financials tells 
us this. Attracting tournaments is not the same as profit. These are wildly overleveraged 
properties that will, probably, never make any moneya€!
Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

