I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters,
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now


RJOCUAI I conwiil
Md

4

Conrrw
nr$t
mcde
of
procurti

on

।

I

I
I

Suppose one were to take this seriously:

Karl Marx: The Poverty of Philosophy. a€~Men make cloth, linen, or silk materials in definite 
relations of production. Buta€! social relations are just as much produceda€! are closely bound up 
with productive forces. In acquiring new productive forces, men change their mode of productiona€! 
the way of earning their livinga€! all their social relations. The
hand-mill gives you society with the feudal lord; the steam-mill society with the industrial 
capitalists. Social relations [are] in conformity witha€! material productivitya€!.Principles, 
ideas, and categories [are] in conformity witha€! social relationsa€!. Ideasa€! [and] categoriesa€! 
are historical and transitory productsa€!

LINK: chttps ://www.marxists .org/archive/marx/works/subiect/hist-mat/pov-phil/ch02 ,htm>

The rate of technological advance is itself a product of the shape of society. But in return the 
level of technology, and the speed and direction at which that level is advancing, greatly shape 
the upper layers of the economy, and then political economy and economic sociology, as well, from 
which consequences ramify. How are we to get a handle on this?
The first attempt to get a handle on this was, of course:

Karl Marx: Preface to a€ceA Contribution to the Critique of Political Economya€d a€~In broad 
outline, the Asiatic, ancient, feudal and modern bourgeois [or, alternatively, tribal, ancient, 
feudal, bourgeois] modes of production may be designated as epochs marking progress in the economic 
development of societya€!
LINK: chttps://www.marxists .org/archive/marx/works/1859/critique-pol-economy/preface,htm>

But surely we can do better now?

I have my exceptionally crude index of the value of the stock of human a€oetechnologya€na€”the 
useful ideas about manipulating nature and productively organizing humans that have been 
discovered, developed, deployed, and diffused throughout the global economy. It is simply equal to 
the estimated (or guessed) average worldwide level of real income per capita times the square-root
of the population, with the square-root to take account for the fact that because resources are 
scarce feeding and housing more people requires better technology, but because each human comes 
with ten fingers, eyes, a mouth, and a brain, humans are productive.

My index, normalized at a global level of 1.0 in 1870a€”in the Steampower Age, just after Marx 
published the first volume of his Capital^’^or the value of the stock of useful human ideas for 
manipulating nature and productively organizing humans, is equal to 1/3 back in 1000, when 
feudalism was well-established (at least between the Rhine and the Loire).

Suppose we view that big a jumpa€”a triplinga€”as indicative of a change in the a€oemode of 
productiona€D: as a big enough shift in underlying technologies that are then embodied in the 
forces of production to make it sensible to put a stake in the ground, and to then say that that 
stake marks a fundamentally different kind of society than humans had when my technology index had
been only one-third as large.


Then, if we take each tripling of that index as marking a shift in the a€oemode of productiona€D, 
we get:

• 2020: Global-Manufacturing mode of production

• 1970: Mass-Production mode of production

• 1920: Second-Industrial-Re volution mode of production

• 1870: Steampower mode of production

• 1000: Feudal mode of production (and maybe you also want to say a€ceAsiatica€D)

•  -1500: Bronze-Literacy mode of production (what Marx thought of as a€ceancienta€D has its center 
of gravity about halfway between Bronze-Literacy and Feudal)

• -8000: Gatherer-hunter mode of production
Does this make sense?

We could say a€oenoa€na€”that, rather, the important things are not modes of production but modes 
of domination. One would then want to mark the Babylon-MycenA!-Troy triad before -1000 as one 
system, and the Athens-Sparta-Rome triad around -200 as another, before moving on to Feudalism in 
1000 as we knew it as a third. And then, presumably, we would want to insert
Gunpowder Empires between Feudalism and Steampower, and back away from an exclusive focus on 
technological underpinnningsa€’’hand-mills and steam-millsa€”and grant autonomy and agency to modes 
of appropriation and distribution. Before 1870, not x3 but rather xa's3 seems better to me, which 
would give us:

• 2020: Global-Manufacturing mode of production

• 1970: Mass-Production mode of production

• 1920: Second-Industrial-Re volution mode of production

• 1870: Steampower mode of production

• 1550: Gunpowder-Empire mode of domination

• 1000: Feudal mode of production (and maybe you also want to say a€ceAsiatica€D)

• -300: Ancient mode of domination

•  -1500: Bronze-Literacy mode of production (what Marx thought of as a€ceancienta€D has its center 
of gravity about halfway between Bronze-Literacy and Feudal)

• -4000: Tribal mode of production

• -8000: Gatherer-hunter mode of production
I could live with thata€!

Then there is the question of what to do with time after 1870a€”the problem which has its origins 
in Charlie from Trier and Freddie from Barmen mistaking the birth pangs of industrial capitalism 
for its death throes. In terms of humanitya€™ s ability to manipulate nature and productively 
organize humans, the world of 1920 was as much more powerful than the world of 1870 than the
world of 1870 had been than the world of 1000. And the world of 1970 was an equivalent relative gap 
more advanced than 1920 still. And for our world of 2020 the relative gap is the same.

Do we then have a succession of three different a€oemodes of productiona€D between 1870 and today?

The Marxists are of absolutely no help here. The old Marxists flattened everything after 1800 into 
a€oecapitalisma€D, with perhaps an admission that, recently, things have been different: a€oelate 
capitalisma€D. The new Marxists have made themselves take the a€oecultural turna€D, and have 
disappeared into the swamp of discursive idealism. (Recall how extremely nasty were the
things Marx himself had to say about those who in his day had taken the a€oecultural turna€D.) The 
sociologists are also of little help. They tend to say that the big watershed-boundary crossing 
happened once and only once: industrial rather than artisan production, class rather than 
estate-status, urban rather than rural, bureaucratic rather than personal governance, science 
rather than
faith, progress rather than the wheel of fortune, contractual rather than ascribed relationships, 
Malthusian rather than post-demographic transtion, and the societal game-board being upset and 
pieces repositioned every generation as opposed to seen as static and naturala€”one big shift, in 
a€oecomplex" societies, at least, from traditional to modern.

Certainly the forces of production of todaya€™ s Global-Manufacturing economy are sufficiently 
different from 1970a€™ s a€ceFordista€D Mass-Production economy, which are different from 1920a€™ s 
Second-Industrial-Revolution economy which are different from 1870a€™ s Steampower economy. But 
there is a sense in which people think that between today and 1870a€”or
maybe only between today and 1920a€”the relations of production are pretty much the same: people 
exchange goods and services for money in transactions that are at least notionally arms-length, 
have property, most people work for wages for bosses, and the rest collect interest, profits, and 
rent; meanwhile a literate citizenry engages in politics and people typically choose their mates and
thus their families. Life back in 1900 appears to have been both modern, and not.

And then there is the question of whether there have been even bigger changes in the 
information-entertainment-cultural superstructure than even in the forces of production^!

Clearly here is another set of issues, about which I need to think more deeply. That is anxiety 
inducing, since in a month and a half I am publishing a book that will lead people to ask me lots 
of questions, many of them assuming I have already thought all these issues through to my 
satisfaction^!
Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters,
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

