<https ://www.bradford-delong .com/2018/12/clinton-administration-vis-trump-administration .html>

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Real Private Domestic Investment as a Share of Potential National Product

Here is one difference between a Clinton Administration and a Trump Administration. The Clinton 
administration of 1993-2001 sold its 1993 deficit-reduction reconciliation bill as a phased-in five-
year plan to boost American economic growth and American incomes. By raising taxes and by cutting 
government spending relative to the then-projected baselinea€”half of the cuts coming from
the military, half of the cuts coming from the social insurance programsa€’’Clinton sought to 
redirect 1%-point of GDP's worth of funds each year for five consecutive years from funding the
government debt to funding productive private investment.

Thanks for reading this. And please share it far and wide, if you think it worth reading!
Share

Over the five years as the program was being phased in, this boost in investment was projected by 
the administrationa€”i.e., by me and othersa€”to be a supply-side economic stimulus raising the
rate of growth of potential output and boosting the rate of economic growth and thus of American 
incomes by 0.2%-points per year. Thereafter, once it was fully phased in, the program was
projected by the administration^”i.e., by me and othersa€”to boost investment relative to the 
baseline by 4%-points of national product and so boost the rate of potential output growth and thus 
of
American incomes relative to bas3eline by 0.4%-points per year. The program was supposed to make 
the U.S. 1% richer after 5 years; 3% richer after 10 years; 5% richer after 15 years, and so on.

It worked. Investment grew. Growth accelerated. Income rose relative to the baseline.

The Trump administration sold its 2017 tax-cut reconciliation bill as a plan to boost American 
growth and American incomes by reducing, corporate taxes, transferring $2 trilliona€’’equivalent to
10%-points of a year's GDPa€”of wealth to the upper class, thus increase incentives to save, and 
boost the flow of funds into private investment in one year. In the year after the tax cut was 
passed
the program was projected to boost investment relative to baseline by 4%-points of national product 
and so boost the rate of potential output growth and thus of American incomes relative to
baseline by 0.4%-points per year not by demand-side stimulus boosting spending and reducing 
unemployment but by supply-side stimulus boosting investment in America and America's capital
stock. The program was supposed to make the U.S. 1% richer after 5 years; 3% richer after 10 years; 
5% richer after 15 years, and so on.

Where is this extra 4%-points of investment spending as a share of national income and product? 
Nowhere. The investmen share did not leap upward. It is not leaping upward. It will not leap
upward. Relative to baseline, incomes are not boosted by any supply-side stimulus raising potential 
output.

Here is another difference between the Clinton administration and the Trump administration^”a 
difference in how their economists behave. Clinton administration economists eagerly watched to
see whether the plan was in fact workinga€’’whether incomes and growth were increasing, and whether 
the increases relative to previously-projected baselines were in line with the ex ante
modeling predictions made. Trumpists are now watching their ex ante modeling predictions fail, 
catastrophically. Are they curious? Are they writing about why things are different than they had
projected? No.

Do we have anything from Barro, Boskin, Cogan, Holtz-Eakin, Hubbard, Lindsey, Rosen, Shultz, and 
Taylor <https://tinyurl.com/20181209b-delong> saying why it is turning out not to be the case


projected? No.

Do we have anything from Barro, Boskin, Cogan, Holtz-Eakin, Hubbard, Lindsey, Rosen, Shultz, and 
Taylor <https://tinyurl.com/20181209b-delong> saying why it is turning out not to be the case
that the supply-side investment-driven boost relative to baseline from the tax cut would be "3% to 
4%... if achieved over a decade, the... increase in... annual... growth would be about 0.4%..."? No.
Do we have anything explaining why reality has disagreed from Hubbard, Lindsay, Holtz-Eakin, and a 
fourth (who is either Lazear or Mankiw) who forecast privately, according to Sen Susan
Collins (R-ME) <https://tinyurl.com/20181209c-delong>, that the tax cut would boost growth by 
enough to raise tax collections enough to keep the deficit from going up by much? No. Do we have
anything from Miller, Calomiris, Bhagwati, Luskin, and a hundred-odd others 
<https://www.bradford-delong.eom/2017/ll/i-am-embarrassed-to-belong-to-a-profession-that-includes-th
ese-100-
clowns ,html> who confidently predicted a supply-side growth boost by enough to raise tax 
collections enough to keep the deficit from going up at alla€”and boost annual growth by 0.4%a€”
assessing why, so far, they are wrong? No. Do we have anything from Kevin Hassett <https://tiny 
url.com/20181209d-delong> and Greg Mankiw <https://tiny url.com/20181209a-delong>, who told
us  that these productivity gains would primarily boost wages not profits because the relevant 
model was one in which foreigners would flood America with savings, lending to and investing in this
country on a large scale to finance the bulk of this surge and investment, explaining why we are 
not, right now, seeing the rise of a mammoth inflow of capital into America? No.

Back when all these economists from Barro through Taylor were setting out their claims, these drew 
sharp dissents from not just economists associated with former Democratic administrations but
from scorekeepers like the Tax Policy Center whose entire model of operations rests on pleasing not 
politicians and donors but rather making the best forecasts they can. The disagreements, in turn,
drew an anguished cry from reporter Binyamin Applebaum:

I am not sure there is a defensible case for the discipline of macroeconomics if they cana€™ t at 
least agree on the ground rules for evaluating tax policy. What does it mean
to produce the signatures of 100 economists in favor of a given proposition when another 100 will 
sign their names to the opposite statement? How does Harvard, for
example, justify granting tenure to people who purport to work in the same discipline and publicly 
condemn each other as charlatans? How are ordinary people, let alone
members                                                                          of Congress, 
supposed to figure out which tenured professors are the serious economists?...

I think we can now answer Applebaum's question. The 100-odd economists from Barro through Taylor 
were not engaged in any intellectual discipline. When you are engaged in an intellectual
discipline, it is very interesting when you get something wronga€”it is a sign that you have 
something to learn. And so, in every intellectual discipline, you try to learn it: you study it, 
analyze it,
debate about it, in the hope of making yourself smartera€”if, that is, you see yourself as a 
thinker.

There has been none of that.
There has been silence.

There has been silence because the absence of the promised 800 billion surge in investment in 
America this year continued through next year and beyond is not something anybody is surprised to
see. Overwhelmingy, those writing opeds and releasing studies boosting last year's 
Trump-McConnell-Ryan corporate tax cut knew that the forecasts they made last year were 
overwhelmingly
likely to be wrong. So they are not surprised when they turn out to be wrong. And they do not even 
think it worthwhile to go through the motions of pretending to be surprised that the investment
share of national income and product in 2012 dollars is 18% and not 22%.

So I say to Binyamin Applebaum, and to other reporters who wrote upa€”much less critically than 
they should havea€”what the administration was saying and what corporate tax cut-boosting
economists from Barro to Taylor and company were saying last year: remember: "fool me once, shame 
on you; fool me twice, shame on me".

LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong.com/2018/12/clinton-administration-vis-trump-administration.html>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

Become a free subscriber to receive this a€~Stack in your email. Do note that this Grasping Reality 
newsletter is a reader-supported publication^”1 really would like to collect enough from it to
hire an RA. So consider becoming a paid subscriber, please, if you find this project worthwhile and 
think it worth continuing:

Subscribe

Give a gift subscription

