
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Six Paragraphs-Plus:

This I enthusiastically endorse: Figuring out that on Twitter you have a righta€”nay, stronger than 
a right: you have a dutya€”to not mute but block people even if all they do is just waste your time 
is essential to having a
good life.

Either that, or drop Twitter entirely.

In an attention economy, grabbing your attention uselessly is a cognitive attack on your mind. Such 
cognitive attacks need to be stopped:

Zeynep Tufekci: a€™Itry not to block actual criticism but things Ia€™ ve started pretty much 
automatically blocking to make Twitter usable: Snitch-tagging; a€oeOh youa€™re surprised?a€C
reply guys; People who respond to an article I wrote with a point made in the article as if I could 
have no idea. People who respond to an article I wrote with a point made in the article as if I 
could
have                                                                                          no 
idea. I started blocking them! There are people who sit on their keyboards all day telling 
othersa€”who never asked thema€”that what they just said is obvious. And then others reply to them.
And then my mentions are unusable. Ia€™ ve never had a useful interaction with any of the above 
categories, and they are just cluttering up my mentions especially since others then respond to 
them,
and ita€™ s an endless, pointless series of pings that hide any signal that may hide in my 
mentions.

I didna€™t tag someone already on Twitter myself? Yeah, Ia€™m not an idiot, thank you. Immediate 
block if you tag them in my mentions. Go talk to them separately if you want. People wanting to
start fights are not doing something healthy and lifea€™ s too short. You think my points are 
obvious? Happy to relieve you of them! Especially since a€oeoh, youa€™re surpriseda€D adds nothing
whatsoever. Point out something obvious I missed? Ia€™m grateful. Object to it substantively? 
Grateful. Just uselessly smug? On your own time and dime. Finally, I write a lengthy, detailed 
article
about something. Someone comes with a a€oehave you tried rebooting ita€D type comment as if Ia€™m a 
novice, and an idiot, and clueless? I used to tolerate and then realized nothing good ever
comes out of that because of the clutter they adda€!. These categories have a lot of repeat 
offenders so blocking just a few useless repeat offenders really improved my mentions.

Why not mute? I tried. Because people reply to them (which I see) and others see them and affects 
the quality of the discussion I do want to have, and also because snitch-taggers can work even when
muted. I mute some non malicious people who just say the same thing a lota€!.

This is an attempt to be able to hear real criticism and feedback in my mentions. If I dona€™ t do 
this, the roar of the people who make the most obvious points back to me or are just uselessly smug
will drown others out. The smug and stupid minority are very repetitivea€!

LINK: chttps://twitter.com/zeynep/status/1361680717416177664>

Most of you, gentle readers, do not realize what the right-wing fever swamp created by Rush 
Limbaugh and company is really like. Here is a sample. This is what they are hearing. But do note 
that even Frank Salvato is not
with the program. He is supposed to say that there were more Trump voters than Biden votersa€”80 
million plus. That he forgets this and says a€oe75 milliona€D is a tell of how little he himself 
believes what he writes, and
how much it is a conscious grift:

Frank Salvato: Ita€™ s Time for Mitch McConnell to Go: a€~I am taking square aim at one of our own, 
not to remove him from officea€”no I will not acquiesce to the a€oecancel culturea€D
lunacy, but to demote him from leadership^!. The words of the highest-ranking Republican in 
Washington, DC, currently, Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-KY). And more inaccurate and unproductive
they could not be. First and foremost, I reject that there was no chicanery in the 2020 General 
Election. We had a cowardly US Supreme Court that refused to hear a seminal case in whether states
whose executive branches formulated election law in fact violated the US Constitution, as the 
Constitution vests that power solely with the state legislatures. We had routine violations of 
election law
in several key statesa€”and within those states critical urban areasa€”that saw poll watchers and 
credentialed Republican election officials tantamount to being forcefully excluded from the ballot
counting processa€!.

McConnell should have been screaming about [these] in real timea€!. The man who should have been 
leading the charge for the Republican rank-and-file was sitting on his hands, too concerned with
retaining his own seat and, in fact, riding on President Trumpa€™ s accomplishment coattails to do 
soa€!. McConnell single-handedly lost the two run-off races in Georgia with his blunder about not
wanting to pass a $2,000 CO VID relief packagea€!. And how do Republicans in Washington, DC, punish 
McConnell for his failures, for his disloyalty, for his selfish exploitation of his elected
position? They re-elect him to leadership, this time as Senate Minority Leader. How stupid are the 
Senate Republicans to do this? I have to say abundantly so.

McConnell wasna€™t done with his caustic, unproductive screeda€”a screed that, mind you, offended 
75 million voters (how stupid is McConnell?): a€oePresident Trump is still liable for
everything he did while hea€™ s in officea€!He didna€™ t get away with anything yet.a€Da€! A person 
who holds these positions and who has presided over the litany of failures, such as
McConnell   has, who has effectively forced the Republican Party to be subservient to a group of 
people who actually hate the United States, well, that persona€’’Mitch McConnella€’’should not be in
a  position of leadership, and most definitely not the Senate Minority Leadera€!

LINK: <https://www.gopusa.com/?p=106550?omhide=tru>

A right wing made of of grifters and grifters has been a feature of American political life for a 
long long time now:

Steve Perlstein: The Long Con: a€~Mitt Romney is a liar. Of course, in some sense, all politicians, 
even all human beings, are liars. Romney a€™ s lying went so over-the-top extravagant by this
summer, though, that the New York Times editorial board did something probably unprecedented in 
their polite gray precincts: they used the L-worda€!.

There are lies, damned lies, statisticsa€”like his assertion that his tax cut proposal wona€™ t 
have any effect on the federal budget, which the Tax Policy Center called a€oenot mathematically
possible.a€D That frank dismissal vaulted the candidate into another category of lie, an attempt to 
bend time itself: Romney responded by calling that group a€cebiaseda€D; last year, he called them
a€ceobjective.a€Da€! Ann Romney told the right-wing site Newsmax.com that her husband had 
a€oealways personally been prolife,a€D though Mitt had said in his 1994 Senate race, a€oel believe
that    abortion should be safe and legal in this country.a€D And then Ann admitted a few sentence 
later, a€oeThey say he flip-flopped on abortion. Well, you know what? He did change his
mind.aCDaC!

In 2007a€! I mainlined a right-wing id that was invisible to readers who encounter conservative 
opinion at face valuea€!. Back in our great-grandparentsa€™ day, the peddlers of such miracle cures
and get-rich-quick schemes were known as snake-oil salesmen. You dona€™t see stuff like this much 
in mainstream culture any more; it hardly seems possible such dA©classA© effronteries could


wanting to pass a q>z,uuu LUVID renei pacKagea=ei. /MIU now uo ivepuDiicans in wasningion, punisn 
iviwuiuieu lor ins lanures, lor ms disloyalty, lor ms seinsn exploitation 01 ms eiecteu

position? They re-elect him to leadership, this time as Senate Minority Leader. How stupid are the 
Senate Republicans to do this? I have to say abundantly so.

McConnell wasna€™t done with his caustic, unproductive screeda€”a screed that, mind you, offended 
75 million voters (how stupid is McConnell?): a€oePresident Trump is still liable for
everything he did while hea€™ s in officea€!He didna€™ t get away with anything yet.a€Da€l A person 
who holds these positions and who has presided over the litany of failures, such as
McConnell   has, who has effectively forced the Republican Party to be subservient to a group of 
people who actually hate the United States, well, that persona€’’Mitch McConnella€’’should not be in
a  position of leadership, and most definitely not the Senate Minority LeaderaCI

LINK: <https://www.gopusa.com/?p=106550?omhide=tru>

A right wing made of of grifters and grifters has been a feature of American political life for a 
long long time now:

Steve Perlstein: The Long Con: a€~Mitt Romney is a liar. Of course, in some sense, all politicians, 
even all human beings, are liars. Romneya€™ s lying went so over-the-top extravagant by this
summer, though, that the New York Times editorial board did something probably unprecedented in 
their polite gray precincts: they used the L-worda€!.

There are lies, damned lies, statisticsa€”like his assertion that his tax cut proposal wona€™ t 
have any effect on the federal budget, which the Tax Policy Center called a€oenot mathematically
possible.a€D That frank dismissal vaulted the candidate into another category of lie, an attempt to 
bend time itself: Romney responded by calling that group a€cebiaseda€D; last year, he called them
a€ceobjective.a€Da€! Ann Romney told the right-wing site Newsmax.com that her husband had 
a€oealways personally been prolife,a€D though Mitt had said in his 1994 Senate race, a€oel believe
that    abortion should be safe and legal in this country.a€D And then Ann admitted a few sentence 
later, a€oeThey say he flip-flopped on abortion. Well, you know what? He did change his
mind.a€na€!

In 2007a€! I mainlined a right-wing id that was invisible to readers who encounter conservative 
opinion at face valuea€!. Back in our great-grandparentsa€™ day, the peddlers of such miracle cures
and get-rich-quick schemes were known as snake-oil salesmen. You dona€™ t see stuff like this much 
in mainstream culture any more; it hardly seems possible such dA©classA© effronteries could
get anywhere in a society with a high school completion rate of 90 percent. But tenders of a 
23-Cent Heart Miracle seem to work just fine on the readers of the magazine where Ann Coulter began 
her
journalistic ascent in the late nineties by pimping the notion that liberals are all gullible 
rubesa€!.

HumanEvents.coma€! featured an article headlined a€oeldeas Will Drive Conservativesa€™ Revival.a€D 
Two inches beneath that bold pronouncement, a box headed a€oeHealth Newsa€D
included the headlines a€oeReverse Crippling Arthritis in 2 Days,a€D a€oeClear Clogged Arteries 
Safely & Easilya€’’without drugs, without surgery, and without a radical diet,a€D and a€oeHigh
Blood Pressure Cured in 3 Minutesa€! Drop Measurement 60 Points ,a€Da€ I

The history of that movement echoes with the sonorous names of long-dead Austrian economists, of 
indefatigable door-knocking cadres, of soaring perorations on a nation finally poised to realize its
rendezvous with destinya€! [not] the massive intersection between the culture of a€oenetworka€D or 
a€cemultilevela€D marketinga€’’where ordinary folks try to get rich via pyramid schemes that
leave their neighbors holding the baga€!.

And yet this stuff is as important to understanding the conservative ascendancy as are the 
internecine organizational and ideological struggles that make up its official historya€”if not, 
indeed, more
so. The strategic alliance of snake-oil vendors and conservative true believers points up evidence 
of another successful long march, of tactics designed to corral fleeceable multitudes all in one
placea€”and the formation of a cast of mind that makes it hard for either them or us to discern 
where the ideological con ended and the money con begana€!

LINK: <https://thebaffler.com/salvos/the-long-con>

Clubhouse as Tik-Tok for podcasts? Perhaps?

Ben Thompson: Clubhousea€™ s Inevitability: a€~The fact that audio can be consumed while you are 
doing something else allows the immediacy and vibrancy of live conversation to shinea€!.
Make no mistake, most of these conversations will be terrible. That, though, is the case for all 
user-generated content. The key for Clubhouse will be in honing its algorithms so that every time a
listener opens the app they are presented with a conversation that is interesting to them. This is 
the other area where podcasts miss the marka€!. Sometimesa€”a lot of times!a€’’users just want to
scroll their Twitter feed instead of reading a long blog post, or click through Stories or swipe 
TikToks, and Clubhouse is poised to provide the same mindless escapism for background audioa€!.

Why now?a€! Hardwarea€! how easy AirPods make it to drop into and out of audio-listening modea€!. 
COVIDa€! last Aprila€! despite its very rough state it provided a place for people to socialize
when there were few other optionsa€!. Any suggestion that Clubhouse is limited to Silicon Valley is 
very much off the marka€!

LINK: <https://stratechery .com/2021/clubhouses-inevitability/>

Telling the truth and being fair appears way way down on the priorities of manya€”most?a€”NYT 
reporters these days. Scott Alexander Simkins has a receipt":

Scott Alexander Simkins: Response to NYT Article: a€oeThis is undoubtedly the version [Cade Metz] 
read, and he still chose to make this attack. I have 1,557 other posts worth of material he could
have used, and the sentence he chose to go with was the one that was crossed out and included a 
plea for people to stop taking it out of contexta€!

LINK: <https://astralcodexten.substack.com/p/statement-on-new-york-times-article>

More generally, in the case of Scott Alexander Simkins vs. Cade Metz before the bar of public 
opinion, I dona€™t think New York Times reporter Cade Mertz has it right, or did an honest or an 
honorable competent job here.
If the New York Times had an ombudsman, it could defend him and try to change my mind. But it 
doesna€™ t. So I can. And I go with Noah Smitha€™ s judgment here. Not as unprofessional as the 
semi-daily a€celvanka
and Jared are working hard to save us alla€D that the New York Times printed over 2015a€“2019. But 
pretty unprofessional all the samel:

Noah Smith: Silicon Valley Isna€™ t Full of Fascists: a€~Eight months later, that article is 
finally out, and ita€™s every bit as negative as [Scott Alexander Siskind] feareda€! draws 
conclusionsa€!
I dona€™ t think are warranteda€! both draws on and feeds into the mistaken stereotype that Silicon 
Valley is full of right-wingersa€!. I dona€™ t think sustaining this misconception is good for
Americaa€!. Cade Metza€! a€oe[Slate Star Codex was] the epicenter ofa€! the Rationalistsa€l [which] 
included white supremacists and neo-fascistsa€! a window into the Silicon Valley psychea€!.
The   allure of the ideas within Silicon Valley is what made Mr. Alexander, who had also written 
under his given name, Scott Siskind, and his blog essential readinga€!a€D

I always get annoyed at the narrative that Silicon Valley is rife with fascistsa€”a narrative that 
I feel that Metza€™ Times story unfortunately furthers. In reality, the tech industry is almost 
entirely a
bunch of liberalsa€!. In 2020a€! the internet industry gave 92% of its donations to Democrats !a€!. 
a€oeOnline computer servicesa€Ua€! was the third most liberal industrya€! more liberal than
newspapers and print media!a€!. A safe space for fascists, this is not. Metz, being a technology 
correspondent, must know all thisa€!.

The narrative of a pipeline of fascist ideas from Rationalist blogs to the minds of the powerful 
people building the future is certainly a juicy one, but it just doesna€™ t have much evidence to 
back it
up. Silicon Valley is a bastion of liberalism, tech founders are standard liberal nerds, and 
Rationalism is a niche subculture primarily concerned with navel-gazing about Bayesa€™ Rule,
utilitarianism, and robotsa€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/silicon-valley-isnt-full-of-fascists>

Hoisted from the Archives

Reasoning and Cogitationa€”by Individuals, by Social Groups, & by Societies: I am all but certain 
to never teach a course on: Reasoninga€’’Indivdual, Social, and Societal. But if I were to teach 
such a course, would this be
the best reading list? And if not these readings, what would be better replacements: William 
Poundstone: Labyrinths of Reasond€\ Hugo Mercier and Dan Sperber: The Enigma ofReasona€\ Daniel 
Kahneman: Thinking,
Fast and Slowd€\ T. M. Scanlon: Being Realistic about Reasonsa€\ Joshua D. Angrist and 
JA?rn-Steffen Pischke: Mostly Harmless Econometricsa€\ Judea Pearl & Dana Mackenzie): The Book 
ofWhyd€\ William
Flesch: Comeuppancea€\ Josiah Ober: Democracy & Knowledged€\ Henry Farrell & Cosma Shalizi: 
"Cognitive Democracy"a€! Cosma Shalizi: "In Soviet Union, Optimization Problem Solves You"a€.\ 
Herbert
Simon:  The Sciences of the Artificiald€\ Partha Dasgupta: Economics: A Very Short Introductiona€\ 
Milton Friedman & Rose Director Friedman: Free to Choosea€\ Tom Slee: No One Makes You Shop At 
Walmarta€\
Paul Seabright: The Company of Strangersd€\ Richard Thaler (2015): Misbehavinga€\

LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong .com/2018/12/reasoningindividual-social-and-societal .html>
Leave a comment


LINK: <https://www.bradford-delong.com/2018/12/reasoningindividual-social-and-societal .html>
Leave a comment

