I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: OUTTAKE: Economic Policy: Contra von Hayek, Industrial Market Economies Do Not and Cannot 
Manage Themselves:

Note well: the economy will not manage itself, at least not in a good way.
As John Maynard Keynes shrilly stated back in 1926:

Let us cleara€! the grounda€!. It is not true that individuals possess a prescriptive 'natural 
liberty' in their economic activities. There is no 'compact' conferring perpetual rights on those 
who Have or on those who Acquire. The world is not so governed from above that private and social 
interest always coincide. It is not so managed here below that in practice they coincide. It is not 
a correct deduction from the principles of economics that
enlightened self-interest always operates in the public interest. Nor is it true that self-interest 
generally is enlighteneda€! individualsa€! promot[ing] their own ends are too ignorant or too weak 
to attain even these. Experience does not show thata€! social unit[s] are always less clear-sighted 
than [individuals] act[ing] separately. We [must] therefore settlea€! on its meritsa€! a€ce 
determining] what the State ought to take upon itself to
direct by the public wisdom, and what it ought to leave, with as little interference as possible, 
to individual exertion"a€!

The management of economies by governments in the twentieth century was at best inept. And, as we 
have seen since 2007, little if anything has been durably learned about how to regulate the 
un-self-regulating market in order to maintain prosperity, or ensure opportunity, or produce 
substantial equality.

Before the start of the nineteenth century, there were markets but there was not really a market 
economy and there was definitely not an industrial market economy. Thus the peculiar and particular 
dysfunctions that we have seen the industrial market economy generate through its macroeconomic 
functioning were, if not absent, at least rare and in the background of attention. Wars, famines, 
government defaults were threats to life and livelihood. The idea that
Alice might be poor and hungry because Bob would not buy stuff from her because Bob was unemployed 
because Carl wanted to deleverage because Dana was no longer a good credit risk because Alice had 
stopped paying rent to Danaa€”that and similar macroeconomic processes are a post-1800 phenomenon.

The problems of economic policy in the modern age are, speaking very broadly, threefold:

1. the problem of attempts to replace the market with central planning—which is, for reasons 
well-outlined by the brilliant side of Friedrich von Hayek, a subclass of the problem of 
twentieth-century totalitarian tyranny

2. the problem of managing what Karl Polanyi called "fictitious commodities"; and,

3. the problem of managing aggregate demand.

Leave the first problem to the side: we are already depressed enough by the little time we spent on 
it above. Turn to the second problem, to Karl Polanyi's "fictitious commodities". Wea€”we East 
African Plains Apesa€”are gift-exchange animals. We seek reciprocity: neither to give so much that 
we feel exploited by those who give too little back in return, nor to give so little as to 
unbalance the scales and leave us doomed to submission, but rather to fairly
balance the scales. On top of this propensity in human nature to truck, barter, and exchange we 
have built our market economy. This means that market exchanges have to fulfill five distinct 
social roles:

1. The prices at which commodities are exchanged survey as signals and incentives to direct and 
coordinate the human division of labor.

2. The fact of trade and exchange cements social bonds—Albert Hirshman's "doux commerce" idea.

3. Present generosity a€’’giving more than you receive right now, whether explicitly a loan or 
nota€”creates a status hierarchy that distributes social decision-making power.

4. The unlucky benefit from a modicum of social insurance by implicitly trading away some 
decision-making autonomy for current resources.

5. And the prices the market attaches to the resources at one's hand make some rich and others 
poor: "We know these matters:/How the poor debtors/Still sell their daughters ./How in the 
drought/Men still grow fata€!"

But the logic of the competitive (the monopolistic or oligopolistic is worse) industrial market 
economy focuses on fulfilling only the number (1) of these distinct roles, leaving the other four 
hanginga€”and that will not be good. A self-regulating competitive market economy will not seek to 
cement social bonds, or to establish a functional and effective status hierarchy for collective 
decision-making, or provide a modicum of social insurance, or produce a sane
balance between rich and poor. It will only produce prices that serve as guides to direct and 
coordinate the human division of labor. And, in the presence of significant externalities or 
significant market power, it will not even do that.

Karl Polanyi summarized all this by stating that the self-regulating market economy turns the stuff 
of people's lives—where they live, what they work on, and what promises and obligations they have 
for the future—into the fictitious commodities of land, labor, and capital and then deals with them 
as it deals with other commodities. And that, Polanyi correctly said, is not good. The problem is 
that governments, even democratic governments, do less to properly
regulate the market in the interest of achieving these other four social roles besides that of 
setting prices to serve as incentives and signals.

Turn now to the third of the problems of economic policy, the problem of managing aggregate demand 
to avoid either mass unemployment or excessive and destructive inflation. These evils are avoided 
by having the government adjust its spending programs and modify the supply of the money and debt 
it issues in order to make Say's Lawa€”the principle that everybody's production becomes their 
income which is somebody else's spending demand, and all
three of these quantities match—true in practice even though it is not true in theory. Phrased this 
way, the conceptual problem is easy: match aggregate demand to full-employment aggregate supply or 
productive potential.

The global Lesser Depression starting in 2007 is proof that even after two centuries of dealing 
with disturbances to aggregate demand that the world's governments cannot manage these grand mal 
seizures of the market economy. Little, it turns out, was known in 2007 about how to manage a 
market economy under circumstances of large shocks to demanda€”or, rather, little painfully learned 
had been remembered. Lessons learned from experience were often
forgotten quickly. There was an extraordinary disjunction between the power of twentieth-century 
economies as social-calculating and behavior-conditioning mechanisms and the ineptness with which 
these economies were managed.

Some of it is because twentieth-century economists did not know what to prescribe: the history of 
economic policy reads like alchemy, not chemistry. Often proposed remedies made economic problems 
worse. Many times one current generation^™ s proposed solutions to the problems of how to manage 
domestic and international macroeconomic policy turn out to lay the groundwork for the next 
generationa€™ s problems of macroeconomic management. And
it is not always the case that larger problems are replaced by smaller ones over time. As the 
salience of different problemsa€’’inflation, unemployment, unstable capital flows, unstable 
exchange rates, the sacrifice of domestic to international interests, the focus on domestic 
interests which means that the international system is left ungoverned and unmanageda€”has changed 
over time, the movement of economic policy has looked less progressive and more
circular. Theoretical doctrines like the Keynesian a€oeliquidity trapa€D that were last applied to 
the U.S. in the 1930s, and thereafter dismissed as theoretical curios of no practical importance, 
are dusted-off and revived for the analysis of Japanese stagnation in the 1990s. When Argentinian 
technocrat Domingo Cavallo reassumes the post of Minister of Finance in early 2001, some of the 
policy proposals that he advances to deal with Argentinaa€™ s then-
macroeconomic problems appeared remarkably similar to policy proposals that John Maynard Keynes had 
advanced at the end of the 1920s to deal with Great Britaina€™ s similar macroeconomic problems.

Some of it is that politicians did not like to follow their economistsa€™ advice, or at least 
sought for a more complaisant set of economists who would give advice that would be more 
politically pleasing and palatable to follow. And some of it is simply that while it may be true 
that those who do not remember the past are condemned to repeat it, this aphorism does not stress 
the fact that that means that the rest of us are condemned to repeat it with them.

The twentieth-century economy has been a tremendously powerful, efficient, and productive social 
mechanisma€”the market system. Yet few, or few of those in power, have known how to operate or fix 
it. Moreover, learning does not appear to take placea€”or if it does take place, it does not take 
place at more than a glacial pace. The inescapable image is of an ocean liner crewed and steered by 
chimpanzees. The failures and half-successes of economic policy
together make up another key facet of twentieth-century economic history: how governments have 
managed or mismanaged their economies, and how knowledge of how the economic system works has been 
painfully gained and then painfully lost.

Share

One Audio:

Carola Conces Binder: Inflation Expectations, Measurement & Causes: a€~Episode 11 of the Economic 
Forces Podcasta€!


conomic Forces

Carola Binder I Inflation Expectations, Measurement and Causes

Listen now (50 min) I Youa€™re reading Economic Forces, a free weekly newsletter on economics, 
especially price theory, without the politics. You can support our newsletter by signing up herea€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 1 like A- Economic Forces

One Image: Into the Metaverse We Go!


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

• Minxin Pei: Chinaa€™ s Debt Bomb Looks Ready to Explode 
<https://asia.nikkei.com/Opinion/China-s-debt-bomb-looks-ready-to-explode>

•  Lawrence Summers: Principles of a Multipolar System: a€~A policy where our objective would be to 
cause [China] to be poor would be a grave error for the United Statesa€! 
<https://www.thewirechina.com/2Q22/Q7/17/lawrence-summers-on-the-principles-of-a-multipolar-system/>


• Andrew Marvell: An Horatian Ode, Upon Cromwella€™ s Return from Ireland 
<https://www.poetrvfoundation.org/poems/44683/an-horatian-ode-upon-cromwells-return-from-ireland>

Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Josh Barro: Public Health Officials Should Be Clearer About Who Isna€™ t at Risk for Monkeypox: 
a€~A general pattern of dishonest framing by public health authoritiesa€!


Public Health Officials Should Be Clearer About Who Isn't at Risk for Monkeypox

Dear readers, Ia€™ ve seen a spate of pieces in recent days flagging the problem with a€oeanyone 
can get monkey poxa€D messaging from public health authorities. (See, for example, Jerusalem Demsas 
in The Atlantic.) And part of what makes that message extra galling is that ita€™ s not the only 
one public health officials are sendinga€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 23 likes A- 16 comments A- Josh Barro

Noah Smith: China Is Flailing

Noahpinion

China is flailing

Ita€™ s interesting to me that the three most powerful countries in the world are all hitting major 
stumbling blocks right now. For the U.S., the problems are political in nature a€” bitter internal 
division and a dysfunctional political culture that prevents the countrya€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 85 likes A- 36 comments A- Noah Smith

• Brad DeLong: Chinaa€™ s Likely Trajectory in Xi Jinpinga€™ s Third Term



My Never-Published Review of Eric Hobsbawma€™ s " Azhe Age of Extremes11, &

FIRST: My Unpublished Review of Eric Hobsbawma€™ s The Age of Extremes From early 1995. People have 
been asking me why I am not especially enamored of Eric Hobsbawm: The Age of Extremes 
<https://archive.org/details/ageofextremeshisOOhobs_Oa€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 1 like A- 6 comments A- Brad DeLong

• Saladin Ahmed: Launch Week FAQs

Launch week FAQs

Ita€™ s been an amazing week launching Copper Bottle, and there's lots more to come. But today I 
wanted to slow down a bit and answer some questions that have come up as wea€™ ve shared our news 
with the worlda€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 likes A- Saladin Ahmed

• Policy Tensor: The Yield Curve Is Predicting Much Worse than a Recession

Policy Tensor

The yield curve is predicting much worse than a recession.

Herea€™ s the yield curve in what we may call the forward-rates representation. Each of the five 
graphs in the chart are spreads along maturity a€” the number of years until the payment on a 
zero-coupon bond. The first is the yield on the 6-month (mo) bill less the yield on the 3-mo bill 
(anchored at the Feda€™ s current policy rate). The second is 1 year less a€!
Read more

7 months ago A- 9 likes A- 3 comments A- Policy Tensor

Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

