
Eight Paragraphs:

We do not realize how unbelievable the cumulative technological revolution in computer hardware 
performance has been:

Charlie Stross: Lying to the Ghost in the Machine: a€~In the 2000sa€! cheap high performance GPUs 
put the processing power of a ten years previous supercomputer in every goddamn smartphone. Ia€™ m 
not
exaggeratinga€!. Modern CPU/GPU performance is ridiculous. Every time you add an abstraction layer 
to a software stack you can expect a roughly one order of magnitude performance reduction, so 
intuition
would suggest that a WebAssembly framework (based on top of JavaScript running inside a web browser 
hosted on top of a traditional big-ass operating system) wouldna€™ t be terribly fast; but the 
other day I
was reading about one such framework which, on a new Apple Ml Macbook Air (not even the higher 
performance Macbook Pro) could deliver 900GFlops, which would put it in the top 10 world 
supercomputers
circa 1996a€“98. In a scripting language inside a web browser on a 2020 laptop)a€!

LINK: <https://www.antipope.org/charlie/blog-static/index.html>

An attention economy is an increasing-returns economy is a winner-take-all economy. This is 
deranging, and destabilizing:

Kyle Chayka: The Meme Economy. a€~I used to think that stability was formed by the slow gains of 
promotions and work, the respect of my peers and the establishment of authority in some field or 
another,
even if not through salaried full-time jobs. My concept of a career has been replaced, however, 
with the framework of a series of increasingly arcane gambles within the digital platforms that 
contain our lives and
our civilization. Any bet could outpace many years of work. We hope to land at the right startup, 
to buy the right coin, to be an early adopter on a new platform just before the audience floods in, 
to become a
meme ourselves. For that is how it works: You go viral, thus you get a gig, get sponsorships, sell 
subscriptions, sell a booka€!

LINK: <https://kylechayka.substack.eom/p/essay-the-meme-economy>

Is our Capitol Hill Democrats learning? They is. Is media organizations like The New York Times 
learning? So far not a clue:

Scott Lemieux: Chuck Schumer No Longer Interested in Playing 3-Card Monte with Susan Collins - 
Lawyers, Guns & Money. a€~"Collins was not pleased to be singled out in such a manner. In an 
interview, she
called Schumera€™ s comments an a€~extraordinarya€™ backhanding of his most natural ally across the 
aisle. And she said therea€™ s been zero contact with the Democratic leader since the election: 
a€~He
has  not spoken to me, no.a€™ a€oeShould we let Susan Collins make the bill substantially worse, or 
just go ahead and pass a better onea€D is not actually a hard question if those are the choices. 
And in terms of
what this might mean going forward, I assume Schumer has also realized that, as his predecessor 
allegedly remarked, Collins a€oeis always there for a vote you dona€™t need.a€Da€! [Now] even 
relatively
moderate Democrats [are willing] to ignore Republican pleas to spend months and months negotiating 
before Susan Collins can announce that, in fact, her shop has no cheese at all and she was 
deliberately
wasting                                                                                             
  your timea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.lawversgunsmonevblog.com/2021/03/chuck-schumer-no-longer-interested-in-plaving-3-card-m
onte-with-susan-collins>

I have long wondered whether individuals who write to inform their readers might be able to acquire 
enough a brand to disintermediate newspapers and such that really work for their reportersa€™ 
sources, and when they dona€™ t work
for their sources work for their bosses, and when they dona€™ t work for their sources or their 
bosses work for their advertisers. SubStack is once again launching the project of finding out why 
this might become so into the breach:

Elizabeth Spiers: Blogs vs. Substack vs. Legacy Media: a€~Self-publishing on Substack is good for 
people who want to write commentary. And therea€™ s no chance of ever cannibalizing op-ed writers 
from
journalism because therea€™ s just no shortage of people who want to be op-ed writers. But it 
mostly works well for people who already have a bit of a brand, either because theya€™ ve written 
somewhere else
or theya€™ ve already built up an audience from scratcha€“and the latter is really hard to do. But 
if you can do it, the upsides of self-publishing are that you can write about whatever you want 
with no
institutional or stylistic constraints. I write for traditional outlets like the Washington Post as 
well as on my personal Substack, but I have to pitch everything and I hate pitching. There are some 
pieces Ia€™ d
rather   just write on spec than write 450 words explaining what the piece is. And sometimes I get 
rejections and want to write those pieces anyway, if only for myself. Substack is good for thata€!

LINK: <https://www.pairagraph.com/dialogue/8e515294af6248bfb9114172b7b9af7e/2>

A truly great paper:

J. Vernon Henderson, Tim L. Squires, Adam Storeygard, & David N. Weil: The Global Spatial 
Distribution of Economic Activity: Nature, History, & the Role of Trade: a€~We study the 
distribution of
economic activity, as proxied by lights at night, across 250,000 grid cells of average area 560 
square kilometers. We first document that nearly half of the variation can be explained by a 
parsimonious set of
physical geography attributes. A full set of country indicators only explains a further 10%. When 
we divide geographic characteristics into two groups, those primarily important for agriculture and 
those primarily
important for trade, we find that the agriculture variables have relatively more explanatory power 
in countries that developed early and the trade variables have relatively more in countries that 
developed late,
despite   the fact that the latter group of countries are far more dependent on agriculture today. 
We explain this apparent puzzle in a model in which two technological shocks occur, one increasing 
agricultural
productivity and the other decreasing transportation costs, and in which agglomeration economies 
lead to persistence in urban locations. In countries that developed early, structural 
transformation due to rising
agricultural productivity began at a time when transport costs were still relatively high, so urban 
agglomerations were localized in agricultural regions. When transport costs fell, these local 
agglomerations
persisted.                                                                                          
        In late developing countries, transport costs fell well before structural transformation. 
To exploit urban scale economies, manufacturing agglomerated in relatively few, often coastal, 
locations. With
structural transformation, these initial coastal locations grew, without formation of more cities 
in the agricultural interiora€!

LINK: <https ://www .nber.org/system/files/working papers/w22145/w22145 .pdf>

Boris Johnson has set his credibility on fire, and has no potential allies anywhere in the world 
for whatever he wants to do on international diplomacy or economic policy. But thata€™ s probably 
fine with him, since he does not want to
accomplish anything other than become Prime Minister:

Philip Stephens: Squandering Trust Is No Route to a a€~Global Britaina€™: a€™ By seeking to renege 
on his Brexit commitments, Boris Johnson has made the UK an unreliable allya€!. Middle-ranking and
smaller states seeka€! sheltering behind alliances, coalitions of the like-minded and multilateral 
rules. A long-promised foreign, diplomatic and intelligence strategy soon to be unveiled by Boris 
Johnsona€™ s
government must start from this simple premisea€!. International networks rest on mutual trust. 
Nations, like individuals, abide by the rules to the extent that others also act in good faith. 
Unreliable partners do
not get to act as conveners. Which renders all the more inexplicable Johnsona€™ s efforts to renege 
on the Brexit agreement he signed with the EU. The governments™ s move to delay implementation of
agreed new checks on trade between Britain and Northern Ireland recalls a threat last year to 
repudiate the customs arrangements designed to avoid a border between Northern Ireland and the 
Republic of
IrelandS5. Such things are noticed. Witness the remarks of Brendan Boyle, a congressional ally of 
US president Joe Biden. This was the second time, Boyle told BBC televisions™ s Newsnight, Soethat 
this
UK government has signed up to an international agreement and then immediately decided to go back 
on what it agreed toSD. The move carried Soeall sorts of ramificationsSD. One of which could be a
serious falling out with Washington. Biden has signalled he expects Johnson fully to uphold the 
Irish protocols!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/10ec8895-c84f-479e-9fc7-9dde0706dca3>

One of the major pedagogical and intellectual-presentational revolutions of our time:

Matt Asay: Jupyter Has Revolutionized Data Science, & It Started with a Chance Meeting Between Two 
Students: S~If you want to do data science, youS™re going to have to become familiar with JupyterS!
best known for Jupyter Notebooks, a web application that allows data scientists to create and share 
documents that contain live code, equations, visualizations and narrative text. This proves to be a 
great way to
extract data with code and collaborates!. It started with a friendship. Fernando PA©rez and Brian 
Granger met the first day they started graduate school at University of Colorado Boulder. Years 
later in 2004,
they discussed the idea of creating a web-based notebook interface for IPython, which PA©rez had 
started in 2001. This became Jupyter, but even then, they had no idea how much of an impact it 
would have
within academia and beyondS!

LINK: 
<https://www.techrepublic.com/article/jupyter-has-revolutionized-data-science-and-it-started-with-a-
chance-meeting-between-two-students/>

Duncan Black is making me remember days of horror and disappointment from 2009-2012. If the 
right-wing of the Republican caucus had been focused on achieving policies rather than simply 
dissing Obama by refusing to endorse any
deal he proposeda€”they could have repealed a large chunk of the New Deal, given Obamaa€™ s 
desperate, desperate jonesing for a a€oegrand bargaina€D on entitlements:

Duncan Black: Somebody Reads This Blog: a€~Back in the day, Obamaa€™ s people would respond to 
criticism about the size of the stimulus by arguing that there was a problem finding a€oeshovel 
readya€D
infrastructure nroiects. Peonle like stunid me kent nointinp out that this was ridiculous as von 
could iust start renlacinp the water/sewer svstems in most of the countrv. Kevnesa€™ s a€cenav 
neonle to dip holes in


ireianaafei. Mien tnings are noticed, witness me remarks ot Brendan Boyle, a congressional any ot 
U5 president Joe Biden, inis was tne second time, Boyle told BBL televisional s isewsnignt, 
afeoetnat tnis

UK government has signed up to an international agreement and then immediately decided to go back 
on what it agreed toa€D. The move carried a€oeall sorts of ramificationsa€D. One of which could be a
serious falling out with Washington. Biden has signalled he expects Johnson fully to uphold the 
Irish protocola€!

LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/10ec8895-c84f-479e-9fc7-9dde0706dca3>

One of the major pedagogical and intellectual-presentational revolutions of our time:

Matt Asay: Jupyter Has Revolutionized Data Science, & It Started with a Chance Meeting Between Two 
Students'. a€~If you want to do data science, youa€™re going to have to become familiar with 
Jupytera€!
best known for Jupyter Notebooks, a web application that allows data scientists to create and share 
documents that contain live code, equations, visualizations and narrative text. This proves to be a 
great way to
extract data with code and collaborate^!. It started with a friendship. Fernando PA©rez and Brian 
Granger met the first day they started graduate school at University of Colorado Boulder. Years 
later in 2004,
they discussed the idea of creating a web-based notebook interface for IPython, which PA©rez had 
started in 2001. This became Jupyter, but even then, they had no idea how much of an impact it 
would have
within academia and beyonda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.techrepublic.com/article/jupyter-has-revolutionized-data-science-and-it-started-with-a-
chance-meeting-between-two-students/>

Duncan Black is making me remember days of horror and disappointment from 2009-2012. If the 
right-wing of the Republican caucus had been focused on achieving policies rather than simply 
dissing Obama by refusing to endorse any
deal he proposeda€”they could have repealed a large chunk of the New Deal, given Obamaa€™ s 
desperate, desperate jonesing for a a€oegrand bargaina€D on entitlements:

Duncan Black: Somebody Reads This Blog'. a€~Back in the day, Obamaa€™ s people would respond to 
criticism about the size of the stimulus by arguing that there was a problem finding a€oeshovel 
readya€D
infrastructure projects. People like stupid me kept pointing out that this was ridiculous as you 
could just start replacing the water/sewer systems in most of the country. Keynesa€™ s a€oepay 
people to dig holes in
the  ground and then fill them up,a€D but actually useful and needed!a€! The rescue bill has 
quietly become an infrastructure bill. It devotes $350 billion to supporting state and local 
governments. These funds,
initially proposed to plug COVIDa€“19-created holes in public budgets, in many cases now exceed 
those holes. So the Senate has allowed states, cities, and counties to spend that money on 
imteproving services
such  as water, sewage, and broadband. Because many water systems are vulnerable to climate change 
and must be adapted, this is de facto climate funding. The bill also contains $31 billion for 
tribal governments
and Indigenous communities, including line items for new infrastructure, housing, and language 
preservation. Progressa€!

LINK: <https://www.eschatonblog.com/2021/03/somebody-reads-this-blog.html>

Hoisted from the Archives:

1997: The Corporation as a Command Economy 
<https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/the-corporation-as-a-command-economv>: we were all told, back 
when the Soviet Union collapsed, that hierarchical organizations simply did not work
as modes of organizing economic lifea€”that you needed a market in order to achieve anything better 
than low-productivity, bureaucracy-ridden economic stagnation. What, then, are all these large 
corporationsa€”ATT and IBM, General
Motors and Toyota, Microsoft and USXa€”doing? What methods of corporate control have saved them 
from turning into smaller versions of the unproductive Soviet economy That our economy is populated 
by large corporations shapes
how we live. Our social being cannot but be shaped by the one-third of our waking lives spent at 
work. Our politics would be very different without corporations both as sources of pressure an 
influence on politicians and as intermediaries
serving the purposes of politiciansa€!

Leave a comment

