Subscribe now

First:

An ur-text for the doctrines of Dark Satanic Millian Liberalism. Here George Stigler writing back 
in 1949 seeks to assimilate the classical economists Smith, Senior, and Mill to his
claim that a good economic system does not produce prosperity but rather builds character:

George Stigler (1949): Five Lectures on Economic Problems'. a€~Why encourage men to work and save ? 
The customary answer is to maximize
outputa€!. One might defend the goal of maximum output by arguing that the ultimate utilitarian 
goal was maximum satisfaction, and that greater output
will lead to larger increases of satisfaction than will greater equality. This interpretation is 
plausible, but I believe it is mistaken.

Most of the important classical economists explicitly rejected maximum satisfaction as a goal, and 
none except Bentham explicitly adopted ita€!.

The [Adam] Smith of the Wealth of Nations^.} propos[ed]a€! labour disutility as the true measure of 
value over timea€!. Utility is independent of
incomea€!. Labour disutility appeared to have a more durable and stable significance: an houra€™ s 
toil was as irksome in 1400 as in 1776. This view of
the utility of income as dependent only on the incomes of other times and other people accounts for 
much of the neglect of utility in the classical
economics.

[Nassau]Senior reached and stated the law of diminishing marginal utility, only to dismiss ita€D

The desire for distinction^! may be pronounced to be the most powerful of human passions. The most 
obvious source of
distinction is the possession of superior wealtha€!. To seem more rich, or, to use a common 
expression, to keep up a better
appearance,  is, with almost all men who are placed beyond the fear of actual want, the ruling 
principle a€!. For thisa€! they
undergo    toil which no pain or pleasure addressed to the senses would lead them to encounter; 
into which no slave could be lashed
or bribeda€l

Mill followed the tradition:

I know not why it should be a matter of congratulation that persons who are already richer than any 
one needs to be, should have
doubled their means of consuming things which give little or no pleasurea€!. It is only in the 
backward countries of the world that
increased production is still an important objecta€!

Why, then, did the classical economists display such great and persistent concern with policies 
that maximize output? Their concern was with the
maximizing, not with the output. The struggle of men for larger incomes was good because in the 
process they learned independence, self-reliance, self-
disciplined’’because, in short, they became better mena€!

LINK: chttps://github .com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/stigler-1949-five-lectures 
.pdf>
As history of economic thought, these observations by Stigler area€! quite bad.

John Stuart Mill, unless you work very hard to cherry-pick isolated quotations, had a strong 
preference for leisure, bildung, and the philosophical life rather than extending the
working day, and his attitudes were much complicated by his Malthusianism, but he did not think the 
marginal utility of consumption was at all close to zero. Smitha€™ s
observations about the vanity of acquisition are aimed at the upper classes: for him the marginal 
utility of consumption for the overwhelming bulk of the population^’’even in rich
Englanda€”is very large indeed. And as for Nassau Senior, well, for the Drummond Professor of 
Political Economy at Oxford to compare the disutility of his labors scratching out
one   more article to increase his distinction to those of the slaves in Jamaica under the lash who 
grew his sugar and had a life expectancy on the plantation of seven years, or to those
of the adult males in South Carolina growing his cotton, enslaved, lashed, and fed 4000 calories a 
day lest they did of overwork otherwisea€”Nassau Senior was a great ass, and it
is transitive: anyone who quotes Nassau Senior without observing that he was a great ass is a great 
ass.

In the Grand Architecture of Stigler thought, he misuses the classical economists here to gain 
support for the first of the three grand claims that make up his intellectual edifice:

1. The actual quantity and distribution of wealth is unimportanta€’’needs to be dismissed from 
consideration.

2. It is very important that the rich not be taxed and regulated, because to do so would keep them 
from exerting their powers to the fullest to become excellent and
demonstrate their excellence.

3. It is very important that the not-rich not be insured by society against want, for to do so 
would deprive them of the spur that they need to improve their characters and
achieve what excellence they might be capable of.

For most people who make this three-part argument, it is, as John Holbo quotes Lionel Trilling as 
assessing it, not a thought but only an a€oeirritable mental gesturea€D. At least as
I read Stigler, however, he is dead serious.

Cue John Holbo:

John Holbo (2003): Dead Right. a€~[From David Frum]:

The great, overwhelming fact of a capitalist economy is riska€!. Risk makes people circumspect. It 
disciplines them and teaches
them self-control. Without a safety net, people wona€™t try to vault across the big top. Social 
security, student loans, and other
government programs make it far less catastrophic than it used to be for middle-class people to 
dissolve their families. Without
welfare and food stamps, poor people would cling harder to working-class respectability than they 
do nota€!

The thing that makes capitalism good, apparently, is not that it generates wealth more efficiently 
than other known economic engines. No, the thing that
makes capitalism good is that, by forcing people to live precarious lives, it causes them to live 
in fear of losing everything and therefore toa€! behave
a€~conservativelya€™ a€!. Leta€™ s call this position (what would be an evocative name?) a€~dark 
satanic millian liberalisma€™: the ethico-political
theory       that says laissez faire capitalism is good if and only if under capitalism the masses 
are forced to work in environments that break their will to want to
a€~jump across the big topa€™ , i.e. behave in a self-assertive, celebratorily individualist 
manner. Ergo, a dark satanic millian liberal will tend to oppose
capitalism to the degree that, say, Virginia Postrel turns out to be right about capitalism 
ushering in a bright new age of individual liberty, in which people
try   new things for the sheer joy of realizing themselves, etc., etca€!.

Would [David Frum] really be willing to go so fara€!. Why, yesa€”yes, he would. Because he 
believesa€!.

Shrinking government has always been a political means rather than an end in itself. The end was 
the preservation of the
American heritage, and beyond that, the heritage of the classical and Judeo-Christian (or Christian 
toute court) West. If that
heritage  could be preserved without fighting an ugly and probably doomed battle to shrink 
government, most conservatives would
drop the size-of-government issue with hardly a panga€!

But is Frum really serious when he says this?a€! Surely Frum is at most guilty of insufficiently 
vigorous advocacy of prosperity. He cana€™ t be expressly
advocating the lack thereof. Oddly, there are various strong hints that he is. Example:

Contemporary conservatives still value that old American character. William Bennett in his lectures 
reads admiringly from an
account of the Donner party written by a survivor that tells the story in spare, stoic style. He 
puts the letter down and asks
incredulously, a€oeWhere did those people go?a€Ua€! If you believe that early Americans possessed a 
fortitude that present-day
Americans lack, and if you think the loss is an important one, then you have to think hard about 
why that fortitude disappeareda€!.
Reorganizing the method by which they select and finance their schools wona€™ t do ita€! neither 
will the line-item veto, or
discharge petitions, or entrusting Congress with the power to deny individual NEA grants, or court 
decisions strinking down any


in what way our social conditions have changed in order to understand whya€!. There have been 
hundreds of such changesa€”
never mind since the Donner party a€™ s day, just since 1945.a€! But the expansion of government is 
the only one we can do
anything about. All of these changes have had the same effect: the emancipation of the individual 
appetite from restrictions
imposed                                                           on it by limited resources, or 
religious dread, or community disapproval, or the risk of disease or personal catastrophea€!

Words fail me; links not much better. The Donner Party? Where did all these people go?
Into each other, to a dismaying extent.

A passage from one of those moving, stoical diary entries:

Mrs. Murphy said here yesterday that [she] thought she would commence on Milt and eat him. I dona€™ 
t think she has done so
yet, [but] it is distresing. The Donno[r]s told the California folks that they [would] commence to 
eat the dead people 4 days ago, if
they did not succeed in finding their cattle then under ten or twelve feet of snow & did not know 
the spot or near it, I suppose they
have [cannibalized] a€! ere this timea€!.

I think we are beginning to see why Frum feels that his philosophy may be a loser come election 
timea€!.

At this point let me step back and make quite clear: I dona€™ t actually think Frum isa€! actually 
advocating the intentional infliction of dire economic
hardship and sufferinga€“let alone cannibalism - on the American people for the sake of hardening 
them up, stiffening the national spine. I think if there
were some Americans caught in the snowy mountains these days, hea€™ d advocating sending in the 
helicopters and so fortha€“and he wouldna€™ t
order them to stand off, just filming the poor schmucks eating each other for Fruma€™ s subsequent 
viewing pleasure and moral edification.

Which is to say: Frum is not thinking about what hea€™ s saying. Because what he is saying more or 
less instantaneously implies an indefinitely large
cloud of things he reallya€ “really, reallya€“doesna€™t thinka€!.

Orwell talks about this in chapter 12 of The Road to Wigan Pier, incidentally: the naturalness of 
hostility to the softening that results from modern machine
civilization. Thata€™ s the feeling, he explains. But, of course, next comes the thought:

So long as the machine is there, one is under an obligation to use ita€!. to use archaic tools, to 
put silly difficulties in your own
way, would bea€! pretty-pretty arty and craftinessa€!. Revert to handwork in a machine age, and you 
are back in Ye Old Tea
Shoppe or the Tudor villa with the sham beams tacked to the walla€!

Thata€™ s Frum in a nutshell. Had the feeling. Stalled out before he got the thought. What Frum has 
got, to repeat, is just a feeling that the kids these days
are getting a bit soft. Everyone feels this way sometimes, of coursea€“since ita€™ s true. But some 
people have thoughts as well as feelings about this
attendant effect of civilizationa€!. Lionel Trillinga€! in 1953: anti-liberals do not, by and 
large, a€oeexpress themselves in ideas but only in action or in
irritable mental gestures which seek to resemble ideas .a€D Irritable mental gesturesa€!

LINK: chttps ://examinedlife .typepad .com/j ohnbelle/2003/11/dead_right ,html>

Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Carole Eastman: Five Easy Pieces chttps://www.dailyscript.com/scripts/fiveeasypieces.html>

•  Rainy Yao & Emily Liu: Jing-Jin-Ji: The Biggest City in China Youa€™ ve Probably Never Heard of 
chttps://www.china-briefing.com/news/jing- jin- ji-biggest-city-
china-vouve-probably-never-heard/>

• Paul Krugman: Who Was Milton Friedman? 
<https://www.nvbooks.com/articles/2007/02/15/who-was-milton-friedman/>

• Wikipedia: Thomas Wyatt the Younger 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2019/07/thomas-wyatt-the-vounger-weekend-reading,html>

• Paul Krugman (2013): Milton Friedman, Unperson 
chttps://krugman.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/08/08/milton-friedman-unperson/>

• Richard McElreath: a€~Everything is selection effects, always has beena€™ 
chttps://twitter.com/rlmcelreath/status/1396040993175126018>

• Wikipedia: History of the Transistor <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of the transistoi>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Paragraphs:

We want to allow market forces to work only when those market forces are in fact working for social 
betterment. The marketa€’’including property rights, and wealth
allocationsa€’’exist to be our tools, not our masters. This is a very important point. Here Matthew 
Yglesias applies it:

Matthew Yglesias: We Should Have Done More Bailouts'. a€~It is true that ita€™ s important to let 
some businesses fail so that others might grow. Buta€!
Economics 101 principles are observations based on the normal functioning of human society a€’’they 
a€™ re not physical laws of the universe. In general,
it is not a great idea to have the government trying to centrally plan capital allocation across 
the entire economy. Thata€™ s a true fact that youa€™ 11 find
it in textbooks, and I completely agree. But World War II was not fought on that basisa€!. By the 
same token, the government could (and should) have
acted with confidence that the big decline in restaurant meals was not in fact a reliable economic 
signal about diminished long-term prospects for
restauranting. Normally, public officials second-guessing the market is a bad idea, but in this 
case, we really were in a position to knowa€!

LINK: chttps://www.slowboring.com/p/bailouts>

From those post-Sputnik days when the U.S. thought that it might actually lose the Cold War because 
the USSRa€™ s system would prove a€oemore efficienta€Da€”both in
production and in guerrilla war and revolution:

Haig Babian (1960): Khrushchev Calls a Turn'. a€~Peaceful coexistence meets the test of serving all 
of the important goals of the Soviet Union. The
victory of socialism in the Soviet Union is complete, according to Khrushchev. It can be left to 
peaceful competition therefore to bring the final triumph of
communism throughout the world. In the meantime, the socialist Utopia is to be improved at home and 
encouraged in other a€oefriendly statesa€Da€l. By
1965,   if peace prevails the Soviet Union expectsa€! to increase (perhaps double) the portion [of 
investment] going into the production of consumer
goodsa€!. Well-studied Western techniques of linear programming and input-output analysis will be 
put to the greatest usea€!. Although nuclear warfare
may   be eliminated, conventional turmoil and revolution are nota€!. Though the clear-cut economic 
victory of the Soviet Union is not yet in sight, her
successes to date are dramatica€L It will take the best and most modern techniques of 
self-projection by the West to keep from being upstageda€!

LINK: 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/article-babian-1960-khrushchev.pdf>


Three people can keep a secret if two of them are dead. One computer can keep a secret database 
only if it is never connected to anything else:


Andy Greenberg: The Full Story of the Stunning RSA Hack Can Finally Be Told’. a€~In 2011, Chinese 
spies stole the crown jewels of cybersecuritya€:

stripping protections from firms and government agencies worldwide. Herea€™ s how it happeneda€!. 
Leetham saw with dismay that the hackers had
spent nine hours methodically siphoning the seeds out of the warehouse server and sending them via 
file-transfer protocol to a hacked server hosted by
Rackspacea€!. Those secrets were now in the hands of the Chinese militarya€!. In the decade that 
followed, many key RSA executives involved in the
companya€™ s breach have held their silence, bound by 10-year nondisclosure agreements. Now those 
agreements have expireda€!

LINK: <https://www.wired.com/story/the-full-story-of-the-stunning-rsa-hack-can-finally-be-told/>

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

