Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:



Copper Bottle

Copper Bottle a€” the home for creator-owned comics written by Eisner Award winner Saladin Ahmed 
and drawn by some of the most talented artists in the industry a€” is very excited to participate 
in Free Comics Day on Substack! We are a subscription-based pop-up imprint publishing original 
comics owned by the people who make them. Wea€™ ve got years of experienca€!
Read more

9 months ago A- 8 likes A- Saladin Ahmed

Very Briefly Noted:

• Bran Castle <http://bran-castle ,com/>

•  Martin Arnold: UK-EU Trade Falls Sharply as Brexit Disruption Starts to Bite: a€~German exports 
to Britain in January were down about 30 per cent year on year, continuing a trend of declining 
trade between the two countries since the Brexit referendum in 2016a€!. Separately, Italy last 
month reported a 38 per cent year-on-year drop in exports to the UK and a 70 per cent drop in 
British imports in Januarya€!

<https://www.ft.com/content/5b8028a7-edaf-4488-8e96-3761ba8b015f?shareType=nongift>

•  Rana Foroohar: Wishful Thinking on China Will Not Serve American Interests: a€~Why would such a 
large nation, with its own long history, rich culture, unique political system and enormous market, 
not create its own rules? It has done so, of coursea€! 
<https://www.ft.com/content/ced6aa7c-9204-4336-bf8a-5bfe4dfecc24>

•  Gillian Tett: What My Robot Mop Taught Me About the Future of Artificial Intelligence: a€~I 
returned home and discovered that one of my beloveda€! robo-mop[s] had rolled into the backyard, 
where it was diligently trying to clean the edge of the flower bedsa€!. People like Schmidta€! 
argue that AI will be a net positivea€ [revolutionising healthcare, education and much elsea€!. 
Ia€™ 11 be keeping my patio door shuta€!

<https://www.ft.com/content/4d82d813-8856-48af-a73b-fleaaafl689e>

• Joha Anthers: Fed Brings Clarity to Markets: Inflation Is the Only Priority 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/opinion/articles/2022-06-16/fed-brings-clarity-to-markets-inflation-is-th
e-only-priority?srnd=opinion#xi4y7vzkg>

• William Cohan: Larry Summers, Obama, & a Fed Counter/actual 
<https://puck.news/lany-summers-obama-a-fed-counterfactual/>

•  Isaac Chotiner & Neal Katyal: Unpacking the Draft Supreme Court Opinion Set to Overrule Roe 
<https://www.newyorker.com/news/q-and-a/unpacking-the-draft-supreme-court-opinion-set-to-overrule-ro
e?link_id=6&can 
id=7677eab49ead3f512fd881abcla73475&source=email-the-neal-katyal-stop-embanassing-vourself-2022-chal
lenge-is-going-poorly&email referrer=email 1535062&email subject=the-neal-katyal-stop-embanassing-
yourself-2022-challenge-is-going-poorly>


Twitter & a€~Stack

Matthew C. Klein: The Federal Reserve Brings the Pain’. a€~For the first time since the 
introduction of covid vaccines, Americaa€™ s central bankers believe that a price must be paid to 
bring inflation back under controla€!

THE



The Federal Reserve Brings the Pain

What a difference three months makes. As recently as March 2022, Federal Reserve officials were 
still optimistic that Americans wouldna€™ t need to endure slower growth or higher unemployment to 
get inflation back on track. Prices were expected to normalize more or less on their own after a 
few yearsa€”even with Russiaa€™ s invasion of Ukraine anda€!
Read more

8 months ago A- 6 likes A- 2 comments A- Matthew C. Klein

• Timothy Burke: On the Brink of the Cornfield

The Overshoot


The News: On the Brink of the Cornfield

Eight by Seven

The hearings on January 6th have been very well done so far. I hope they will conclude with a 
recommendation that Donald Trump be indicted for sedition. I have a wild thought that they might 
even argue he should be indicted for treason along with several other key planners, most 
particularly John Eastmana€!


ivcau more

8 months ago A- 5 likes A- Timothy Burke
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

Directora€™s Cut PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

SUBJECT: Do My Departments Keep Me from Noting How Weird Academia Today Is?


I noted:

The Discontents with Liberalism: A Check-in, &: Francis Fukuyama: a€~On the lefta€! our 
institutions need to focus on the rights of individuals rather than those of groups. People are 
never fully defined by their group memberships and continue to exercise individual agency. It may 
be important to understand the ways they have been shaped by their group identities, but social 
respect should take account of the individual choices that
they make as well. Group recognition threatens not to remediate but to harden group differencesa€!

And I commented;

The problem here is that Frank is tiptoeing perilously close to a€oel dona€™t see co!ora€D or a€oel 
dona€™t see gendera€D. Well, David Autor and I are both pretty woke as economists go. And yet at 
our CUNY panel with Ann Harrison and Paul Krugman, both of us interrupted Anna€™s opening 
statement, and neither of us interrupted Paula€™s. (I have been hiding in fear from Ann Harrison 
since: rather hard to do, since she
is now Dean of Berkeley a€™s business school.)

a€oeWokenessa€D primarily involves recognizing how ethnic and gender hierarchies are woven into 
society, and trying to counteract them; secondarily, it is recognizing that democracy and 
discussion work because they pool good ideas, and so there is a strong positive benefit from having 
people with different experiences and thus different perspectives in the mix; and only tertiarily 
is it a claim that people have different rights and
authorities simply by virtue of the color of their skin. (And where it does devolve into that, it 
tends, when the rubber hits the road, to be things like a€oewhite people really should not say 
a€~na€”a€”-a€™a€D, or a€oecross-burners like Charles Murray really shouldna€™t be given more forums 
to spout their prejudices unbacked by good data analysis than they already havea€D. I find it very 
hard to get worked up at those.)

For reading on this, I recommend once again the excellent and wise John Scalzi: 
https://whateverjscalzi.com/2012/05/15/straight-white-male-the-lowest-difficulty-setting-there-is/ht
tps://whatever.scalzi.com/2022/05/18/straight-white-male-the-lowest-difficulty-setting-ten-years-on/
a€!
LINK:



The Discontents with Liberalism: A Check-in, &

FIRST: The Discontents with Liberalism: A Check-in: Another truly excellent podcast from Sean 
tiling: Rethinking the "End of History": Frank Fukuyama 
<https://player.fm/series/vox-conversations/rethinking-the-end-of-history>. They spend almost all 
of their time talking abouta€l
Read more

9 months ago A- 3 likes A- 9 comments A- Brad DeLong
There was what seemed to me a very good comment:

X: a€™ Decidedly not an anti-woke nut, and indeed the awareness of structures of race and gender 
and class is very important, but unfortunately the quasi-religious identitarianism form is now a 
very prominent feature in elite institutions, and not in service to anything useful, but just the 
usual status games and backbiting. And it brooks no questions on whether whata€™ s going on even 
makes sense. If youa€™ ve avoided it, Ia€™m
jealous.

On the Democratic Partya€”I dona€™t know what it is now, if it ever was anything except 
fundraising. Both the activist and fundraising arms now have messages that remind me of the 
Republican Partya€™ s constant moral panics and culture war nonsense of the late 90s and 00s; the 
activists dona€™t offer much in the way of community because they seemingly have 150 different 
emergencies we must all attend to immediately.
a€oeWatch a movie, when we could be smashing the fascist regime?a€D Not that theya€™ re doing that 
eithera€!

To which I replied:

I do not know.

I may simply be very lucky and living in a bubble. After all, economics is all about peeling back 
the surface layer and looking at where the material resources are going. Political science is all 
about persuasion and making alliances. Both are likely to be extremely skeptical of 
a€requasi-religious identity Arianisma€Da€”thata€™s an autocorrect error, but I am going to keep 
ita€”as, well, conscious, semi-conscious, or unconscious grifts
whose purpose is to block some from resources and coalitions to gain them and enhance other sa€™ 
abilities to do so.

But bear in mind such things can be good sources of countervailing power. One point of John 
Scalzia€™s line that a€~playing the game of life as a white male is playing it in a€reeasy 
modea€Da€™ is that it is actually quite hard to do meritocratic ticket-punching if you are not a 
white male, so systems that require such ticket-punching to gain access to resources are highly 
likely to be discriminatory in effect, even if not in intent, and
by now the a€rebut we did not intend!a€D dodge is well-past its sell-by date.

Maybe things are very different in other departments and situations? In which turning the spotlight 
of recasting things in terms of resource-allocation and coalition-formation on yourselves is not a 
standard, instinctive move?

Please, Good People of the Internet, tell me what I should think about all thisa€!

Paragraphs:

Never go off the record in front of Isaac Chotiner. Nothing demonstrates more that you are an idiot 
and a coward, who hasa€”was it Talleyrand said this of the Bourbons?a€”has learned nothing (he 
should have from experience) and forgotten nothing (he should let go, because he was wrong):

Isaac Chotiner & Neal Katyal: Unpacking the Draft Supreme Court Opinion Set to Overrule Roe: a€~You 
[Neal] wrote a piece for the Times in 2017 called a€oeWhy Liberals Should Support Neil Gorsuch.a€D 
I am wondering how you view that piece now and whether you think liberals in the legal community 
have been too willing to support Republican-appointed Justices. What I saida€! Gorsuch for Scalia 
doesna€™t change
things very much. Indeed, there is an argument that it moved the Court a little to the lefta€!. 
Kavanaugha€! was very differenta€L The real game changer was Amy Coney Barrett for Ruth Bader 
Ginsburga€! Right, and I know you are a fan of Coney Barrett. You said she was a€oebrillianta€n and 
a a€oelovely persona€D and so on. Can we go off the record for a second? Ia€™ d rather stay on the 
record. [Goes off the
record.]a€! As I look back on my Gorsuch endorsement, the thing I really regret is that I had hoped 
Republicans would behave with more principle. In 2017? Yeah, in 2017. When I came forth for 
Gorsuch, Senator Lindsey Graham came up to me and said what I did was incredibly important for the 
institution and legitimacy of the Court. And then fast-forward to today, where that same man voted 
against
Ketanji Brown Jackson, when easily the same thing could and would be said about her. So I really 
regret that there is no principle left, and no bipartisanship left in the United States Senate when 
it comes to Supreme Court nominationsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.newvorker.com/news/q-and-a/unpacking-the-draft-supreme-court-opinion-set-to-ovenule-roe
?link_id=6&can jd=7677eab49ead3f512fd881abcla73475&source=email-the-neal-katyal-stop-embarc^

Larry, IIRC, made three predictions: (1) that there would be substantially more inflation than the 
median expectation thought, (2) that the inflation would last substantially longer than the median 
expectation thought, and (3) that because the inflation would become embedded in wage and price 
expectations for the future, bringing it down would require a large monetary tightening. He was 
right about (1) and (2). I still think the odds are 2-1 he was wrong about
(3):

FRED — 5-Year, 5-Year Forward Inflation Expectation Rate

3.0


0.0

2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       2020       
2022

The 5-year, 5-year forward expectation has not broken out of its Fed-has-got-this range. So I see 
no expectational wage-price spiral here:

William Cohan: Larry Summers, Obama, & a Fed Counterfactual: a€~Inflation, at an annual rate of 8.5 
percent, is at the highest level in 40 years, and the financial markets are in turmoil, largely as 
a result of Yellena€™ s, and then her successor, Jerome Powella€™ s, slavish devotion to 
Bernankea€™ s policies of historically low interest rates, which ignited one asset bubble after 
another. Now we are paying the price with rising prices,
rising rates, and a serious bear market. a€oel do think there needs to be considerable 
soul-searching at the Fed as to how they missed this as badly as they did,a€D Summers told David 
Ignatius on May 31. To his credit, while Powell was sticking with the idea that inflation was 
a€cetransitory,a€D Summers saw things differently as early as February 2021a€!

LINK: <https://puck.news/larrv-summers-obama-a-fed-counterfactual/>

To quote GnAius Pompeius Magnus: a€oeWhy speak you of laws? We carry swordsa€D:

Timothy Burke: On the Brink of the Cornfield: a€~Power as privileged!. Power as authoritya€!. Liz 
Cheneya€! is willing to take a strong stand against Trump, because Trump stands for a third kind of 
power. Ita€™ s the kind of power used to wish people into a cornfield. Ita€™ s like the cliche that 
Trump is a poor mana€™ s idea of a rich man: he is striving for the kind of power associated with 
adolescent fantasy, where power is
getting to do whatever you wanta€!. People who are invested in power derived from institutions, 
systems and rules stand against hima€!. They understand that when someone gets the power to wish 
everybody into the cornfield, no other kind of power matters any more. All there is left is the 
person who gets to do whatever he wants, the Suffers and enablers who hope to benefit by being the 
tools of his will, and the mini-mea€™ s who
hope that there will be fractal versions of cornfield-wishing available to them further down the 
lined!. The cornfield-wishing kind of power has to regard all rules, all constraints, anything that 
stands in its way, as unimportant. The sad truth is that the more boldly this kind of power 
expresses that attitude, the more it tends to make that wish come trued!. There are still marriages 
and gender and families in Peakesville Ohio, none of
which provide anything to stop or impede little Anthony from wishing people into the cornfield and 
bringing snow down on the cropsd!. Aunt Amy had one chance to grab a fireplace poker and take 
Anthony out in Peakesville. This is that moment for all of usd!

LINK:

Eight by Seven

The News: On the Brink of the Cornfield

The hearings on lanuarv 6th have been verv well done so far. I hone thev will conclude with a 
recommendation that Donald Triimn be indicted for sedition. I have a wild thought that thev mipht 
even arene he should be indicted for treason alone with several other kev nlanners. most 
narticularlv John Eastmand!


0.5

0.0

2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014       2016       2018       2020       
2022

The 5-year, 5-year forward expectation has not broken out of its Fed-has-got-this range. So I see 
no expectational wage-price spiral here:

William Cohan: Larry Summers, Obama, & a Fed Counterfactual: a€~Inflation, at an annual rate of 8.5 
percent, is at the highest level in 40 years, and the financial markets are in turmoil, largely as 
a result of Yellena€™ s, and then her successor, Jerome Powella€™ s, slavish devotion to 
Bernankea€™ s policies of historically low interest rates, which ignited one asset bubble after 
another. Now we are paying the price with rising prices,
rising rates, and a serious bear market. a€oel do think there needs to be considerable 
soul-searching at the Fed as to how they missed this as badly as they did,a€D Summers told David 
Ignatius on May 31. To his credit, while Powell was sticking with the idea that inflation was 
a€cetransitory,a€D Summers saw things differently as early as February 2021a€!

LINK: <https://puck.news/larry-summers-obama-a-fed-counterfactual/>

To quote GnAius Pompeius Magnus: a€oeWhy speak you of laws? We carry swordsa€D:

Timothy Burke: On the Brink of the Cornfield: a€~Power as privileged!. Power as authoritya€!. Liz 
Cheneya€! is willing to take a strong stand against Trump, because Trump stands for a third kind of 
power. Ita€™ s the kind of power used to wish people into a cornfield. Ita€™ s like the cliche that 
Trump is a poor mana€™ s idea of a rich man: he is striving for the kind of power associated with 
adolescent fantasy, where power is
getting to do whatever you wanta€!. People who are invested in power derived from institutions, 
systems and rules stand against hima€!. They understand that when someone gets the power to wish 
everybody into the cornfield, no other kind of power matters any more. All there is left is the 
person who gets to do whatever he wants, the Suffers and enablers who hope to benefit by being the 
tools of his will, and the mini-mea€™ s who
hope that there will be fractal versions of cornfield-wishing available to them further down the 
lined!. The cornfield-wishing kind of power has to regard all rules, all constraints, anything that 
stands in its way, as unimportant. The sad truth is that the more boldly this kind of power 
expresses that attitude, the more it tends to make that wish come trued!. There are still marriages 
and gender and families in Peakesville Ohio, none of
which provide anything to stop or impede little Anthony from wishing people into the cornfield and 
bringing snow down on the cropsd!. Aunt Amy had one chance to grab a fireplace poker and take 
Anthony out in Peakesville. This is that moment for all of usd!

LINK:

Eight by Seven

The News: On the Brink of the Cornfield

The hearings on January 6th have been very well done so far. I hope they will conclude with a 
recommendation that Donald Trump be indicted for sedition. I have a wild thought that they might 
even argue he should be indicted for treason along with several other key planners, most 
particularly John Eastmand!
Read more

8 months ago A- 5 likes A- Timothy Burke
Subscribe now

