a€\Greekpolymath would almost surely have been better company than a Roman aristocrata€\

Subscribe now


Lucius Annaeus Seneca Minor (64): Moral Letters to Lucilius 90: On the Part Played by Philosophy in 
the Progress of Man’. SELECTIONS: a€™ Philosophy[a€™ s]a€! sole function is to discover the truth 
about things divine and things human. From her side religion never departs, nor duty, nor justice, 
nor any of the whole company of virtuesa€!. Philosophy has taught usa€! [that] among men [is]
fellowship. This fellowship remained unspoiled for a long time, until avarice tore the community 
asunder and became the cause of povertya€!. For men cease to possess all things the moment they 
desire all things for their owna€!.

That philosophy discovered the arts of which life makes use in its daily round I refuse to 
admita€!. I, for my part, do not hold that philosophy devised these shrewdly-contrived dwellings of 
ours which rise story upon story, where city crowds against city, any more than that she invented 
the fish-preserves, which are enclosed for the purpose of saving mena€™ s gluttony from having to 
run the risk of
stormsa€!. Was it philosophy that taught the use of keys and bolts? Nay, what was that except 
giving a hint to avarice? Was it philosophy that erected all these towering tenements, so dangerous 
to the persons who dwell in them?a€! That was a happy age, before the days of architects, before 
the days of builders! All this sort of thing was born when luxury was being born,a€”this matter of 
cutting timbers
square and cleaving a beam with unerring hand as the saw made its way over the marked-out linea€! 
a€oeThe primal man with wedges split his wooda€Ua€! were not preparing a roof for a future 
banquet-balla€!. Forked poles erected at either end propped up their houses. With close-packed 
branches and with leaves heaped up and laid sloping they contrived a drainage for even the heaviest 
rains.

Beneath such dwellings, they lived, but they lived in peace. A thatched roof once covered free men; 
under marble and gold dwells slavery.
Share

On another point also I differ from Posidonius, when he holds that mechanical tools were the 
invention of wise mena€!. It was mana€™ s ingenuity, not his wisdom, that discovered all these 
devices. And I also differ from him when he says that wise men discovered our mines of iron and 
copper, a€oewhen the earth, scorched by forest fires, melted the veins of ore which lay near the 
surface and caused the
metal to gush forth.a€D Nay, the sort of men who discover such things are the sort of men who are 
busied with thema€!. The hammer [and] the tongsa€! were both invented by some man whose mind was 
nimble and keen, but not great or exalted; and the same holds true of any other discovery which can 
only be made by means of a bent body and of a mind whose gaze is upon the grounda€!.

Which man, pray, do you deem the wisera€”the one who invents a process for spraying saffron 
perfumes to a tremendous height from hidden pipes, who fills or empties canals by a sudden rush of 
waters, who so cleverly constructs a dining-room with a ceiling of movable panels that it presents 
one pattern after another, the roof changing as often as the courses ,a€”or the one who proves to 
others, as well
as to himself, that nature has laid upon us no stern and difficult law when she tells us that we 
can live without the marble-cutter and the engineer, that we can clothe ourselves without traffic 
in silk fabrics, that we can have everything that is indispensable to our use, provided only that 
we are content with what the earth has placed on its surface? If mankind were willing to listen to 
this sage, they would
know that the cook is as superfluous to them as the soldiera€!.

Nature suffices for what she demands. Luxury has turned her back upon naturea€! made the soul a 
bondsman to the body, and bade it be an utter slave to the bodya€™ s lusts. All these crafts by 
which the city is patrolleda€”or shall I say kept in uproara€”are but engaged in the bodya€™ s 
business; time was when all things were offered to the body as to a slave, but now they are made 
ready for it as for a
mastera€! the workshops of the weavers and the carpentersa€! the savoury smells of the professional 
cooksa€! the wantonness of those who teach wanton postures, and wanton and affected singing. For 
that moderation which nature prescribes., it has now come to thisa€”that to want only what is 
enough is a sign both of boorishness and of utter destitution^!.

Posidonius then passes on to the farmera€! the plougha€! the earth, thus loosened, may allow freer 
play to the roots; then the seed is sown, and the weeds plucked outa€!. This trade also, he 
declares, is the creation of the wise ,a€’’just as if cultivators of the soil were not even at the 
present day discovering countless new methods of increasing the soila€™ s fertility !a€! He even 
degrades the wise man by
sending him to the milla€!. Posidonius came very near declaring that even the cobblera€™ s trade 
was the discovery of the wise man.

Reason did indeed devise all these things, but it was not right reason. It was man, but not the 
wise man, that discovered thema€!. Says Posidonius, a€oethe wise man did indeed discover all these 
things; they were, however, too petty for him to deal with himself and so he entrusted them to his 
meaner assistants ,a€C Not so; these early inventions were thought out by no other class of men 
than those who
have them in charge to-day. We know that certain devices have come to light only within our own 
memorya€”such as the use of windows which admit the clear light through transparent tiles, and such 
as the vaulted baths, with pipes let into their walls for the purpose of diffusing the heat which 
maintains an even temperature in their lowest as well as in their highest spaces. Why need I 
mention the marble
with which our temples and our private houses are resplendent? Or the rounded and polished masses 
of stone by means of which we erect colonnades and buildings roomy enough for nations? Or our signs 
for whole words, which enable us to take down a speech, however rapidly uttered, matching speed of 
tongue by speed of hand? All this sort of thing has been devised by the lowest grade of slaves.

Wisdoma€™ s seat is higher; she trains not the hands, but is mistress of our mindsa€!
Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Leave a comment

Senecaa€™ s full letter: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/lucius-annaeus-seneca-minor-64-moral>
(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

