Subscribe now

Very Briefly Noted:

• John Quiggin: The Nota€DSoa€DStrange Death of Multifactor Productivity Growth: a€~Improvements in 
information and communications technology (ICT) and in
labour quality represent a€~embodieda€™ technological progressa€!. The seeming paradox of continued 
labour productivity growth combined with static MFP...

• Harold James: What Happens After the War?: a€~Figuring out Ukrainea€™ s post-conflict future will 
be essential not just for the Ukrainian victims of Russiaa€™ s
invasion, but also for Europe and the world at large. Heeding the the lessons of the 
twentieth-century, today's victors must proceed in the spirit of the Marshall Plan, not
the Treaty of Versaillesa€!

• Joyeuse Noelle: An Increasingly Less Brief Guide to Mastodona€!

Share

AJs:

Ethan Mollick: The street finds its own uses for things, AI Edition: Breakthrough innovations often 
come from people who use technology, not create it. So, how are students using
AI?'. a€~Since I introduced AI to my class a couple of weeks ago, my students have described dozens 
of uses that I never expected. I thought I would list of few of thema€!.

Making new thingsa€L By the end of the class one of my students, Kirill Naumov, had created a 
working demo for his entrepreneurship project - a program that would
automatically detect a face and play a video clip - using a code library he had never used before, 
in less than half the time it would otherwise have taken. AI is very, very good at
helping  people code. Explaining conceptsa€!. Correcting errors: Students mentioned feeding 
problems they got incorrect on tests or problem sets to the AI to better understand
what they were doing wrong. They then asked for a corrections and explanationsa€!. As a model to 
overcome inertia & uncertaintya€L As a source of inspiration^!. As a
summary tool: ChatGPT is remarkably good at summarizing large blocks of academic text, material 
from user interviews, transcripts from meetings, and so ona€!. The lessons of
user innovation is that technology is only really useful when it is useda€!. Thanks to ChatGPT, 
practical AI is available to everyone. To understand why that may matter, think
about  a much less capable system - Excel. As anyone in an organization knows, Excel is already the 
ad hoc programming language of the office workers, because few of them know
Python, but many of them understand Excela€!. With easy-to-use AI, everyone will be applying it to 
the problems they want to solve. It wona€™ t work in every case, but it will in
many cases. And the impacts are likely to be unexpected and widespreada€!. Keep your eyes opena€!

Mariana Mazzucato: Most Recommended Books of 2022: a€~How China Escaped Shock Therapy: The Market 
Reform Debate. By Isabella M. Weber: Weber a€oeset out to
write How China Escaped Shock Therapy to shed light on one of the most consequential 
economic-policy debates of the past century a€“ namely, the struggle among Chinese
reformers over how to recreate markets.a€Ua€! Mariana Mazzucato saysa€! "fascinating history of 
Chinese capitalisma€! [which] offers crucial insights into a local approach to
economic thinking that steered clear of neoliberal fallaciesa€Da€!

Matt Yglesias: Secret Congress delivers more good news on clean water: a€~Clean Water fans got more 
good news this December as the Water Resources Development Act of
2022 was incorporated into the National Defense Authorization Act and passed on December 15. Ita€™ 
s a bit of a legislative Christmas tree, as youa€™ d expect from something
that ends up with 88 votes in the Senate, but all the major environmental groups are endorsing 
ita€!. The things Congress authorizes in these big bills tend not to end up fully funded
when the annual appropriations cycle comes around. So excitement around a big comprehensive bill 
inevitably has an element of overstatement^!. The point, though, is that the
Water Resources Development Act does a bunch of useful things. It also reflects, I think, most 
peoplea€™ s broad sense of how politics a€oeought toa€D work a€” it addresses a
bunch of topics that earnest progressive activists have put on the radar, but in a non-radical, 
business-friendly way it emphasizes bipartisanship and problem-solving rather than
revolution. Some horses were traded, some deals were struck, the ball is moved forwarda€!. The 
larger bipartisan NDAA [was not] the major storya€!. The major story is always
some   form of ugly fighting, and because Congress wasna€™t doing much ugly fighting, the main 
story instead became Elon Muska€!. One of my theses (developed with Simon
Bazelon) has been that this is not a coincidence a€” ita€™ s easier for Congress to get things done 
when ita€™ s quiet, but having most of the good parts of politics languish in
obscurity feeds cynicism, just as few people know the underlying story of improving watera€!

Edward Luce: The meaning of Ron DeSantis: Trumpa€™ s most serious rival is key to the future 
ofTrumpism'. a€~An enduring debate about Donald Trump is whether he stands
for a clear ideology or just for Donald Trump. The latter was never in doubt. But it has taken Ron 
DeSantis, Floridaa€™ s governor and the former US presidenta€™ s chief rival,
to fashion a worldview from Trumpa€™ s gut instinctsa€!. It is Trumpa€™ s likeliest nemesis, other 
than himself, who is doing the most to build Trumpism into a lasting forcea€!.
Many of the righta€™ s biggest donors, including Peter Thiel, the Koch family and Ken Griffin, are 
backing DeSantis. Those who hope the Republican party will revert to its pre­
Trump character after he has gone are missing the plot. In some ways, DeSantis is even further 
removed than Trump from the party of Ronald Reagana€!.. You might describe
DeSantisa€™ s philosophy as fossil fuel Christian nationalism. Its enemies are amoral tech 
oligarchs, Big Pharma, ESG-endorsing finance, the corporate media and elite
universities.    Since Trump does exist, we call it Trumpism. The difference lies in the competence 
of its executiona€!

Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions

Read null in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


