
Subscribe now

Brad DeLong (2019a€“02a€“25): Passing the Baton'. David Walsh went to the Niskanen Center 
conference. He got hives: 
<https://bradford-delong.com/2019/02/david-walsh-went-to-the-niskanen-center-conference-he-got-hives
,html>. I think it is fair to say that the already-broken American political public sphere has 
become significantly more broken since November 8,2016. On the center and to the left, those like 
me in what used to proudly call itself the
Rubin Wing of the Democratic Party a€’’so-called after former Treasury Secretary Bob Rubin, and 
consisting of those of us hoping to use market means to social democratic ends in bipartisan 
coalition with Republicans seeking technocratic win-winsa€’’have passed the baton to our left. Over 
the past 25 years, we failed to attract Republican coalition partners, we failed to energize our 
own base, and we failed to produce enough large-scale obvious policy wins to
cement the center into a durable governing coalition.

We blame cynical Republican politicians. We blame corrupt and craven media bosses and princelings. 
We are right to blame them. But shared responsibility is not diminished responsibility: We 
ourselves cannot escape all blame. And so the baton rightly passes to our colleagues on our left.
We are still here, but it is not our time to lead.

Share

On the right, however, things are much worse. Looking to the right of the Rubin Wing of the 
Democratic Party, we see rubble. Then we see more rubble. And more rubble. Beyond that, rubble. And 
then, at the far end of the political spectrum, what former Secretary of State Madeleine Albright 
can only call [the American version of a twenty-first century neo-fascism 
<https://books.google.com/books ?isbn=006293127X>, devoted to entrenching plutocracy and
stoking ethnic and religious hatreds, with which a great many people who ought to know better are 
making accommodation.

Two recent straws in the wind in this space: former Republican CEA Chair Martin Feldstein egging 
the Trump administration on to an intellectual-property trade war with China 
<https://project-svndicate.org/commentary/trump-china-trade-deal-capitulation-by-martin-feldstein-20
19-02> without even a whisper of acknowledgement that the Trump administration cannot competently 
conduct this negotiation; former Republican CEA Chair Michael Boskin
claiming that Trump is reaching [a€oefor bipartisan compromise on important issuesa€D 
<https://proiect-syndicate.org/commentary/2020-democratic-presidential-candidates-policies-by-michae
l-boskin-2019-02>.

Pitching their flags in the rubble and hoping to rebuilda€”in a stunning triumph of optimism of the 
will over rational pessimism of the intellect that I cannot view with anything other than awea€”are 
The Bulwark <https://thebulwark.com> and the [Niskanen Center <https://niskanencenter.org> (on 
whose Advisory Board I sit).
What can those of us who sit to the left of the Niskanen Center and who do wish for a healthy 
public spherea€”i.e., those of us who are not interested in concern trolling for the moment, as 
much fun as concern trolling isa€”do to be genuinely helpful?

I could use some help here, people of twitter!

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

I think that the first piece of advice to give is: restrict yourself to #nevertrump. Trumpists are 
either morons, grifters, or deluded. Those who have made accomodation with neo-fascism to any 
substantial degree are not people you want arounda€”they will, for one reason or another, stab you 
in the back the first moment that it seems opportune. Failing to require a #nevertrump litmus test 
seems wise. Admittedly, it is unlikely to lead to power and Fox News. But it
is the right thing to do. And I urge you to Do the Right Thing.

Second, I at least regard your cultural-historical task as being to wean Republicans away from 
Trumpist neo-fascism as an orienting frame. Trumpist neo-fascism is, I think, a version of 
Kentucky-style American nationalism. Kentucky-style American nationalism is a species of standard 
blood-and-soil nationalism. People have moved to Kentucky because they want elbow room and do not 
like being forced by government and society to conform, and once people
are in Kentucky they become the kinds of people who can build a log cabin with their bare hands in 
48 hours, and bring down a squirrel for squirrel stew at 300 yards. Thus heredity and environments 
’’blood and soila€’’produce a special kind of person. And those who come to the U.S. hoping to live 
in, say, a little Mogadishu or a little Kishinev or a little Cuzco cannot fit.

This blood-and-soil Kentucky neo-fascist Trumpist nationalism is, I believe, highly destructive, 
pernicious, and positively un-American. It needs to be fought against. In the center and on the 
left we fight it with the opposed a€ceMassachusettsa€D picture of American nationalisms ”a 
community engaged in an Errand Unto the Wilderness to build a Utopia that will be a City Upon a 
Hill, and we are all in this together with no special authorities or leaders
because of the Priesthood of All Believers. Never mind that John Winthrop would run screaming from 
us: we are his children. The Massachusetts-style American nationalism of elections’’that America 
really consists of those of us who have come here to build a common UtopiaS”is very powerful, much 
more correct, sociologically healthy, and something we all can be proud of in a sense that is 
simply not possible for the Kentucky-style neo-fascist Trumpist
blood-and-soil nationalism.

The question is whether the Niskanen Center and the Bulwark can take this 
Errand-Unto-the-Wildnerness narrative and make it sing for the center-right in anything like the 
way it sings for the center-left. So your task is to build up your own version of the 
Errand-Unto-the-Wilderness narrative of American nationalism.

Third, the Niskanen Center and The Bulwark need to build up distinctive center-right policy 
positions on important issuesS”to stake out positions in the rubble that center-right 
#nevertrumpers can rally around. I see five issue areas as key. (a) the public sphere, (b) global 
warming, (c) income and wealth distribution at the top. (d) the social safety net. (e) the economic 
growth agenda. Far be it from me to say what those should beS”I have enough on my plate
figuring out what my position on these issue areas should be, let alone what the position of others 
should be. I will confine myself to saying that simple opposition to whatever actual policies wind 
up under the umbrella of GND is not sufficients’’not if you want me and people like me to think you 
belong in the public sphere. And no, Elaine Kamarck, Soeshut up and adapt to global warmingS □ is 
not sufficient either, andS”if that is your position because
you   are too scared to endorse George ShultzS™ s carbon-tax-plus-UBI proposalS”you should be 
ashamed of yourself. Go for the crash space program to build a giant sun umbrella and park it at 
Lagrange Point 1 if you wish. (And eat the costs as reduced insolation devastates agriculture.) At 
the very least, it will make us a figure of fun to aliens everywhere:

You know the earthlings? They couldnS™ t get their act together to stop burning coal before it 
started to cook their planet! So do you know what they did? You wona€™ t believe it! Rather than 
cheaply transitioning to green energy THEY TRIED TO BUILD A GIANT SUN UMBRELLA AND PARK IT AT LI!! 
HA HA HA HA HA!!!!!! Spent a fortune!a€!

But be for something.

And be brave. I know you find it hard. But you are camped there in the rubble, and if you wona€™ t 
Do the Right Thing, then you have decided to go and become a Kentucky-nationalist blood-and-soil 
neo-fascist Trumpist. If you have, then go to your master the Devil, and stop wasting our time.
LINK: <https://twitter.com/delong/status/1100166150845939712>

Leave a comment

