9) John Maynard Keynes, Essays in Biography, London: Macmillan, 1933. Reprinted in John Maynard 
Keynes, Collected Works Vol. X, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 66-7.

10)A good milestone for when people began to think that utopia might be in our future rather than 
in our past comes in 1602, when Tomasso Campanella writes his The City of the Sun. Campanella 
writes of how his age:
a€oehas in it more history within 100 years than all the world had in 4,000 years before! of the 
wonderful inventions of printing and guns, and the use of the magneta€!a€d The effect is somewhat 
marred by the immediately
following a€oea€!and how it all comes of Mercury, Mars, the Moon, and the Scorpion!a€D, See Francis 
Bacon and Tomasso Campanella, New Atlantis and City of the Sun: Two Classic Utopias, New York: Dover
Publications,                                                                                       
           2018, p. 85 <http://books.google.com/?id=rLljDwAAQBAJ>

11)    Keynes, a€oeConsequencesa€d, pp. 9. He very much hopeda€”if post-WWI reconstruction was 
successful and humanity could be gotten back onto its pre-WWI tracka€”that that confinement of 
enjoyment would not
permanent, for before World War I a€oesociety [had been] working not for the small pleasures of 
today but for the future security and improvement of the racea€”in fact for 'progress'. Ifa€! the 
cake were not cut but was
allowed to grow in the geometrical proportiona€! of compound interest, perhaps a day might come 
when there would at last be enough to go rounda€! when posterity could enter into the enjoyment of 
our laboursa€!

overwork, overcrowding, and underfeeding would come to an end, and men, secure of the comforts and 
necessities of the body, could proceed to the nobler exercises of their facultiesa€!a€d, p. 12

12) Aristotle, Politics, Ernest Barker, trans., Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009, p. 14, 
Bekker sections 1253b-1254a. Written around the year -350. <http://books .google 
.com/?id=NAYUDAAAQBAJ>

Still, one can follow Antonio Gramsci, and combine pessimism of the intellect with optimism of the 
will. One cana€”perhaps shoulda€”and even must agree with Camus and see a€oeSisyphus happyaCD. As 
Ken
Untener wrote in a a speech for John Dearden:

It helps, now and then, to step back and take a long view.... We cannot do everything, and there is 
a sense of liberation in realizing that. This enables us to do something, and to do it very well.  
We

are workers, not master builders; ministers, not messiahs....
We are prophets of a future not our own...

Share


Still, one can follow Antonio Gramsci, and combine pessimism of the intellect with optimism of the 
will. One cana€”perhaps shoulda€”and even must agree with Camus and see a€oeSisyphus happya€D. As 
Ken
Untener wrote in a a speech for John Dearden:

It helps, now and then, to step back and take a long view.... We cannot do everything, and there is 
a sense of liberation in realizing that. This enables us to do something, and to do it very well.  
We

are workers, not master builders; ministers, not messiahs....
We are prophets of a future not our own...

Share

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

