Christopher G. Adamo: Did Donald Trump Destroy the Republican Party?'. a€~The greatest pitfail for 
conservatives is the leftist Democrat mantra that America can now
a€ceunitea€D and a€oemove forwarda€D with any sense of a€oenormalcy.a€n This scam is essential to 
any aspiring despotism. Everyone must accept the new order. Not
surprisingly,    it is also exactly where the GOP a€oeEstablishmenta€n is equally obsessed with 
taking us. And this tells us everything we need to know about the thoroughly corrupt
and duplicitous Republican a€oeinsidersa€D who have been selling us out for years. They are now 
fully out in the open.

Several of their glaring betrayals should never be forgotten. The abominable Wyoming RINO 
interloper Liz Cheney, who promoted the second a€oeimpeachmenta€n sham in the
House of Representatives, immediately comes to mind. Right in line with Cheney is the ongoing 
treachery of Senate Minority a€ceLeadera€D Mitch McConnell, who expresses his
support for a€ceconvictiona€D if the Senate actually continues with its wholly unconstitutional 
atrocity of a post presidency impeachment circus.

If real conservatives want to know why, in the midst of the greatest national economy the world has 
ever seen, their Country could be so flagrantly and illegally ripped from them by
the left, just consider the behavior of those two traitors. In truth however, they are only a 
symptom of the root problem, which extends much further yet into the fetid depths of the

D.C swamp.

Clearly, the entire national Republican apparatus must be just as thoroughly compromised and 
infested with self-serving political posers for these two Democrat lapdogs to ever get
into Republican a€celeadership.a€D And on almost a daily basis, others show their own unspeakably 
ugly colors. Kevin McCarthy (R.-CA), Republican Minority a€oeLeader,a€D
has rejected any demands by real Republicans for Cheneya€™ s removal from her No.3 position in the 
Republican House caucus. Many others, including Dan Crenshaw (R.-TX)
have also expressed their support of the double-dealing Cheney.

As a backdrop for the treachery of these RINOs, consider a brief timeline of 2020, and the total 
failure of a€ceRepublicana€D office holders to effectively stand up to it. Beginning
with the first sham a€oeimpeachmenta€n in January, leftist Democrats played a wholly politicized 
game with the Constitution, suppressing truth and bypassing any legitimate
investigation into the bogus a€cechargesa€D they cobbled together against President Trump.

Next came the Wuhan virus a€cepandemica€D scam, by which the entire US economy was shut down and 
millions of Americans saw their livelihoods devastated. Leftist
Democrats engaged in every despicable murderous effort to stoke fear and maximize the impact of the 
virus. Positive cases where forced into nursing homes, where they could
infect  as many of the most vulnerable among us as possible. Meanwhile, notably effective 
treatments such as Hydroxychloroquine and Zinc, with proven track records of saving
lives, were suppressed through iron-fisted abuses by leftist Democrats in office. Throughout all of 
this, these same leftist Democrats and their Fake News lackeys squalled that
President Trump was to blame for all of the resulting suffering and deaths.

As summer approached and the flu season abated, the left shifted gears with their massive, 
orchestrated riots, vandalism, looting, assaults, and murders. The claim was made that
this was all based on the death of George Floyd, but the coordinated nature of the onslaught made 
it abundantly clear that Floyd was just an excuse for pre-planned mayhem. Leftist
ideology always thrives in the midst of chaos and calamity.

Then came the 2020 Election Day theft, which was nothing less than a coup on the United States of 
America. The vast scale on which it took place, coupled with the universal
stonewalling of any genuine effort to properly audit fraudulent ballots and flagrant manipulations 
of voting machines, proved that an enormous plot had been hatched beforehand by
the   left to ensure their takeover of the US government through any available means. Government 
of, by, and for the people is a thing of the past. And on January 6,
a€oeRepublicansa€D in the House and Senate overwhelmingly put their stamp of approval on it.

Many were quick to castigate President Trump for refusing to concede a stolen election. From VP 
Pence, who never once mustered the decency or the spine to call the election theft
what it was, all the way down to a€oeRepublicana€D governors and Attorneys General in contested 
swing states, it was obvious that the GOP had no intention of fighting for the
eighty million (and likely many more) Americans who had supported the President. But you can be 
sure that, come time for re-election, they will all be campaigning as the
a€oeSecond Coming of Ronald Reagan .a€D

So called a€oeConservative Never Trumpa€D commentators (the term is an oxymoron) are piling on. 
Like their counterparts in elected office, they remain totally out of touch with
the American people. Believing they have achieved victory in collaboration with the leftist 
Democrats, they now seek to thoroughly marginalize the President to the point that
Americans will abandon him. But in their arrogance, they fail to realize that they are only 
destroying any credence they might ever have had, and are marginalizing themselves!

Now that leftist Democrats have completed their coup and secured their stranglehold on power, they 
are predictably calling for a€oenational unitya€D and a€oehealing,a€D which
translates to demands for silence and compliance from our side. And of course those calls are 
eagerly echoed by the same RINO traitors who had little to say against all of the
division  and chaos fomented by Democrats since the 2016 election. In short, Democrat leftists are 
in complete control, and the GOP insiders like it that way. The abhorrence of this
situation among outraged Americans is of no concern to any of them. Votes can be fixed.

President Trump gave Republicans many golden opportunities to rise up against the leftist onslaught 
on America, but they totally and deliberately failed. He merely forced their
duplicity and treachery out into the open. This unmasking of phony Republican players may prove to 
be the greatest single accomplishment of the Trump Presidency. If Real
America  is ever to be restored (and that is by no means a certainty), we must move on from the 
fecklessness and deceit of the GOP. It must be understood that President Trump did
not destroy the Republican Party. They did it to themselves .a€!

LINK: https://www.gopusa.com/?p=105677


