Subscribe now

First:

The batshit insanity of the Republican Party on full display:

New cases per 100k people by 2020 voter patterns - as of August 25, 2021

Percent of the county which voted Republican in the 2020 presidential election

80      1                  -—

Percent Republican

---- <20%

---- 20-40%

-   40-60%

-    60-80%

-   80-100%


Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


Very Briefly Noted:

• Explorable Explanations <https ://explorabl .es/>

•  Stefan Zweig (1927): The Tide of Fortune: Twelve Historical Miniatare.s<https://ia601608 
.us.archive .org/2/items/in.ernet.dli.2015.527575/2015.527575 .The-Tide text.pdf> (London: Cassell 
& Company Limited, 1940 [1927])

• Stefan Zweig (1927): The Tide of Fortune: Twelve Historical Miniatare.s<https://ia601608 
.us.archive .org/2/items/in.ernet.dli.2015.527575/2015.527575 .The-Tide text.pdf>

• Stefan Zweig (1943): The World of Yesterday: An AMtofoograp/ry 
<https://ia801609.us.archive.org/21/items/in.ernet.dli.2015.176552/2015.176552.The-World-Qf-Yesterda
y_text.pdf>

•  Stanley M. Elkins & Eric McKitrick (1993): The Age of Federalism: The Early American Republic, 
1788a€ “7^00<https://archive.org/details/ageoffederalism00elki>

• Alan Cole & Tim B. Lee: Full Stack Economics <https://fullstackeconomics,com/>

•  Eric Topol: This is very hard to watch. Nearly 90,000 US hospitalizations, still accruing very 
quickly toward the 3rd wave peak. Over 1300 deaths reported todaya€!

Eric Topol @EricTopol

This is very hard to watch. Nearly 90,000 US hospitalizations, still accruing very quickly toward 
the 3rd wave peak. Over 1300 deaths reported today.

* aawwnv MGCXJM OT® irrw

1:16 AM r™ Aug 18,2021

2,091Likes825Retweets

Paragraphs:

Economist: What Tech Does China Want?: a€~The vision is becoming clear. In a decade or so China 
will, if the Communist Party has its way, become a techno-utopia with Chinese characteristics, 
replete with a€oedeep techaGD such as cloud-computing, artificial intelligence (ai), self-driving 
cars and home-made cutting-edge chips. Incumbent technology giants such as Alibaba in e-commerce or 
Tencent in payments and entertainment will be around but less
overweeninga€”and less lucrative. Policies to curb their market power will redistribute some of 
their profits to smaller merchants and app developers, and to their workers. Second-tier cities 
will boast their own tech industries with localised services, competing with the less-mighty 
titans. Data will pulse through the system, available to firms of all sizes, under the watchful eye 
of the government in Beijing. Chinaa€™ s internet will strengthen its authoritarian
design. Clearer, too, is the way in which President Xi Jinping wants to make this vision a reality. 
Besides talking up deep tech, this involves taking the shallower sort down a peg. In the past nine 
months Chinaa€™ s regulators have cracked down on the countrya€™ s effervescent tech scene, which, 
though it has generated world-beating innovations and astounding shareholder value, is no longer 
seen as fit for purposea€!. The list of casualties is a Whoa€™ s
Who of Chinese tech: Ant Groupa€! Didi Globala€l TencentaGI Meituana€! NetEasea€!. The ranks of 
potential winners are less well-defined. As a guiding principle, the vice-premier, Liu He, recently 
stated that China is moving into a new phase of development that prioritises social fairness and 
national securitya€l. It is a break with the old pro-growth model and the beginning of a€oereal 
state capitalisma€D, as one investment banker puts ita€!. The final
facet of ChinaaG™ s campaign is a transfer of resources from internet companies to firms that can 
create tangible advances in technologies that the party deems less frivolousaGI. Many politicians 
in America and Europe would love to fashion their tech industry into something like Mr Xia€™ s 
vision: less social media and other a€oespiritual opiumaGD, as Chinese state news outlets recently 
dubbed video-gaming; more strategic development of the techno­

infrastructure of the 21st century. This includes computer chips, clean energy and much besidesaG!. 
The policies behind the techlash are born of sweeping goals for society from the highest reaches of 
central government, an echelon of engineers and economists who lack expertise in most of the 
sectors being targetedaG!. Apparently without irony, Chinese media have likened the governmentaG™ s 
push to spur domestic chipmaking to the Great Leap ForwardaG!
LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/business/what-tech-does-china-want/21803410?itm_source=parsely-api>

Douglas London: Afghanistan Not An Intelligence Failurea€”Something Much Worse: aG~In grading their 
own homework, the U.S. defense establishment only exacerbated the problem. While itaG™ s little 
surprise the Department of Defense was unwilling to objectively evaluate the resolve and capacity 
of those they trained, equipped, and advised to resist a forthcoming Taliban offensive, their 
rose-colored depictions of achievement over 20 years flew in the
face of reality, and was consistently challenged by the CIAaG™ s more gloomy, albeit realistic 
projectionsaG!

LINK: 
<https://www.iustsecurity.org/77801/cias-former-counterterrorism-chief-for-the-region-afghanistan-no
t-an-intelligence-failure-something-much-worse/>

David Reifschneider & David Wilcox: Another Reason to Raise the Feda€™ s Inflation Target: An 
Employment and Output Boom: aG™ In 2012, the Federal Reserve formally adopted an inflation target 
and set it at 2 percent, in line with the level chosen by many other central banks. In hindsight, 
this setting left policymakers with too little room to cut interest rates when they want to fight 
recessions. Many researchers have noted that if central banks raised their

inflatinn taraetsa^’’either individnallv nr in rnnrprta^‘”thpv r.nnld dn a better inb in the. Inner 
run nf keenina inflatinn near its taraet and the. wnrkfnrre fnllv emnlnved This Pnlir.v Rrief 
hicrhliahts an additinnal and less-nnted rnnsennenre nf raisincr the. inflatinn target mndesflv 
The. emnnmv r.nnld eninv a temnnrarv hut substantial hnnm in emnlnvment and nutnnt as it adjusted 
tn the increase in the taraet Mnde! simnlatinns snaaest that if the taraet were lifted tn


1:16 AM r™ Aug 18,2021

2,09 !Likes825Retweets

Paragraphs:

Economist: What Tech Does China Want?: a€~The vision is becoming clear. In a decade or so China 
will, if the Communist Party has its way, become a techno-utopia with Chinese characteristics, 
replete with a€oedeep techa€D such as cloud-computing, artificial intelligence (ai), self-driving 
cars and home-made cutting-edge chips. Incumbent technology giants such as Alibaba in e-commerce or 
Tencent in payments and entertainment will be around but less
overweeninga€”and less lucrative. Policies to curb their market power will redistribute some of 
their profits to smaller merchants and app developers, and to their workers. Second-tier cities 
will boast their own tech industries with localised services, competing with the less-mighty 
titans. Data will pulse through the system, available to firms of all sizes, under the watchful eye 
of the government in Beijing. Chinaa€™ s internet will strengthen its authoritarian
design. Clearer, too, is the way in which President Xi Jinping wants to make this vision a reality. 
Besides talking up deep tech, this involves taking the shallower sort down a peg. In the past nine 
months Chinaa€™ s regulators have cracked down on the countrya€™ s effervescent tech scene, which, 
though it has generated world-beating innovations and astounding shareholder value, is no longer 
seen as fit for purposea€!. The list of casualties is a Whoa€™ s
Who of Chinese tech: Ant Groupa€! Didi Globala€! Tencenta€l Meituana€! NetEasea€!. The ranks of 
potential winners are less well-defined. As a guiding principle, the vice-premier, Liu He, recently 
stated that China is moving into a new phase of development that prioritises social fairness and 
national securitya€!. It is a break with the old pro-growth model and the beginning of a€oereal 
state capitalisma€D, as one investment banker puts ita€!. The final
facet of Chinaa€™ s campaign is a transfer of resources from internet companies to firms that can 
create tangible advances in technologies that the party deems less frivolousa€!. Many politicians 
in America and Europe would love to fashion their tech industry into something like Mr Xia€™ s 
vision: less social media and other a€oespiritual opiuma€D, as Chinese state news outlets recently 
dubbed video-gaming; more strategic development of the techno­
infrastructure of the 21st century. This includes computer chips, clean energy and much besidesa€!. 
The policies behind the techlash are born of sweeping goals for society from the highest reaches of 
central government, an echelon of engineers and economists who lack expertise in most of the 
sectors being targeteda€!. Apparently without irony, Chinese media have likened the governmental™ s 
push to spur domestic chipmaking to the Great Leap Forwarda€!

LINK: 
<https://www.economist.com/business/what-tech-does-china-want/21803410?itm_source=parsely-api>

Douglas London: Afghanistan Not An Intelligence Failurea€” Something Much Worse: a€~In grading 
their own homework, the U.S. defense establishment only exacerbated the problem. While ita€™ s 
little surprise the Department of Defense was unwilling to objectively evaluate the resolve and 
capacity of those they trained, equipped, and advised to resist a forthcoming Taliban offensive, 
their rose-colored depictions of achievement over 20 years flew in the
face of reality, and was consistently challenged by the CIAa€™ s more gloomy, albeit realistic 
projectionsa€!

LINK: 
<https://www.iustsecuritv.org/77801/cias-former-counterterrorism-chief-for-the-region-afghanistan-no
t-an-intelligence-failure-something-much-worse/>

David Reifschneider & David Wilcox: Another Reason to Raise the Feda€™ s Inflation Target: An 
Employment and Output Boom: a€™ In 2012, the Federal Reserve formally adopted an inflation target 
and set it at 2 percent, in line with the level chosen by many other central banks. In hindsight, 
this setting left policymakers with too little room to cut interest rates when they want to fight 
recessions. Many researchers have noted that if central banks raised their
inflation targetsa€’’either individually or in concerta€”they could do a better job in the long run 
of keeping inflation near its target and the workforce fully employed. This Policy Brief highlights 
an additional and less-noted consequence of raising the inflation target modestly: The economy 
could enjoy a temporary but substantial boom in employment and output as it adjusted to the 
increase in the target. Model simulations suggest that if the target were lifted to

3 percent, the unemployment rate could average 3aD„4 percentage point or more below its sustainable 
level during the first 15 years after the higher target is announceda€!
LINK: <https://www.piie .com/sites/default/files/documents/pb21-19 .pdf>

Noah Smith: The 2020 Census & Americaa€™ s Racial Future: a€~The number of Hispanics who identify 
as a€oe White alonea€D fell by 14 million, while the number who identify as a€oetwo or more 
racesa€D rose by 17 million, and the number who identify as a€oesome other racea€D rose by 7 
million. For a group whose population is only 62 million total, this is an absolutely enormous 
change!a€! When people say a€oerace is a social constructa€n, this
is one of the things they meana€!. Whata€™ s going on? One obvious possibility is that the Trump 
Era made Hispanic people feel more like a racial minority. The Righta€™ s targeting of immigrants, 
Trumpa€™ s well-publicized disparaging remarks about Mexicans, and violence like the 2019 El Paso 
shooting might have sent a message that Hispanics are not in the White club, and Census respondents 
might simply be acknowledging that. Another possibility
is that Hispanics dona€™t feel rejected by whiteness, but are choosing to reject ita€L To woke 
folks who see America as dominated by White hegemony and want to see that hegemony broken, this is 
likely a welcome development. To anti-woke folks who fear the creation of a new hegemonic 
a€cePOCa€D (or a€ceBIPOCa€n) racial overclass, ita€™ s probably something to be feareda€!. Note 
that all of these viewpoints see race in terms of political
coalitions. Implicit in that idea, it seems to me, is the notion of society as a zero-sum struggle 
for supremacy between unified racial blocsa€i. I see this as a very dark, pessimistic worldviewa€!. 
[But] if we want a future where society doesna€™t consist of a struggle between racial armies, we 
cana€™t just expect the vast inevitable forces of sociology and history to produce that future for 
us. We have to fight for ita€!

With all the attention on Afghanistan this week, it was easy to miss the release of Census race and 
ethnicity data. But those who were paying attention noticed quite a bombshell a€” an enormous shift 
in the way Hispanic Americans describe their race. The number of Hispanics who identify as 
a€oeWhite alonea€D fell by 14 million, while the number who identify aa€!

Read more

a year ago A- 31 likes A- 37 comments A- Noah Smith

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


duoscripe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

