Subscribe to get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. &/or become a paid subscriber to support my 
hiring an RA for this, & to get the Directora€™ s Cut version of this a€~Stacka€!

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

Paul Romer: Mathiness in the Theory of Economic Growth'. a€™ II. The Fork in Growth Theory: a€™ The 
traditional way to include a scale effect in a growth model was [the external increasing-returns 
framework] proposed by Marshall (1980). One writes the production ofa€! each of a large number of 
firms in an industry as g(X)f(x) where the list x contains the inputs that the firm controls and X 
is the list of inputs for the entire industrya€! [external
increasing-returns] spillover benefits from the term g(X)a€\.

If we split f(x) = f(a,z)a€! [with] nonrival input a and rival inputs z, and write output at an 
individual firm as Af(a, z), a standard replication argument implies that f must be homogeneous of 
degree 1 in the rival goods za€!. In a competitive equilibrium, for each firm, the value of output 
equals the compensation paid to the rival inputs z so there can be no nonrival inputs a that an 
individual firm can use whilst excluding other firms from using them. (For an
elaboration of this argument, see Romer 1994b.) Hence, the nonrival inputs A must be 0% excludable 
and output must take the form Af(z). No firm or person can keep a nonrival idea secret. No firm or 
person will have any incentive to take advantage of the surplus noted above by encouraging the 
diffusion of an idea like mobile telephony throughout the world. Discovery and diffusion have to 
happen by accident.

Ia€! switched to a model with monopolistic competition^ I with partially excludable nonrival 
ideasa€! [so it became] logically possible for a firm to have an incentive to discover new ideas 
(Romer 1990) or to encourage the international diffusion of an existing idea like mobile telephony 
(Romer 1994a). In this framework, excludability offers a much more precise way to think about 
spillovers. Non-rivalry, which is logically independent, is the defining
characteristic of an idea and the source of the scale effects that are central to any plausible 
explanation of the broad sweep of human history (Jones and Romer 2010).

As part of the campaign of academic politics noted above, economists commitment to price-taking 
persevered with the assumption of 0% excludability required for external increasing returns, even 
when this forces mechanical models in which agents have no incentive either to discover ideas or 
encourage their diffusion. To defend this approach, they too resorted to mathinessa€!
LINK: <https://paulromer.net/mathiness/Mathiness .pdf>

Leave a comment
Share

Subscribe now


