<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2022-10-08/wall-street-week-full-show-10-07-2Q22-video>

Wall Street Week - Full Show 10/07/2022: a€~On this edition of Wall Street Week, Erin Browne, PIMCO 
Portfolio Manager and Chris Ailman, CalSTRS CIO wrap up a weird week in the markets. Brad DeLong, 
U.C. Berkeley Professor of Economics joins Former US Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers to 
discuss the long tail of history and it's effects on today. (Source: Bloomberg)a€!

And from This Weekenda€™s Google Sweep:

<https://frankdiana.net/tag/slouching-towards-utopia/>

So what moved the Amazon sales needle? Larry on Wall Street Week, Adam on The Ezra Klein Show, or 
something else?

Historical Sales Rank


crnirninuh

Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century


rormais ana eaiuons


UTOPIA

AN ECONOMIC HISTOW

HE TWENTIETH CENTURY^

~ J. BRADFORD DELONG

Hardcover, September 5, 2022          ▼

This format is currently ranked #775.

As of today: 2 Weeks 1 Month 6 Months | 1 Year | 2 Years | All Available

Sales Rank

09/10/2022     09/13/2022     09/16/2022     09/19/2022     09/22/2022     09/25/2022     
09/28/2022     10/01/2022     10/04/2022     10/08/2022

(In the range which I have been seeing, it looks like salesa€’’hardcover and ebook through all 
channelsa€”are roughly 1/ASR x 200,000. But the numbers are very fuzzy, what with lags, & c.)


Must-Read: On W.E.B. DuBois:

Paul Poast: a€~W.E.B. Du Bois is a major International Relations theorist, and his writings should 
be standard reading for international relations students .If you're reading Morgenthau (or Waltz or 
etc), you need to also read Du Boisa€! critical FOR IR theory becausea€! ita€™ s critical OF IR 
theorya€! questioning the very foundations of the theory... in two big ways: (1) Race relations are 
central for understanding world politics. (2) "International Relations" is
best thought of as "Imperial Relations"

Let's unpack each:

First, race relations are central for understanding world politics. A core idea in Du Bois' writing 
is the notion of "The Color Line". As he said in his 1900 "To the Nations of the World" address, 
"The problem of the twentieth century is the problem of the color line". In that speech, he 
elaborates on the "problem": "The question as to how far differences of race...will hereafter be 
made the basis of denying to over half the world the right of sharing to utmost ability
the opportunities and privileges of modern civilization.a€Da€! This led Du Bois to label the 
Russo-Japanese War was as "epoch-making" because it "crossed the color line"a€!. World War I, 
namely [the] way it was seen as shockinga€! to many in Europe and the United States because... the 
devastation was unfolding in "White Civilization". He then contrasts what [was then] unfolding in 
Europe with the death and devastation that Belgian imperialism did in
Congo during the late 19th century....

The second big way in which Du Bois is critical of IR theory: "International Relations" is best 
thought of as "Imperial Relations".... "The African Roots of War".... His thesis is 
straightforward: this might be a war in Europe, but its cause is in Africa. This is because of 
colonialism and how that fed jealousy and competition among the European powers, especially 
Germany...
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Project Syndicate: Is Putin in Peril?: a€~Russian President Vladimir Putin seems to be living in 
a parallel universe. By claiming sovereignty over a huge swath of Ukrainian territory from which 
Russiaa€™ s military is steadily retreating, he has staked his political future on a fantasya€!. We 
ask Robert D. Kaplan, Dina Khapaeva, Mark Leonard, and Angela Stent whether Putina€™ s grip on 
power will slip along with his apparent grip on realitya€!

•  Philip Stafford and Scott Chipolina: Binance blockchain suffers $570 million hack: a€~Worlda€™ s 
largest crypto exchange targeted in security breacha€!

•  Jon Gruber: Everything: a€~Smartphones replaced everything Radio Shack sold 30 years ago: still 
cameras, video cameras, music players, radios, alarm clocks, calculators, tape recorders, and, yes, 
cellular dumbphonesa€L What we need isna€™ t an everything app. Ita€™ s an everything device, with 
small focused apps for features. You want to do more? Downloada€%oa€”a€%cor better yet, 
createa€%oa€”a€%oa new app. And youa€™ ve
already got one in your pocketa€%oa€”a€%oor in your hand, as you read this very sentence on 
ita€%oa€”a€%oright nowa€!

• Next Big Idea Club: The Hand-Picking Ideas Authors Book Club: a€~Get the Best New Nonfiction 
Books Delivered to Your Door. Join the nonfiction subscription book club curated by Malcolm 
Gladwell, Adam Grant, Susan Cain, and Daniel Pinka€!
Leave a comment

AJs:

Jacob Soil: Britannia Deranged: a€~Britannia Unchained, the 2012 manifesto that UK Prime Minister 
Liz Truss wrote with other Conservative MPs, reveals her remarkably strange and dystopian vision of 
free-market capitalism. It also provides important insights into the radical ideology behind 
Trussonomics and the governments™ s disastrous budget plana€!. It is an odd combination of 
Victorian self-help clichA©s, Randian platitudes, and incongruous
factoids presented in a strange stream-of-consciousness stylea€!. The two SoefrontierSD 
protagonists tasked with building the new Britain are the London a€ ce cabby a€D and the 
a€cebuccaneera€D venture capitalist. The authors juxtapose hard-working cab drivers with unionized 
Tube drivers, whom they call a€oegriftersa€D with S republic sector pensionsa€D whose place is 
among the a€reidlers of the worlda€Da€i. The authors are concerned that
young Britons model themselves not on these fearless capitalist buccaneers but on reality TV stars, 
whom they see as sapping the UKa€™ s work ethic. The Apprentice, the television show that made 
Donald Trump famous, is an exception: The authors seem to think it is unscripteda€!

Diane Coyle: Liz Trussa€™ s Backward Vision of the Future: a€~The new UK prime ministers™ s 
outdated economic plan attempts to apply Thatcher-era solutions to twenty-first-century problems. 
But lifting BritainS™ s chronically low growth rate and boosting its flat-lining productivity 
requires a government that does not shy away from actively shaping marketsS!. TodayS™ s knowledge 
economy requires an innovative state to provide a long-term
framework for investment and set the rules of the game. Unless Truss and Kwarteng stop living in 
the past, the prospects for the UK economy on their watch look bleakS!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

Get 25% off a group subscription
Give a gift subscription

