I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

FIRST: Rakesh Bhandari Challenges Me on the Fall of the New Deal & Rise of the Neoliberal Order, &

Rakesh Bhandari: Challenge to DeLong about how he explains rise of neoliberalism

Rakesh Bhandari ©postdiscipline

@delong abt how he explains rise of neoliberalsm. His idea that it was to maintain rising living 
standards contrasts with Kotz's that it was to address falling profitability & Piketty's that it 
was an Anglo-American elite response to their declining relative position

Diane Coyle @DianeCoylel859

The slouch of history https://t.co/PjXxhWuAHF
1:54 PM r™ Aug 21,2022

8Likes2Retweets

His idea that it was to maintain rising living standards contrasts with Kotza€™ s that it was to 
address falling profitability & Pikettya€™ s that it was an Anglo-American elite response to their 
declining relative position. In short, there are Marxist/class-based explanations for the rise of 
neoliberalism that contrast with Brada€™ s. It could be an interesting conversation to have. I am 
referring to Thomas Pikettya€™ s Capital in the 21st
century <https://archive.org/details/isbn 9780674430006> and David Kotza€™ s The Rise & Fall of 
Neoliberal Capitalism <https: //hup .harvard .edu/catalog ,php?isbn=9780674980013>.

Brad DeLong: My neo-Polanyiesque framing of the long 20th century in Slouching Towards Utopia 
<bit.ly/3pP3Krk> commits me to a deeper explanation of the rise of the Neoliberal Order than simply 
"the revolt of the havesa€D. My interpretation has to be that the version of social justice offered 
by the New Deal Ordera€”full employment, strong unions, public provision of both public goods and 
private commodities for free over a wide range, and a highly
progressive tax-and-transfer systema€”was sustainable as long as economic growth was high and 
prices stable, but not otherwise.

The first speed-bump with respect to real income growth and inflation brought to the fore the 
complaints about the New Deal Ordera€™ s version of social justice:

1. It treated unequals equallya€’’especially African-Americans getting above themselves and wanting 
a€oepreferential treatment"

2. It failed to make fife for the lazy and shiftless difficult enougha€’’people who were not 
hard-working ought to be more miserable than they were.

3. It failed to offer sufficient respect to those whose success in the marketplace gave them 
warrant to demand such respect.

In short, the New Deal Order made social power too equal: it was held by people by virtue of their 
status as citizens plus their after-tax wealth. But societya€”at least in the form of its 
public-sphere megaphones that could command legislative majorities and cultural hegemony a€’’saw 
social justice as requiring that some citizens have more social power than others by virtue of 
ethnicity and cultural heritage, and that property inequality-generated divergences in
social power not be too greatlya€”and unfairlya€’’curbed


Hulton Archive/Getty Images

Otto von Bismarck in the late 1800s maintained his rule by saying:

1. The liberals believe that only private property should be a source of social powera€”and you 
poor do not believe that, but rather that community and tradition should be sources too. So you 
belong with us.

2. The socialists believe that that social power should be equalizeda€”even to the extent of giving 
an equal share to Poles, and Frenchmen. So you belong with us.

Just the a€oerevolt of the havesa€D would not have been enough. It was a lot of have-nots believing 
that the haves should have more; and that somehow the New Deal Ordera€™ s belief that the haves 
should have less undermined their own status derived from the little they had managed to attain.
In some ways thisa€’’unequal status-based social power is more a€oesocially justa€D than 
less-unequal market-plus-redistributiona€”is datable back to 1848, or even before.

Cf. Tocqueville, a€oeSouvenirsa€n:

In the country all the landed proprietors, whatever their origin, antecedents, education or means, 
had come together, and seemed to form but one class: all former political hatred and rivalry of 
caste or fortune had disappeared from view. There was no more jealousy or pride displayed between 
the peasant and the squire, the nobleman and the commoner; instead, I found mutual confidence, 
reciprocal friendliness, and regard.
Property had become, with all those who owned it, a sort of badge of fraternity. The wealthy were 
the elder, the less endowed the younger brothers; but all considered themselves members of one 
family, having the same interest in defending the common inheritance. As the French Revolution had 
infinitely increased the number of land-owners, the whole population seemed to belong to that vast 
family.

I had never seen anything like it, nor had anyone in France within the memory of mana€!

Now is this all true!

The logic of me choosing my neo-Polanyiesque Grand Narrative as the structuring frame of my book on 
the grounds that it is the least-false Grand Narrative I can think ofa€”having done that, I am then 
committed to this particular not a€ceclassa€D but rather a€oemarket vs. statusa€D explanation.
But that my Grand Narrative is least-false in general for the Long 20th Century does not make it 
true for the Neoliberal Turn that was the collapse of the New Deal and the rise of the Neoliberal 
Order.

Share


a€0 JI#Mavic3#MountEverestDJI Mavic 3 - Flying Over Mount Everest
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

One Image:

Virtual Book Talk

BRAD DELONG

Professor, UC Berkeley
Author, Slouching

Towards Utopia


UTOPIA

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY

OF THE TWENTIETH CENTURY

' J. BRADFORD DELONG

In conversation with

NICKTIMIRAOS

Chief Economics Correspondent,
Wall Street Journal
Author,Trillion DollarTriage

Monday, September 12 at 12:00 pm edt
RSVP: friendlycitybooks.com/utopia

NAJ

Leave a comment

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Matthew Yglesias: For the next two years, Biden needs to bring back the economists: a€~Time to 
make technocracy great againa€!

• David Leonhart: The Morning: Bidena€™ s debt relief: a€~An attempt to find a middle grounda€!

•  Will Wilkinson: a€oelt kills me every time I think about the fact that the first known written 
symbol for "freedom," the Sumerian ama-gi, which libertarians around the world have tattooed on 
themselves, actually means "debt relief." I love it so mucha€!

•  Alexandra Petri: a€oel look down at the face of my sleeping child and I vow: If this babya€™ s 
life is even one particle easier than mine was, I will burn this whole place down!

•  Rachel Leah Siegel: a€oe Jesus Montiel relies on energy drinks to get from his mobile home to 
his job at Teton Toys, some 90 minutes away along winding canyon roads. Sometimes, he doesn't make 
it home to his wife and 2-year-old daughter, choosing to sleep on friend's couches in Jackson to 
save on gasa€!

• Jonathan M. Gitlin: California calls time on internal combustion engines from 2035

AJs

Ben Casselman: a€~The divergence between GDP and GDI is remarkable. In theory, the two should be 
identical — they measure the same thing from opposite sides of the ledger. Any differences are due 
to measurement issues. Yet they are telling totally different stories about the economy right 
nowa€!

Ben Casselman @bencasselman


The divergence between GDP and GDI is remarkable. In theory, the two should be identical - they 
measure the same thing from opposite sides of the ledger. Any differences are due to measurement 
issues. Yet they are telling totally different stories about the economy right now.

Real gross domestic products vs gross domestic income

In trillions of chained 2012 dollars, annualized

2018             2019             2020             2021             2022

Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis

12:40 PM r™ Aug 25,2022

102Like s40Ret weets

Josh Barro: Republicans' Other Dobbs Problem: a€~The Republican base is pleased about Dobbs. But 
the base always turns out to vote for you a€” thata€™ s what makes them the base. One of the 
reasons Donald Trump was able to win in 2016 despite alienating large numbers of traditionally 
Republican voters in upscale suburbs was that he brought out so many new voters who werena€™ t 
traditionally part of the Republican basea€l. Bill Clinton did well
with these voters at a time when Republicans were seen as moralizing scolds who wanted to take away 
your Medicare. Trump won them over by emphasizing opposition to immigration, abandoning unpopular 
Republican economic planks on Social Security and Medicare, and defending their a€cetraditionala€D 
values against a snobby elite without projecting a religiously conservative moral worldviewa€!. The 
key problem for Republicans is that a lot of non­
base Trump voters are pro-choice. Even some of the ones who call themselves pro-life are, when push 
comes to shove, pro-choice

Give a gift subscription

Get 25% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

I greatly enjoy and am, in fact, driven to write Grasping Realitya€”but its long-term viability and 
quality do depend on voluntary subscriptions from paying supporters. I am incredibly grateful that 
the great bulk of it goes out for free to what is now well over ten-thousand subscribers around the 
world. If you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group receiving it regularly, 
please press the button below to sign up for a free subscription and get (the bulk of) it in your 
email inbox. And if you are enjoying the newsletter enough to wish to join the group of supporters, 
please press the button below and sign up for a paid subscription:

Subscribe now

