Subscribe now

10000 words on why the 20th Century was not a Chinese century. Very few of these belong in a 20th 
Century history book, alas...
https://www.icloud.com/pages/0pebTWadZO0frIs9Q JSUKMnw

Kong Shangren (1699):

White glass from across the Western Seas
Is imported through Macao:

Fashioned into lenses big as coins,

They encompass the eyes in a double frame.
I put them ona€”it suddenly becomes clear;
I can see the very tips of things!

And read fine print by the dim-lit window
Just like in my youtha€!

The most interesting thing was not that the world was poor in 1870: the world had always been poor 
since the invention of agriculture. The interesting things were that a part of the world was just 
starting to become richa€”and it was
interesting which part was becoming rich. That part of the world was starting to become rich was 
odd. And that the technological and organizational edge of human civilization in 1870 was the North 
Atlantic rather than, say, China was
distinctly odd.

Share

1: Britons: Too Ignorant to Make Good Slaves

Two thousand years before 1870, people would have laughed at the idea at Britain as a leading 
economic power.

The first-century BCE Roman military-politician Gaius Julius Caesar thought that the Britons as 
among the most backward people he had ever conquered. When Marcus Tullius Cicero learned that 
Caesar was planning to invade Britain, his
reaction was to snark to his friend Titus Pomponius Atticus. Caesara€™ s invasion of Britain was 
completely pointless. Not an ounce of silver that could be stolen was to be found on the entire 
island. All that a Roman politician on the make
could gain from an invasion of Britain was slavesa€”and not very good-quality slaves at that. 
Certainly nobody could expect from the Britons even a single slave smart and well-educated enough 
to have a useful skill like literacy or
musicianship!

A thousand years before the 19th Centurya€”in 800, saya€”the technological and civilizational 
cutting edges of humanity were to be found in the Caliph Haroun al-Rashida€™ s capital of Baghdad 
and the Tang Dynastya€™ s Changa€™ an
rather than London or Bristol or Manchester or New York or Washington or Cleveland. Even 
three-hundred years beforea€”in 1570a€”it would have taken a very sharp-eyed observer indeed to 
believe that northwest Europe was about to get
its act together in a way that the Turkish Ottoman civilization around Constantinople, the Moghul 
Indian civilization around Delhi, and the Ming Chinese civilization around Beijing could not.

That the 20th Century was not a Chinese century was distinctly odd in the context of world history. 
For three millennia the overwhelming proportion of centuries had been primarily or at least 
secondarily a€oeChinese centuriesa€O. Those
who did not feel that China was in some senses a civilization to be emulated thus betrayed their 
ignorance. But by 1870 this was no longer the case.

By 1870, however, the power and technology gradients across world civilizations were very clear. 
Real wages in England in 1870 were beginning to be substantially higher than past averages from the 
Middle Ages. Real wages in China and
India remained extremely low by any standard. Travelers from western Europe to Asia in the 1600s 
and before had been impressed back then not just by the scale of the empires and the luxurious 
wealth of their rulers but by the rest of the
economy as well. The scale of operations, the prosperity and industry of the merchant classes, the 
good order of the people, and the absence of extraordinary poverty among the masses frequently 
struck European observers as worthy of
comment  as striking contrasts with back home. But by the 1800s this was no longer true. 
Travelersa€™ reports then focused as much on mass poverty and near-starvation as on high-craft and 
high-culture luxury. Assessments of the wealth of
the court took on a sinister a€oeorientalista€D casta€”a cruel corrupt ruling elite that simply did 
not care about the welfare of the peoplea€”when viewed against the background of the poverty of the 
masses.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

2: What Had Happened to China?

The coming of the technology gradient favoring western Europe was indeed remarkably late. Before 
1800 or so there was very little that European traders could offer to sell that Chinese consumers 
would wish to buy. For more than two
thousand years China had been one of the leading, if not the leading civilization on the planet. It 
was not that the average standard of living was higher in China: Malthusian population pressures 
roughly equalized standards of living around
the world. But China had a higher population density because more efficient technologies allowed a 
given plot of arable land to generate more food, better craftswork in most industries, a larger 
class of literati interested in high culture,
anda€’’quite probably a€”a higher standard of living for the landed and ruling elite.

Before 1800 European trade for Chinese goods was by and large trade of silver for China-made 
luxuries. And the transfer of technology flowed from east to west: it is still unclear to what 
degree the European development of items like
gunpowder, printing, the compass, and noodles owed to the Chinese example. It is clear that all of 
these were known in China before they were known in Europe.

3: Chinaa€™s Relative Apogee

In the Tang Dynasty years before and the Sung Dynasty years after the year 1000, China had been the 
most progressive and innovative civilization in the world: innovative technologically, 
organizationally, and militarily. Its populationa€”60
million? 80 million? 100 million?a€”was one of the most rapidly growing and best-fed populations in 
the world, thanks to the development of strains of rice that could be wet-planted, irrigated, and 
produce three crops a year in the fertile soil
of China from the Yangtze basin south. China then led the world in non-agricultural technologies as 
well. At the start of the seventeenth century the British savant, politician, and bureaucrat 
Francis Bacon had marveled at three inventions that
he said had utterly transformed Europe: gunpowder, printing, and the compass. China had developed 
all three, and had developed all three before 1000.

China in the twelfth century at its pre-industrial relative apogee produced more iron and saw a 
greater share of agricultural production sold on markets than Britain would produce and market in 
the eighteenth. Zheng He's mid-fifteenth century
voyages of exploration sailed four times as far with twenty times as many sailors as Columbus, and 
could land ten times as many soldiers at Dar es Salaam and Trincomalee as Cortez would land at Vera 
Cruz. China had long had the
capability   of launching its own a€oevoyages of discovery.a€D Its governments had chosen not to, 
with that one exception. Zheng Hea€™ s fleet reached Zanzibar, and touched Africa, bringing back a 
giraffe. Annoyed at their treatment by a
Sri Lankan king, they captured him and brought him back to China to make his apology to the 
emperor. But the political balance in the Ming court changed, the follow-up expeditions were 
cancelled, and the exploration program abandoned.

Trade between China and the rest of Eurasia was overwhelmingly one-way. Places from India west 
wanted silks, porcelains, teas, and the other valuable and fightweight products of the craftworkers 
of Chinaa€™ s high civilization. In return,
China wanteda€! silver. Demand for curiosities aside, nothing made in the countries to Chinaa€™ s 
east were worth the cost of carrying them to China for what they could be sold there.

China led the world in political organization as well. The four greatesta€”by some average of size 
and durabilitya€’’empires of all history were, fourth, the johnny-come-lately seaborne empire of 
the British; third, the Persian produced by the
lucky adjacency of the horse-and-rider country of the Iranian plateau and the agricultural boomland 
of the Tigris-Euphrates valley; second, the Roman trans-Mediterranean; and first, the Chinese. Both 
the Roman and Chinese were launched
more than 2000 years ago. Both fell apart after 650 and 450 years, respectively. In the case of 
Rome, the memory and the goal of empire and the name of the founder echoed down through history, so 
that even in 1917 George V Windsor
called himself a€oeCaesar of Indiaa€D (Kaiser-i-Hind), Nikolai II Romanov called himself a€oeCaesar 
of All the Russiasa€D (Tsar' Vsekh Rosiy), Wilhelm II Hohenzollern called himself a€oeGerman 
Caesara€D (Deutscher Kaiser), Karl I
Habsburg called himself a€oeKaiser von A-sterreicha€n (Caesar of Austria) and Mehmed VI called 
himself a€oeKaisar-i-Ruma€n (Caesar of Rome). But nothing like the empire was ever reestablished.


Not so in China. The memory of the Chin-Han empire drove its reestablishment by the Tang (618-907), 
the Sung (960-1127 or -1279), the Yuan (1206- or 1279-1368), the Ming (1368-1644), and, last, the 
Qing (1644-1912). No other ruler's
writ ran a third as far or had even a third as large a chance of being obeyed as that of China's 
emperor. Tang Dynasty cavalry had skirmished with Persians on the shores of the Aral Sea. The Sung 
Dynasty river navy was the only military force
to even temporarily stymie Ghengis Khan's Mongols before his descendants took to fighting each 
other rather than expanding the empire. No pre-industrial central government anywhere ever managed 
to match the reach, extent, and power of
the landlord-scholar-bureaucracy mode of domination invented under the Tang and developed under the 
Sung. The Sung Dynasty capital, Hangzhou, was before the Mongol conquest the largest city in the 
worlda€’’larger than Baghdad or
Constantinople or Cordova or Delhia€”with perhaps half a million inhabitants: the closest thing to 
an economic, cultural, and political capital the twelfth-century world had.

4: Chinaa€™s Post-Sung Relative Stagnation

By the second half of the nineteenth century Chinaa€™ s relative apogee was three-quarters of a 
millennium past, and the government and the people were in crisis. The people were in crisis 
because they were more than three times as
numerous as their predecessors at the pre-industrial apogee, because they were ruled by a rapacious 
landed aristocracy, and because progress in agriculture and industry to counterbalance rising 
population had been nearly absent for most of
the second millennium. In 1100 the Chinese people were rich, or at least as rich as pre-industrial 
peasant societies get. At the start of the second millennium development of new types of crops and 
new strains of rice had greatly boosted
agricultural productivity and triggered the centuries-long spread of ChinaaC™ s heartland from the 
Yellow River to the Yangtze and further south, to Hunan and Guangzhou.

And by the second half of the nineteenth century Malthus was having his revenge. China had filled 
up, with more than 300 million people, which left average farm sizes less than a third of what they 
had been three quarters of a millennium
before. The bulk of peasant families were close to the edge. It is virtually certain that the 
average Chinese peasant family in the second half of the nineteenth century had less food than its 
predecessors in the twelfth: think of 1300 calories per
person per day as a rough guess.

The technological dynamism and organizational relative edge that China had possessed in the twelfth 
century was gone as well. Chinese producers still had substantial technological edges in limited 
industrial segments: high end silk textiles,
high-end porcelain, tea. But there had been little internally-driven technological progress in any 
industry for more than half a millennium. And the bureaucracy that in 1150 had looked efficient and 
powerful compared to a Europea€”a place
where                                                                                               
          no king would even think of asking an Earl of Pembroke to explain anythinga€”by 1870 
looked corrupt and incapable.

Why this 750 year relative stagnation is a great mystery. There are many potential suspects to take 
the blame as the root cause.

Perhaps the root problem was that emperors, grand secretaries, and landlords feared their own 
generals more than they feared their neighbors' soldiers. European kings, ministers, and landlords 
sought a strong military to protect them and
theirs against the next William the Conqueror or Friedrich II or Francois I or Napoleon. In China 
there was little to fear from outside the empire as long as the Mongols were kept divided, but a 
great deal to be feared inside the empire from
your own generalsa€”men like the ninth-century An Lu-Shan or the seventeenth-century Three 
Feudatories. Thus the military-industrial-metallurgy-innovation complex that drove so much of 
pre-industrial and early-industrial European
technological progress was absent.

Perhaps the root problem was that with triple-cropping rice strains the wet-rice fields were too 
fertile, the governmental bureaucracy too effective, and the avenues of establishment-oriented 
upward mobility to the striving and aggressive too
open. After making a little money the logical next step was to buy some land. Because the land was 
rich, because labor was plentiful and cheap, and because the empire was (most of the time) strong 
internally, one could live well after turning
one's wealth into land. One could also easily make the important social contacts to pave the way 
for one's children to advance further. And one's children could do the most important thing needed 
for upward mobility: study the Confucian
classics and do well on the examinations: first the local shengyan, then the regional juren, and 
then the national jinshi. Those who had successfully written their eight-legged essays and made 
proper allusions to and use of the Confucian
classics would then join the landlord-scholar-bureaucrat aristocracy that ruled China and profited 
from the empire. In the process of preparing for the examinations and mastering the material needed 
to do well on them, they would acquire the
habits of thought and values of a Confucian aristocrat landlord-scholar-bureaucrat. Entrepreneurial 
drive and talent was thus molded into an orthodox Confucian-aristocratic pattern and harnessed to 
the service of the regime and of the
landlord class: good for the rents of the landlords, good for the stability of the government, but 
possibly very bad indeed for the long-run development of technology and organization. Carlson 
(1957) quotes an imperial edict of 1724
condemning mining as a potential source of disorder and treason:

Miners are easy to recruit but hard to disband. If mining is left to the initiative of merchants 
there will be danger of crowds assembling and harboring treachery...

Perhaps the root problem was the absence of a new world rich in resources to exploit and helpless 
because of technological backwardness, or the lesser weight attached to instrumental rationality as 
a mode of thought, or the absence of
dissenting hidey-holes for ideological unconformity, or the fact that the merchants and 
hand-manufacturers of China's cities were governed by landlords appointed by the central government 
rather than governing themselves, or that large
muscled animals like oxen and horses turned out to be powerful productive multipliers for temperate 
rain-irrigated wheat-based agricultural but not for sub-tropical paddy-irrigated rice-based 
agriculture, or some combination of these, or any
of   a host of other possibilities over which historians will struggle inconclusively (but 
thoughtfully and fruitfully) for the rest of time.

Perhaps there were many root problems.

5: China as of Mid-Nineteenth Century

Whatever the cause, the result was China's extraordinary relative stagnation through much of the 
second millennium. The country and region that had been the world's leadera€’’culturally, 
economically, organizationallya€”in 1200 was poor,
economically backward, and organizationally decrepit by 1770, and much more so by 1870.

The poverty struck eighteenth-century British moral philosopher Adam Smith hard, for in his view 
China had been for a long time "the richest... most fertile, best cultivated, most industrious, and 
most populous" country in which even
landless peasants were relatively rich: aCcethe wages of labour had ever been more than sufficient 
to... enable him to bring up a family.a€D Smith had a theory as to why the China he saw in his 
daya€”the late eighteenth centurya€”had
become                                                                                              
              poor. Because China would not trade with outsiders and so learn and adapt their 
ideas, it was bound to stagnate: a€oea country which neglects or despises foreign commerce... 
cannot transact the... business which it might do with
different laws and institutions.a€D A stagnant economy, Smith thought, was headed for desperate 
poverty through a Malthusian population crisis. Population would continue to grow while the economy 
did not. Without technological progress
and with increasing population a€cecompetition... would soon reduce [wages] to this lowest rate 
which is consistent with common humanity.a€D At that lowest rate of wages, children would be so 
malnourished as to be easy prey to disease
and women's body fat levels would be so low that ovulation was hit-or-miss.

By 1870 it looked like that Malthusian crisis had arrived. The more than 300 million people of late 
nineteenth-century China had no mechanized farm machinery and no industry-produced nitrogen 
fertilizers. They were crowded into the wet,
arable eastern slice of what is a€ceChinaa€D on today's maps, with the median family of 6 farming 
perhaps 4 acres at a time when the Radical Republicans were still hoping to somehow find 40 acres 
plus a mule for each family of American
ex-slaves. Average adult height was, we think, significantly under five feet.

After 1800 British merchants did discover one commodity besides silver that Indian producers could 
supply and that Chinese consumers were eager to buy: opium. By the end of the 1830s the Chinese 
government was beginning to worry
about the consequences of opium addiction on the country, and the exchange of European silver for 
Chinese goods had turned around: the bulk of the China trade was the exchange of Chinese silver for 
Indian-grown opium. The Chinese
government attempted to suppress the opium trade and opium smuggling. The result was the 1839-1842 
"Opium War," in which the British fleet intervened on the side of free trade, the sale of opium, 
and drug addiction. The British Empire
acquired  the then nearly barren island of Hong Kong as a base, European influence was established 
in a substantial number of "treaty ports" along the Chinese coast, and the division of China not 
into European colonies but into regions in the
"spheres of influence" of different European powers began.

Thus the first iron-hulled ocean-going steamships called on a country where the government and the 
economy were in crisis for three reasons:

The first reason is that Chinaa€™ s government in the late nineteenth century was the ethnically 
Manchurian Qing Dynasty, and the Qing Dynasty was weak because it had always been weak. It had 
seized power in the mid-seventeenth
century. An ethnic clan of non-proper-Chinese military adventurers from beyond the Great Wall, from 
Manchuria, struck at the moment when the previous Ming Dynasty was paralyzed by peasant revolts and 
hamstrung by a run of bad
emperors  and more-than-usually-corrupt bureaucrats. The Manchu were unified because they were not 
Han Chinese: what Manchu prince or mercenary could expect to long survive a victory by any 
alternative faction? The Manchu were weak
because they were not Han Chinese: how many of the 300 million Chinese would give how much loyalty 
to a ruling dynasty in which the top places were reserved for others?

It was the classic problem of colonial rule. The Manchus tried to solve it by (a) presenting 
themselves as ideal Confucian sage-kings (presenting themselves as more righteous Confucian rulers 
than Kung-Fu-Tze himself), (b) giving the
landlords through which they ruled free rein throughout central and southern China (curbing 
rapacious landlords in the interest of protecting the Old Hundred names of China was not on the 
Qing Dynasty agenda, ever), and (c) opposing all
change for change threatened to cause instability and the Qing Dynasty knew that it was unstable 
already.

This worked as a political strategy: the Qing Dynasty had a run of 250 years, and the last Qing 
emperor still sat a thronea€’’albeit as a puppet of the Japanese armya€”in 1945. But it meant that 
the kind of national and nationalist appeals that
those who in Japan spoke for the Emperor Meiji or that Mongkut and Chulalongkorn used to try to 
preserve the independence of Thailand were impossible for China's late nineteenth-century 
government. You cannot rally a people against
foreign colonialists with the slogan a€oerevere the emperor and expel the barbarians !a€D when for 
more than 200 years the emperor has defined himself as non-Hana€”as a barbarian.

Even in the days of its peak strength, the Qing Dynasty found it wise to tolerate dominant currents 
of thought that viewed its coming to power as a tragedy and its rule as profoundly illegitimate. 
Jonathan Spence's In Search of Modern China
notes the performances at the court of the Kangxi emperor, the first strong and long-lived Qing 
dynasty emperor, of "The Peach-Blossom Fan" by Kong Shangrena€”an author still loyal to the 
previous Ming Dynasty, and hostile to the idea
that a scholar-official could win honor by helping the Manchu conquerors rule China: a€oe[A]t the 
play's end, with the Ming resistance in ruins, the lovers agree to take monastic vows... the 
surviving virtuous officials retreat deep into the
mountains to escape a summons from the Qing that they take up office .a€D

The second reason that China in the late nineteenth century was in crisis was that Confucian 
landlord-bureaucrat-scholar aristocracy through which the Qing Dynasty ruled was not only 
potentially disloyal but trained to be incapable. As long
as the Mongols were kept divided through bribes and the ruling dynasty uncorrupt, no Chinese 
emperor faced any outside existential military threat. Internal disorder was the main worry. So the 
central government had discouraged military
skill among its bureaucrats and notables since the Tang dynasty rebellion of An Lushan, and 
discouraged any liking for changea€”a potential cause of disordera€”since the first Ming dynasty 
emperor had expelled the Mongol descendants of
Genghis Khan in the fourteenth century.


seventeentn-century cnma was well aware or growing European technological developments. Yet neither 
Kong snangren nor any ot his relatives and descendants ever thought that tne optical glass business 
was worm studying or researching

or entering or even financing. It was simply not the kind of thing that a Confucian gentleman would 
do. One consequence of this lamentable uncuriosity was extraordinary ignorance about the outside 
world. During the first Opium War of
1840 the staff of High Commissioner Lin, the Qing plenipotentiary on the spot in Canton, appears to 
have debated whether an embargo of rhubarb exports might be enough all on its own to win the war 
for China.

The third reason China's government was in crisis was that the people were in crisis. As I noted 
above, China's population was on the downswing of a Malthusian population cycle. Compared to the 
aftermath of the great wave of agricultural
technological development nearly a millennium before, the threefold growth in population meant that 
yields per person were low, farms small, and peasants poora€”hence malnourished, and with 
relatively little energy. Population growth also
meant larger clans of landlords to be fed off the rents. Combined with an alien ruling dynasty that 
feels weak and threatened by its own upper class and tells its bureaucrats that it is justice when 
the landlords win, this means that the peasants
have very little to lose. Thus peasant revoltsa€”like those that everyone remembered had brought 
down dynasties beforea€’’burned through China in the mid-nineteenth century.

The greatest was the Taiping Rebellion of 1850-1864 that ravaged central China for fifteen years, 
aided by the fact that the imperial court feared successful generals (as potential usurpers) at 
least as much as it feared the rebels. There were
enough landless and other desperate peasants that perhaps ten million joined Hong Xiuquan, who had 
hoped to become a bureaucrat-scholar-landlord but failed the shengyan examinations several times. 
He then had visions that convinced him
that he was the younger brother of Jesus Christ. The Manchu banner-armies proved useless when Hong 
proclaimed the a€oeHeavenly Kingdom of Great Peace,a€D and promised his followers not only the 
Kingdom of Heaven in the hereafter
(where he would reign alongside his elder brother Jesus Christ) but that land would be equally 
divided after all the landlords were killed down herea€”meaning a roughly fifty percent increase in 
median peasant standards of living. And Hong
Xiuquan supplemented his brand of theocratic landlord-free authoritarian communism with anti-Manchu 
nationalism: "Ever since the Manchus poisoned China... the poison of corruption has defiled the 
emperor's throne...a€D 1300 calories
per   day versus 2000 plus God on your side plus revenge against the oppressive landlords plus the 
expulsion of the barbarian Manchus.

The fifteen-year march of the Taiping through south-central China and reign from Nanjing had echoes 
not just of previous peasant rebellions (like the one that had given the Manchus their opening in 
the 1640s at the end of the Ming dynasty)
but of what Mao Zedong and company would do from 1925 to 1945. Move into a village, get the 
peasants' hands dirty by having them kill a couple of landlords, divide up the land so all the 
small peasants are much richer, point out that if the
landlord-backed authorities return they will all be in big trouble, and ask for volunteers to join 
the army and come along to the next village.

The Taiping prohibited opium, foot-binding, prostitution, and female servitude. They instituted 
equal shares for all, vaccination, low taxes, and encouraged tea and silk exports. Hugh Deane 
quotes American missionary E.C. Bridgeman's
report that the Taiping "appear[ed] like a new race of warriors... well-clad, well-fed, and 
well-provided for... content and in high spirits, as if sure of success," and asserts that 
twentieth century Communist leaders like Mao Zedong, Zhu Te,
and Peng Dehaui drew inspiration from the stories of the Taiping heroes that they had grown up with 
in Hunan, Sichuan, and Nanjing.

Outside observers like Karl Marx were impressed enough that they thought that the World Revolution 
was starting in the late 1850s in China, and that the last moments of the Chinese empire had come. 
But they did not win.

Competent local landlords organized pickup militias, some of which grew into competenta€”but 
non-Manchua€’’battalions and brigades. The merchants and bankers of Shanghai and other ports in 
contact with and profiting from European
trade were desperate for help and knew how to draw on European military-technological competence. 
The thirty year-old Frederick Ward Townsenda€”with, Deane reports, two years' experience as a 
military cadet in Norwich, Vermont
followed by service as a Texas Ranger, a Mexican army drill instructor, and in the Crimean 
Wara€’’organized an army on the British Indian sepoy model: officers from Europe and America, 
rifles and carbines and cannon supplied by the
British government, high pay, and river mobility through steampower. The Qing court heard such good 
things about his army from Li Hongzhang, their commander on the spot, that they named Ward's army 
aCceThe Undefeatables.a€D Ward
was killed at Ningbo in 1862, but his successor the British General Charles a€ceChinesea€D Gordon's 
army proved equally capable.

Perhaps 10 million people, 3% of China's population, died in the war. The Taiping were crushed in 
1864. China's political revolution was postponed for half a century, and the Qing Dynasty continued 
to rule until 1911.

6: No Equivalent of the Meiji Restoration

Western China specialists sometimes see and can almost touch an alternative historya€”one in which 
late-nineteenth century China stood up economically, politically, and organizationally. Japan, 
after all, won its short victorious war against
Russia in 1905, negotiated as an equal with Britain and the U.S. over warship construction in 1921, 
and was perhaps the eighth industrial power in the world by 1929. Jonathan Spence, for example, 
sees:

Confucian statesmen [like Li Hongzhang] whose skill, integrity, and tenacity helped suppress the 
[Taiping and other] rebellions... showed how imaginatively the Chinese could respond to new 
challenges... managed to
develop new structures to handle foreign relations and collect customs dues, to build modern ships 
and weapons, and to start teaching international law and the rudiments of modern science.  It was 
true that there

remained complex problems... rural militarization... local autonomy over taxation... landlord 
abuses... bureaucratic corruption... bellicose foreign powers. But with forceful imperial 
leadership and a resolute Grand

Council, it appeared that the Qing Dynasty might regain some of its former strength...

And he laments how due to the chances of politics:

Forceful leadership was not forthcoming... the empress dowager Cixi... coregent for her son Tongzhi 
from 1861-73... coregent for her nephew Guangxu from 1875-89.... [A]bsolute political authority. 
while Guangxu

[was imprisoned in the palace]... on her orders from 1898-1908.... Cixi had clashed badly in 1869 
with Prince Gong.... Zeng Guofan died in 1872... Wenxiang died in 1876. Zuo Zongtang remained 
preoccupied with

the pacification of the Muslims in [Xinjiang].... The grand councilors... worthy... with 
distinguished careers. lacked the skill or initiative to direct China on a new course. Although 
self-strengthening programs

continued to be implemented... a disproportionate number of them were initiated by one man, Li 
Hongzhang... governor-general of Hebei... commissioner of trade for the northern ports...

We economists are much more skeptical. We note that the "new structuresa€D were things like the 
Qing Imperial Maritime Customs Service built up in the 1860s under Robert Harta€”no Chinese 
officials allowed, largely out of fear that
their corruption would have been impossible to moderate given the ties to Qing Dynasty high 
politicians they would have had to have possessed in order to get appointed in the first place. We 
note the corrupt and incompetent bureaucracies
that failed to manage the Yellow River dikes and the Grand Canal. We note that the Qing could not 
get their local officials to collect the salt tax.

In the mid-1880s the Qing Dynasty, having bought foreign metal-working machinery and built a navy, 
arsenals, and docks, thought it was strong enough to oppose the French conquest of Vietnam. The 
fleet was destroyed in an hour. Jonathan
Spence reports that the Chinese navy lost 572 dead, while the French lost five. In 1895 the Qing 
Dynasty thought it was strong enough to oppose the Japanese extension of their sphere of influence 
to Korea. It was wrong. The Treaty of
Shimonoseki added Taiwan, Korea, and southern Manchuria to Japan's sphere of influence. In 1929 
China produced 20K tons of steela€”less than two ounces per person per year. It produced 400K tons 
of irona€”that's 1.6 pounds per person
per   year. It mined 27M tons of coala€”that's 100 pounds per person per year. Compare this to 
America's 700 pounds of steel per capita in 1929 or 200 pounds in 1900, or to America's 8000 pounds 
of coal per capita in 1929 or 5000 pounds of
coal per capita in 1900.

We do not find it satisfactory to attribute China's stagnation through the first decade of the 
twentieth century to poor choice of ministers by the Dragon Lady, the Dowager Empress Cixi. 
Jonathan Spence is following in a long tradition that
treats her as the original mold for the figure of the Evil Dragon Lady. But one manipulative and 
malevolent female is rarely the cause of the decline of empires.

6.1: The Disproportionate Man

Recall Jonathan Spencea€™ s a€oe[of] self-strengthening programs. a disproportionate number of them 
were initiated by one man, Li Hong zhang a€ I a€D who we have just seen as a man-on-the-spot during 
the Taiping Rebellion. But he was

not the only loyal servant of the Qing Dynasty. It had manya€”skilled scholars, administrators, and 
military politicians who might well have seen it as their duty to do for China what those who 
restored the Emperor Meiji were doing in Japan
and what the servants of Mongkut and Chulalongkorn were trying to do in the Kingdom of Siama€”now 
Thailand. Why were there not others? Let us look at Li Hong zhang a€™ s career:

Li Hongzhang (EenZe₄^9« , 1823-1901) was born in 1823 in Qunzhi, Modian, ten miles northeast of the 
Anhui Province capital of Hefei. He was of the scholar-gentry class: like his father one of the 
literati-landlord-officials who combined
their intellectual, plutocratic, and bureaucratic power to rule China under the emperor in 
Beijinga€”but since a€oethe mountains are high, and the emperor is fara€D the emperora€™ s 
theoretically absolute power was very limited in

practice. With the leisure to studya€”and the focus because only by studying hard could he rise and 
secure the future fortunes of his familya€”he flourished. Tutored by prominent military politician 
Zeng Guofan (ce>34ace<e—©, 1811-72), in
1847 he obtained the highest examination degree, the jinshi, and two years later saw him admitted 
to Chinaa€™ s Harvard or perhaps its Ecole Normal Superieur: the Hanlin Academy.

But rather than rising through the Beijing-based bureaucracy, a few years later sees him detached 
from the Beijing bureaucracy and back in his home lower Yangzi Valley: the Taiping Rebellion had 
led him to return home and, outside the
Imperial administrative system, raise a unit of local militia to defend their homes and their 
property from the rebels. The governor trying to contain the rebellion, his former tutor Zeng 
Guofan, noticed hima€”and took Li Hongzhang on as one
of  his protA©gA©s.

He rose, becoming an ace troubleshooter.

Soon after the 1864 final suppression of the Taiping, he was sent to Shandong to deal with the Nien 
Rebellion. 1870 sees him promoted to Viceroy of Chihli, at the age of 47 one of the very 
highest-ranking administrators in China. And from
that perch he was to spend the rest of his life trying to salvage the situation for the dynasty he 
served.

Li Hongzhanga€™ s achievements at economic developmenta€”self-strengthening (^'<a<™eO<a<*)a€”were 
indeed impressive: bureaucratic prime mover behind the 1877 Kaiping coal mine, the 1878 cotton 
mills in Shanghai, the Tianjin
arsenal, the telegraph between Tianjin and Peking, a seven-mile railroad to ship from Kaiping to 
the river and then downriver to Tianjin, and so forth.

Moreover, what successful self-strengthening programs were undertaken by Li Hongzhang appears 
likely to have been undertaken by only one other: Zhang Zhidong, governor-general of Hunan-Hubei 
for two decades: the railroad from
Hankou to Beijing, the Wuhan Han-Ye-Ping heavy industrial complex. In the last generation of the 
Qing empire, individual governors-general who made economic development a top priority could make 
some things happena€’’elsewhere it
didn't, save to some degree in and next to the foreign concessions and treaty ports: Qingdao, 
Tientsin, Shanghai, Guangdong, Hong Kong. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, in 
the last years of the Qing empire and the first
years of the Republic of China, economic growth and development took place around China's coastal 
fringes in and near foreign enclaves, but not elsewhere.

It seems to us here and now today that, in the years before World War I, the example of the 
industrial core seemed easy to follow. Inventing the technologies of the original industrial 
revolution^’’steam power, spinning mills, automatic
looms, iron- and steel-making, and railroad-buildinga€”had required many independent strokes of 
genius. But copying the technologies did not, especially when you could buy and cheaply ship 
industrial capital goods made in the same New
and Old England machine shops that supplied the industries of England and of America. If Ford could 
redesign production immediately after World war I so that semi-skilled assembly line workers could 
do what highly-skilled craftsmen used


io uo, wny couiun i roru aisoa=e or someone eisea=e redesign production oeiore worm war i so mat n 
couiu oe cameo out oy low wage reruvians or roies or ivenyans rauier man oy Americans, WHO were 
extraordinarily expensive iaoor oy

world standards eve back then?

6.2: Li Hongzhang's Kaiping Coal Mine

Let us look at one of Li Hongzhanga€™ s major projects, the Kaiping coal mine. We are lucky in that 
we can draw on Ellsworth Carlson's 1957 Harvard east asian monograph to understand how and to what 
extent Li Hongzhang could
midwife modern coal-mining technology in late-nineteenth century China. In 1877 Li Hongzhanga€”a 
senior scholar-landlord-bureaucrat high in the confidence of the Qing courta€’’joined forces with 
Tang Tingshua€”a prominent,
experienced, and wealthy treaty port comprador-merchant who had managed Jardine, Matheson's 
interests along the Yangtzea€”to establish a modern, industrial, large-scale coal mine in Kaiping, 
in Chihli. Li Hongzhang and Tang Tingshu
faced unusual forms of opposition to their mining plans. Carlson quotes a British cable of 1882 
stating that mining work had been stopped because Chi Shihchang, a vice-president of the Board of 
Civil Offices, had declared that "foreign
mining methods angered the earth dragon... [and so] the late empress could not rest quietly in her 
grave" sixty miles away from Kaiping:

Foreign mining methods angered the earth dragon... [and so] the late empress could not rest quietly 
in her grave.... The Governor-General has been ordered to make inquiry and report... work has 
partially ceased....
Either he must throw over a company... formed with his direct sanction... [and] a very large 
quantity of capital, or he must... declare the mines harmless with the knowledge that he will then 
be considered responsible
for any bodily ailment or other ill which may befall the Emperor or his family...

Given the size of the imperial family and mortality and morbidity rates in the late nineteenth 
century, it would be a brave bureaucrat indeed who would respond to this by certifying that there 
was no geomantic danger to the grave of the late
empress sixty miles away from the mine works.

Li Hongzhang was a brave bureaucrat indeed.

Tang Tingshu had originally proposed to build a steam railway to get the coal from the mines to the 
port of Tientsin, but dropped that idea and replace it with a proposal for a seven mile mule-drawn 
tramway to be connected to a twenty-one
mile canal. Shen Pao-chen had in 1877 dismantled China's first railwaya€”the Shanghai-Woosung. 
According to David Pong, Li Hongzhang was furious, blaming the destruction on Shen's 
narrow-mindedness and his desire to curry favor
with anti-foreign elements. Moreover, the Manchu court had just rejected Liu Mingchuan's request 
for permission to build railways.

When the mining began and the tramway started up, however, there were no mules: there was a 
locomotivea€”the "Rocket of China" with, engineer Claude Kinder reported, a boiler from "a portable 
winding engine, the wheels had been
purchased as scrap castings, the frames... made of cast iron." Ellsworth Carlson believes that Li 
Hongzhang and Tang Tingshu were able to get their steam railroad going because of three reasons. 
First, it was built in a remote and sparsely
populated area with no Confucian scholar-landlord-bureaucrats around. Second, Li Hongzhang used all 
his political skills to keep the existence of the steam railroad. Third, Carlson believes that Li 
had the blessing of the empress dowager
Cixi  to proceeda€”and thus her protection from his superiors on the Grand Council and elsewhere.

Production began with modern machinery a€’’for the daya€”in 1881 excavating coal up to 500 feet 
down. By 1889, 3000 workers in three shifts were producing 700 tons of coal a day using steam lifts 
underground coal cars on rails, and
pneumatic drills. By 1900,9000 workers were producing 200 tons a coal a day, with average pay 6 
dollars per month and with at least some Chinese-born technical employees making 60 dollars. About 
four miners died each year. As Herbert
Hoover (yes, that Herbert Hoover: at the time a 26 year-old mining engineer on the make, later to 
become the architect of food relief to Europe after World War I to prevent mass starvation, the 
wonder-working Commerce Secretary during the
Roaring Twenties, and president during the slide into the Great Depression) reported:

The disregard for human life permits cheap mining by economy in timber [supports].... The aggrieved 
relatives are amply compensated by... 30 dollars per man.... Cases have been proved of suicide for 
that amount...

Hoover's judgment was that the miners were producing 1/4 of what was expected of miners in America 
or Australia. The rate of production was nearly 500 pounds per worker per day, but still only six 
pounds a year for every person in China.
There was still no railway all the way to Tientsin. The railway had been built down to Taku, but 
Chief Engineer Claude Kinder reported:

High officials who detested the railway... foster[ed] trouble with the junk people.... So great was 
the clamor... that the Viceroy... gave the order for the nearly completed bridge [over the Peiho to 
Tientsin] to be
destroyed, although hundreds of the largest junks had already safely passed through...

Without the aegis of Li Hongzhang and his position as governor, the enterprise is unlikely to have 
survived. Ellsworth Carswell quotes Tang Shouchien on the difficulties that merchants and 
entrepreneurs had outside the coastal foreign
concessions: a€oeThe officials have rights; the merchants have no rights; their influence does not 
go beyond the bringing together of capital; and naturally the profits of the merchants are lost to 
the officials ceaselesslya€la€D

Even with his aegis, not everything went smoothly. Carswell quotes the North China Herald of June 
24,1887 as pessimistic about the future of Kaiping as a capitalist economic enterprise: a€oeif a 
mine is at a promising state, Kaiping to wit,
the kinsmen of the Director, Managers, and officials, come in shoals, and without the slightest 
regard to competence are provided with posts and fattena€la€D But as long as Li Hongzhang was in 
control and his attention was focused on
making the mine a successful economic enterprise, Tang Tingshu, his team, and his specialist 
foreign engineers could do their work.

Their position, however, was shaky, for the mine was both a public governmental project and a 
private capitalist enterprise: shang-pan kuan-tu: official supervision and merchant management. 
This meant that each manager of the mine wore
two hats: on the one hand, they were intendants in the Qing administrative bureaucracy, with 
jurisdiction not over a town and its villages but over a mining enterprise, and on the other hand 
they were employees of the shareholders. Should
push come to shove, it would turn out that they worked for the governor of Chihli rather than the 
shareholders of the company.

6.3: Herbert Hoover Takes a Hand

Mine director-general Tang Tingshu died in 1892. His successor was a very different man. Tang 
Tingshu was a merchant. Chang Yenmao was not a merchant or an industrialist or an engineer. Chang 
Yenmao was a bannermana€”a hereditary
retainer of Prince Qun. Tang Tingshu was a merchant who had worked extensively for British bosses. 
Chang Yenmao was a political fixer for the Empress Dowager Cixi. In The Making of Herbert Hoover, 
Rose Wilder Lane claims that Chang
Yenmao had played a key role in Cixi's coup of 1885, when she placed the Gwangxu emperor on the 
throne.

Chang Yenmao had little education. In spite of his lack of literary attainment, he had acquired 
official rank. He was slotted to become an intendant in Kaingsu when the director-generalship of 
Kaiping fell vacant, his replacement, but rather a
hereditary retainer of Prince Qun and a political fixer for the Empress Dowager Cixi.

By 1900 Chang Yenmao was perhaps the wealthiest man in Tientsin.

When Herbert Hoover looked at the books he reported that the 9000-worker payroll had been padded by 
6000 names, and that the director of personnel doing the padding and collecting the wages had paid 
Chang Yenmao A£10000a€”50,000
dollarsa€”for the post.

Chang Yenmao's company paid A£20000a€” 100000 dollarsa€”a year in dividends. Herbert Hoover took 
over in 1901, and was able to pay out A£150,000a€”750,000 dollarsa€”a yeara€”to the shareholders as 
dividends.

Herbert Hoover? you say. Yes, Herbert Hoover: at the time a 26 year old mining engineer on the 
make, later to become the architect of food relief to Europe after World War I to prevent mass 
starvation, the wonder- working Commerce
Secretary during the Roaring Twenties, and president during the slide into the Great Depression.

What happened was this: Herbert Hoover, mining expert, arrived in Tientsin in 1900 just in time to 
be besieged in the city by the Boxers (a better translation for this grassroots uprising influenced 
and encouraged but not controlled by the
Forbidden City would have been "Fighters United for Justice"). In Tientsin Hoover met Gustav 
Detring of the China Maritime Customs Service, a friend of Chang Yenmao's. He also met Chang 
Yenmao. Chang had fled to Tientsin as well,
fearing that the Boxers would execute him as a corrupt puppet of the Europeans; in Tientsin, 
however, the Europeans arrested Changa€” fearing, probably correctly, that he was passing 
intelligence to the besieging Boxer armies as a way of
hedging his bets. The British charge d'affaires on the scene later said that Chang "ought to have 
been shot in 19OO.a€D

Somehow Detring and Hoover, probably, got Chang released from prison. Somehow Chang decided to 
reincorporate the Kaiping mines as a British-flag enterprise incorporated in London in order, he 
said, to make it easier to raise capital to
expand the mines and to provide some political cover: Russian or Japanese proconsuls would love to 
confiscate a working Chinese-flag industrial property as reparations or indemnities, but would not 
dare touch a British-flag industrial
property. Chang commissioned Detring and then Detring and Chang commissioned Hoover and then Hoover 
commissioned his boss C. Algernon Moreing back in London to do the deal.

Changa€™ s old Kaiping Mine Company had owned the mine works, had little spare cash, and had owed 
A£250,000a€”l .25 million dollarsa€”in bonds that paid 12% per year interest. Hoovera€™ s new 
Kaiping Mine Company borrowed
A£500,000 at 6%, paid off the old bonds, and had A£250,000 in cash to expand. Herbert Hoover, his 
bosses, and his friends somehow owned 62.5% of the new company, without having committed any funds 
to the enterprise at all, leaving the
shareholders of the old company owning 37.5% of the new company. The old company had been 
controlled completely by Chang Yenmao in his dual status as director-general both elected by the 
shareholders and appointed by the governor of
Chihli.  The new company was controlled completely by Herbert Hoover as the representative on the 
spot of the London-based majority shareholders. The old company had a management and advanced 
technical staff of 620 Chinese managers
and                                                                                                 
          10 foreign-born engineers and foremen. The new company had a management and advanced 
technical staff of 170: 120 from china and 50 from abroad.

The new company also had a Europeans-only club.

The local judgment of those on the spot was that Hoover and company had:

made a pretty pile at the expense of the Chinese.... legally the Board of Directors were 
unassailable... but... morally they were in the wrong. [Britain should not] give its countenance to 
a financial transaction which

had fleeced Chinese shareholders... lined the pockets of an Anglo-Belgian gang...

And Chang Yenmao and his associates were "wild... [because] they thought themselves rather smarter. 
and got themselves fairly had by a Yankee man of straw [Hoover]."

We can try to read Herbert Hoovera€™ s mind: Perhaps Herbert Hoover thought that the old 
shareholders should be grateful that Hoover and his partners had only charged them only 62.5% of 
the company because:


Changa€™ s old Kaiping Mine Company had owned the mine works, had little spare cash, and had owed 
A£250,000a€”l .25 million dollarsa€”in bonds that paid 12% per year interest. Hoovera€™ s new 
Kaiping Mine Company borrowed
A£500,000 at 6%, paid off the old bonds, and had A£250,000 in cash to expand. Herbert Hoover, his 
bosses, and his friends somehow owned 62.5% of the new company, without having committed any funds 
to the enterprise at all, leaving the
shareholders of the old company owning 37.5% of the new company. The old company had been 
controlled completely by Chang Yenmao in his dual status as director-general both elected by the 
shareholders and appointed by the governor of
Chihli.  The new company was controlled completely by Herbert Hoover as the representative on the 
spot of the London-based majority shareholders. The old company had a management and advanced 
technical staff of 620 Chinese managers
and                                                                                                 
          10 foreign-born engineers and foremen. The new company had a management and advanced 
technical staff of 170: 120 from china and 50 from abroad.

The new company also had a Europeans-only club.

The local judgment of those on the spot was that Hoover and company had:

made a pretty pile at the expense of the Chinese.... legally the Board of Directors were 
unassailable... but... morally they were in the wrong. [Britain should not] give its countenance to 
a financial transaction which

had fleeced Chinese shareholders... lined the pockets of an Anglo-Belgian gang...

And Chang Yenmao and his associates were "wild... [because] they thought themselves rather smarter. 
and got themselves fairly had by a Yankee man of straw [Hoover]."

We can try to read Herbert Hoovera€™ s mind: Perhaps Herbert Hoover thought that the old 
shareholders should be grateful that Hoover and his partners had only charged them only 62.5% of 
the company because:

• The alternative was for the Russians to have confiscated the entire mine as war reparations, 
leaving old shareholders with zero.

• Chang Yenmao was a corrupt thief, untouchable because of his status in the Qing court. He was 
stealing from the company by padding the payroll with 6000 extra workers at 50 dollars a year. 
Thata€™ s 300,000 dollars a year
stolen. We got that back for the shareholders.

• Hoover would make the mine run productively and profitably. Chang Yenmao, neither a mining 
engineer nor a merchant, could not

• The old shareholdersa€™ 37.5% of the post-Hoover 750,000 dollars a year in dividends is about 
270,000 dollarsa€”that is nearly three times the 100,000 dollars a year in dividends the old 
company had paid: Hoover had thus
nearly tripled the value of the old stockholdersa€™ shares.

62.5% of the company, Hoover would perhaps have said, is a bargain price for the old shareholders 
to pay for all we have done and will do for them.

Chang Yenmao, however, had to explain to Yuan Shihkai, the new Governor-General of Chihli, that he 
had conspired or western sharpies had tricked him or something had happened by which what Yuan 
Shihkai thought was the strategic
imperial government enterprise of the Kaiping mine was now the property of a British-Belgian 
investors' syndicate. Yuan Shihkai was displeased:

The mines had not been started... [until] Li Hongzhang had... obtained imperial approval... they 
could not be alienated without imperial approval. Chang, said Yuan, was a person of humble origins 
to whom the

country had given great favors, but he had not been properly grateful... [had sold] mining land [to 
foreigners] without authority... deceived the throne... about Chinese-foreign joint management. If 
unpunished,

Chang's action might become a precedent... losses of the country's mines, the merchant's capital, 
and the dynasty's ports...

Chang Yenmao, ordered to recover the mines, went to London and sued.

In the process of browbeating Chang Yenmao, Herbert Hoover had signed a "Memorandum of 
Understanding" that the change of corporate form would not alter Chang Yenmao's status: that he 
would remain director-general of the mine "as
before .a€D That Memorandum was then ignored.

One British judge was shocked at the deception and dishonor, and ruled that the "Memorandum" was a 
valid instrument that had to be followed by the new company. Other British judges in London ruled 
that the "Memorandum" was a valid
instrument only insofar as the powers granted Chang by the memorandum were legal according to 
British corporate law, but that those powers weren't.

So British judges in London ultimately ruled that Hoover, as a mere employee of the new 
shareholders, had no power to sign a memorandum giving up the shareholdersa€™ power to choose the 
director-general they wanted. LLater on,
Herbert Hoover scrambled as he launched his political career to buy up and destroy all copies of 
the trial record containing his testimonya€”missing the one in Oxford's Bodleian Library.

In the end Yuan Shihkai started up another coal company with rights to much more extensive deposits 
in the area, and the two were amicably merged.
As Albert Feuerworker summed up the story of Kaiping in the 1959 Journal of Asian Studies:

Despite its pioneering achievements, Kaiping faltered. [like] other kuan-tu shang-pan enterprises 
in the late nineteenth century. The first was the lack of sufficient capital and the inability to 
raise more from domestic

sources. The second was the unpropitious political environment into which it was born. Little aid 
could be expected from the tottering Manchu regime either in the form of financial assistance to 
compensate for the
reluctance of private investors, or protection from foreign encroachment such as eventuated in 
British domination of this enterprise. [T]he contrast with the history of early industrial efforts 
in Meiji Japan is a

striking one...

Feuerworker sees three things going wrong: no private capital, a poor cash-strapped government that 
could not contribute public capital, and a weak government that could not protect incipient 
enterprises against rapacious foreigners. These
three were certainly important, yes, but I see three others that were even more important:

•  a social-economic structure that could not find and promote executives, but instead replaced 
Tang Tingshu with a corrupt political fixer like Chang Yenmao

•  a political-ritual culture that required that a modernizing governor focus his attention 
constantly on the enterprise and run interference to protect it from anti-modernizers

•  an educational system that continued to turn out literati instead of engineers and thus required 
foreign technical personnel for everything

The fact is that, outside the charmed circles created by the extraterritorial foreign concessions, 
and to a slight degree the immediate span of control of the few modernizing governors, modern 
industries did not develop and modern
technologies were simply not applied in late imperial China. The typical Qing bureaucrat was 
hostile. But the typical Qing bureaucrat was also interested. There was rough equilibrium in how 
much money Qing bureaucrats were expected to
squeeze from landlords (not that much), merchants and traders (significant but limited), and others 
who needed government action (as much as they could grab).

New people doing new things had no customary, social, or countervailing power protections against 
their overlords. And overlords with limited intelligence, limited types of experience, and limited 
official tenure could not be expected to
nurture economic growth when there were loose assets to be stripped. And, as the shareholders of 
Kaiping and Chang Yenmao discovered, to flee into the arms of foreign legal systems was to flee 
from Scylla to Charybdis.

7: The End of Imperial China

The loss of the Japanese-Chinese War in 1895 brought matters to a head: was the government going to 
make a more serious effort to mobilize the country for modernization and progress or not? The 
Guangxu emperor said yes: he allied
himself with reformer Kang Youwei and launched the "hundred days of reform" of 1898. The rest of 
the Qing power structure, especially the dowager empress Cixia€”who we have seen before as patron 
and protector of modernizer Li
Hongzhanga€”said no. she imprisoned the emperor inside the palace and encouraged the grassroots 
a€oeFighters United for Justicea€D to see what would happen.

The attempt to mobilize anti-European sentiment to support the conservative regime failed, as an 
all-European expeditionary force relieved the besieged European embassies in Beijing, exacted 
indemnities, and wreaked destruction.

A tack back to the left was not possible. Kang Youwei's memoranda on such things as the partition 
of weak-government Poland by Russia, Prussia, and Austria and on the successful Meiji reforms in 
Japan could still be read, but Cixi had
executed Kang Youwei's younger brother and other reformers in 1898. And when Sun Yatsen had offered 
his services to Li Hongzhang in 1894, Li had sent him away.

Sun Yatsen built up a financial and propaganda network among Chinese emigrants beyond the reach of 
the government. Military politicians like Yuan Shihkai came to the conclusion that working with the 
Manchu court was useless. And at the
beginning of 1912 the last Chinese imperial dynasty fell, as Yuan Shihkai and his peers refused to 
suppress Sun Yatsen's rebellions. The six-year-old emperor abdicated. But the new Chinese 
republic's president was military politician Yuan
Shihkai. And his authority over his peers and near peersa€”army commanders, provincial governors, 
and other would-be warlordsa€”was nil. China descended into near-anarchy.

With China thus hors de combat and with the high civilizations of India and Islam in no better 
shape, the worlda€”that in 1870 the submarine telegraph cable and the iron-hulled ocean-going 
screw-propeller steamship were about to make a
very small world after all indeeda€’’would become a North Atlantic-dominated world for quite a 
while.

Leave a comment

Subscribe now


62.5% of the company, Hoover would perhaps have said, is a bargain price for the old shareholders 
to pay for all we have done and will do for them.

Chang Yenmao, however, had to explain to Yuan Shihkai, the new Governor-General of Chihli, that he 
had conspired or western sharpies had tricked him or something had happened by which what Yuan 
Shihkai thought was the strategic
imperial government enterprise of the Kaiping mine was now the property of a British-Belgian 
investors' syndicate. Yuan Shihkai was displeased:

The mines had not been started... [until] Li Hongzhang had... obtained imperial approval... they 
could not be alienated without imperial approval. Chang, said Yuan, was a person of humble origins 
to whom the

country had given great favors, but he had not been properly grateful... [had sold] mining land [to 
foreigners] without authority... deceived the throne... about Chinese-foreign joint management. If 
unpunished,

Chang's action might become a precedent... losses of the country's mines, the merchant's capital, 
and the dynasty's ports...

Chang Yenmao, ordered to recover the mines, went to London and sued.

In the process of browbeating Chang Yenmao, Herbert Hoover had signed a "Memorandum of 
Understanding" that the change of corporate form would not alter Chang Yenmao's status: that he 
would remain director-general of the mine "as
before .a€D That Memorandum was then ignored.

One British judge was shocked at the deception and dishonor, and ruled that the "Memorandum" was a 
valid instrument that had to be followed by the new company. Other British judges in London ruled 
that the "Memorandum" was a valid
instrument only insofar as the powers granted Chang by the memorandum were legal according to 
British corporate law, but that those powers weren't.

So British judges in London ultimately ruled that Hoover, as a mere employee of the new 
shareholders, had no power to sign a memorandum giving up the shareholdersa€™ power to choose the 
director-general they wanted. LLater on,
Herbert Hoover scrambled as he launched his political career to buy up and destroy all copies of 
the trial record containing his testimonya€”missing the one in Oxford's Bodleian Library.

In the end Yuan Shihkai started up another coal company with rights to much more extensive deposits 
in the area, and the two were amicably merged.
As Albert Feuerworker summed up the story of Kaiping in the 1959 Journal of Asian Studies:

Despite its pioneering achievements, Kaiping faltered. [like] other kuan-tu shang-pan enterprises 
in the late nineteenth century. The first was the lack of sufficient capital and the inability to 
raise more from domestic

sources. The second was the unpropitious political environment into which it was born. Little aid 
could be expected from the tottering Manchu regime either in the form of financial assistance to 
compensate for the
reluctance of private investors, or protection from foreign encroachment such as eventuated in 
British domination of this enterprise. [T]he contrast with the history of early industrial efforts 
in Meiji Japan is a

striking one...

Feuerworker sees three things going wrong: no private capital, a poor cash-strapped government that 
could not contribute public capital, and a weak government that could not protect incipient 
enterprises against rapacious foreigners. These
three were certainly important, yes, but I see three others that were even more important:

• a social-economic structure that could not find and promote executives, but instead replaced Tang 
Tingshu with a corrupt political fixer like Chang Yenmao

• a political-ritual culture that required that a modernizing governor focus his attention 
constantly on the enterprise and run interference to protect it from anti-modernizers

• an educational system that continued to turn out literati instead of engineers and thus required 
foreign technical personnel for everything

The fact is that, outside the charmed circles created by the extraterritorial foreign concessions, 
and to a slight degree the immediate span of control of the few modernizing governors, modern 
industries did not develop and modern
technologies were simply not applied in late imperial China. The typical Qing bureaucrat was 
hostile. But the typical Qing bureaucrat was also interested. There was rough equilibrium in how 
much money Qing bureaucrats were expected to
squeeze from landlords (not that much), merchants and traders (significant but limited), and others 
who needed government action (as much as they could grab).

New people doing new things had no customary, social, or countervailing power protections against 
their overlords. And overlords with limited intelligence, limited types of experience, and limited 
official tenure could not be expected to
nurture economic growth when there were loose assets to be stripped. And, as the shareholders of 
Kaiping and Chang Yenmao discovered, to flee into the arms of foreign legal systems was to flee 
from Scylla to Charybdis.

7: The End of Imperial China

The loss of the Japanese-Chinese War in 1895 brought matters to a head: was the government going to 
make a more serious effort to mobilize the country for modernization and progress or not? The 
Guangxu emperor said yes: he allied
himself with reformer Kang Youwei and launched the "hundred days of reform" of 1898. The rest of 
the Qing power structure, especially the dowager empress Cixia€”who we have seen before as patron 
and protector of modernizer Li
Hongzhanga€”said no. she imprisoned the emperor inside the palace and encouraged the grassroots 
a€oeFighters United for Justicea€D to see what would happen.

The attempt to mobilize anti-European sentiment to support the conservative regime failed, as an 
all-European expeditionary force relieved the besieged European embassies in Beijing, exacted 
indemnities, and wreaked destruction.

A tack back to the left was not possible. Kang Youwei's memoranda on such things as the partition 
of weak-government Poland by Russia, Prussia, and Austria and on the successful Meiji reforms in 
Japan could still be read, but Cixi had
executed Kang Youwei's younger brother and other reformers in 1898. And when Sun Yatsen had offered 
his services to Li Hongzhang in 1894, Li had sent him away.

Sun Yatsen built up a financial and propaganda network among Chinese emigrants beyond the reach of 
the government. Military politicians like Yuan Shihkai came to the conclusion that working with the 
Manchu court was useless. And at the
beginning of 1912 the last Chinese imperial dynasty fell, as Yuan Shihkai and his peers refused to 
suppress Sun Yatsen's rebellions. The six-year-old emperor abdicated. But the new Chinese 
republic's president was military politician Yuan
Shihkai. And his authority over his peers and near peersa€”army commanders, provincial governors, 
and other would-be warlordsa€”was nil. China descended into near-anarchy.

With China thus hors de combat and with the high civilizations of India and Islam in no better 
shape, the worlda€”that in 1870 the submarine telegraph cable and the iron-hulled ocean-going 
screw-propeller steamship were about to make a
very small world after all indeeda€’’would become a North Atlantic-dominated world for quite a 
while.

Leave a comment

Subscribe now

