Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1) Coming on October 6 and 7. Register now. This has been among the very top events that I have 
seen. Highly recommendeda€”and they have a very interesting virtual platform this year:

EconCon 2021: Building an Economy that Works for All of Us: a€~A virtual conference where you will 
hear from and connect with experts, organizers, and advocates shaping our economy. Now more than 
ever, we need once-in-a-generation policy changes and transformative investments in our 
communities. And they are possible if we can marshal the political will to enact needed policy 
change. Come connect, learn, and share what it will take for us to build
an economy that works for all of us! EconCon is co-hosted by Center for American Progress, Center 
for Popular Democracy, Community Change, DA“mos, Economic Policy Institute, Economic Security 
Project, Groundwork Collaborative, Omidyar Network, Roosevelt Institute, and Washington Center for 
Equitable Growth.a€!

LINK: chttps://econcon.com/>

2) Getting social insurance to people who need it during this plague has also entailed getting a 
lot of extra resources to people who really do not need it. Why? Precisely because our income 
support infrastructure is so weak. We could have done the income support job much more cheaply, and 
fairly. Not that I regret the effort. I do not regret it at all. But continuous improvement is the 
watchword. And there is a huge amount that we could have done beforehand,
and that we could do now, to improve:

Liz Hippie & Alix Gould-Werth: Weak Income Support Infrastructure Harms U.S. Workers & Their 
Families & Constrains Economic Growth: a€~People in the United States access income support from a 
wide range of programsa€!. Many people who need this support are blocked from accessing it. During 
the COVIDa€“19 crisis, the existing income support infrastructure has been wholly insufficienta€!. 
What is it, precisely, that stops people from accessing
income supports?a€! Eligibility rules are too strict. Benefits are too hard to access even when 
people are eligible. Benefits amounts are too lowa€!. These weaknesses in our nationa€™ s income 
support system prevent the U.S. economy from reaching its full potential through lowered labor 
force participation, a weakened macroeconomy during economic recessions, and underinvestment in the 
human capital of the next generation of workersa€!

LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/weak-income-support-infrastructure-harms-u-s-workers-and-their-families
-and-constrains-economic-growth/>

3) Looking forward to the arrival of the next Fearless Leader for Equitable Growth:

Michelle Holder: a€™ Whata€™ s wrong with this picture? NOTHING! Rakeen Mabud & I out having wine 
with me rocking my Groundwork tee shirt !a€!
LINK: «https: //twitter.com/mlholder999/status/1423031642843750406»

4) The critical path to dealing with a plague in a globalized era always was clear: Vaccine shots 
in the arms of everyone on the globe as fast as possible. With that, much becomes possible. Without 
that, little is possible. The Trump administration was totally clueless. And the Biden 
administration has not been nearly as clued in to this as I would've hoped. So this summer and fall 
are, once again, yes, a disaster:

J. Bradford DeLong: The Summer of Disaster: a€~The bottom line today is the same as it was a year 
ago, when stage-three trials first suggested that the mRNA vaccines against COVIDa€“19 were a huge 
success. The obvious next step is to cut through the bureaucracy and open the money spigots to 
mobilize as many resources as are needed to get high-quality vaccines into every arm in the world 
as fast as possible. We can sort out the financing and regulatory
approval issues later. It has been a full year since the biotech wizards gave us the tools that we 
need to beat the virus. Why are we still in the situation we are?a€!

LINK: 
<https://www.proiect-svndicate.org/commentarv/delta-variant-underscores-failed-pandemic-response-bv-
i-bradford-delong-2021-08>
Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) at least Arkansas governor Asa Hutchinson recognizes that his anti-mask grandstanding of the 
spring was criminal malfeasance on his part. The contrast with Florida governor DeSantis is clear:

Richard Fausset: As Virus Cases Spike in Arkansas, the Governor Backtracks on Masks: a€~Gov. Asa 
Hutchinson signed a law banning mask mandates. Now he wants to unravel ita€!. Hutchinson, a 
relatively moderate Republican, did not see much harm in it at the time. a€oeOur cases were at a 
very low point,a€D he recalled in a news conference on Tuesday. However, he added, a€oeln 
hindsight, I wish that it had not become law.a€Da€! Hutchinson has
backtracked, and is now urging state legislators to undo part of the law so school districts may 
adopt mask mandates before students return to their classrooms en massea€!

LINK: <https://www.nytimes.com/2021/08/Q3/us/covid-arkansas-mask-mandate 
,html?referringSource=articleShare>

2) The initial RCT results on the effectiveness and safety of the mRNA platform anti-plague 
vaccines were so totally, completely, ridiculously good. And these results have held up over the 
past nine months. Truly we had extraordinary luck, and skill, on our side here, in this narrow 
sector. Much kudos to the biowizards of BioNTech, Pfizer, and Moderna here:

Fernando P. Polack & al. for the C4591001 Clinical Trial Group: Safety and Efficacy of the BNT162b2 
mRNA Covida€ “19 Vaccine: a€™ A total of 43,548 participants underwent randomization, of whom 
43,448 received injections: 21,720 with BNT162b2 and 21,728 with placebo. There were 8 cases of 
Covida€“19 with onset at least 7 days after the second dose among participants assigned to receive 
BNT162b2 and 162 cases [with onset at least 7 days
after the second dose] among those assigned to placeboa€!

LINK: <https://www.neim.org/doi/full/10.1056/neimoa2034577>

Placebo


Days after Dose 1


Efficacy End-Point Subgroup     BNT162b2, 30 pg (N=21,669)

No. of participants Surveillance time

Placebo (N =21,686)

No. of participants Surveillance time

• I %                                                        * I \

VE (95% Cl)


Efficacy End-Point Subgroup BNT162b2, 30 pg (N=21,669)                 Placebo (N =21,686)

No. of participants Surveillance time No. of participants Surveillance time

person-yr (no. at risk)  person-yr (no. at risk)

VE (95% Cl)

percent


Covid-19 occurrence

After dose 1                       50

After dose 1 to before dose 2         39

Dose 2 to 7 days after dose 2          2

>7 Days after dose 2                 9

4.015 (21,314)         275

82

21

172

3.982 (21,258)    82.0 (75.6-86.9)

52.4 (29.5-68.4)

90.5 (61.0-98.9)

94.8 (89.8-97.6)

3) And the recovery is now firing on, if not all, at least half the cylinders. Now I have my 
fingers crossed that we can manage the Delta variant outbreaka€’’which probably means: delay it as 
long as we can to give the vaccine-resistant a better chance when Delta knocks on their noses, as 
it will:

Joe Weisenthal: July Non-Farm Payrolls Liveblog'. a€~Numbers at a Glance: July payrolls report 
shows a gain of 943,000 jobs versus an 870,000 median estimate in a Bloomberg survey. That also 
compares with a revised-upward June figure 938,000. Unemployment rate sank to 5.4% versus 5.7% 
projection. Year-over-year average hourly earnings growth advanced to 4.0%; estimate was 3.9%. 
Labor force participation rate met the projection of 61.7%a€l.
Leisure and hospitality workers getting 6.6% annualized wage growth (on a 24-month basis)a€l. Yes, 
prices of many goods have risen faster than people have expected, or would hope. But on the other 
hand, we continue to see a rapid drop in the unemployment rate, and robust wage growth. This can go 
a long way in helping to ameliorate a higher cost of living. All this being said, therea€™ s still 
a big hole to climb out of. As Nick Bunker at Indeed notes,
wea€™re still down about 8 million jobs from where we should bea€l. S&P futures are up 0.13%, while 
the 10-year yield is rising to just under 1.27%. In addition to the solid numbers for July, 
revisions were also quite solid, with Junea€™ s payroll growth changed upward from 850K to 
938Ka€!.. The spread of the delta variant has raised new concerns about the extent and pace of the 
recovery, particularly as it relates to a€oenormalizationa€n of consumption
and                                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
            work patterns. Meanwhile, the economy is still facing supply chain and inflationary 
stressesa€l

LINK: 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2021-08-06/iulv-non-farm-pavrolls-liveblog?srnd=oddlots&sre
f=vuYGislZ>

4) But do not overestimate how healthy the economy is. We are still down 8 million jobs:

Nick Bunker: a€~Lots to like, but leta€™ s hope the Delta variant does disrupt this great progress 
wea€™ re seeing3^\. Reminder: wea€™ re seeing strong payroll gains, but wea€™ re still down over 8 
million jobs from where we would have been absent the pandemica€l. The rise in employment came from 
both a rise in job finding and a decline in job losing. Really excited to see that pick up in job 
finding! And involuntary part-time work dropped as well!
a€l. Another strong month of payroll gains for low average wage industries. But employment there 
still down 6.8%a€l

LINK: <https:// twitter.com/nick_bunker/status/1423625810162950144>

5) 60 years of Republican politicians thinking that they will use the base by pandering to them, 
and they still have not learned about the problem of the sorcerera€™ s apprentice:

David Frum: a€™Republican anti-vaxxism offers a fascinating study of relationship between 
right-wing elites vs. rank-and-file. Elites first fomented anti-vax feeling for partisan purposes. 
They succeeded so well that they cannot/dare not now reverse. Elite leads; rank-and-file then 
constraint I
LINK: <https://twitter.com/AriPearlstein/status/1423622320766205955>

6) Very few people realize how profoundly il- and indeed anti-liberal John Stuart Mill could become 
when he shifted his gaze from the literate intellectual clerisy to the a€oelower ordersa€oe of 
society:

John Stuart Mill: Dark Satanic Millian Liberalism'. a€~Every one has a right to livea€l. The 
statea€l is bounda€l to provide that no person shall be born without its consenta€!. If the 
ordinary and spontaneous motives to self-restraint are removed, others must be substituteda€l. The 
guarantee of support could be freed from its injurious effects upon the minds and habits of the 
people, [only] if the relief, though ample in respect to necessaries, was accompanied
with conditions which they dislikeda€l some restraints on their freedoma€l privation of some 
indulgencesa€l [their] conditional needs not be one of physical suffering, or the dread of it, but 
only of restricted indulgence, and enforced rigidity of disciplined!

LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2018/05/dark-satanic-millian-liberalism-from-john-stuart-mill.html>


7) Does the Chinese Communist Party work for Chinaa€™ s bourgeoisie, or does Chinaa€™ s bourgeoisie 
work for the Chinese Communist Party? Under Xi Jinping the party has decided that it must take very 
strong steps to ensure the second. Stephen Roche thinks that the consequences for Chinaa€™ s 
economy will be devastating. I tend to agree. But I would make one more point, a point that I think 
is very important: the von Hayekian point that an
authoritarian party that seeks to eliminate all alternative sources of societal power than itself 
turn first into a kleptocracy, and then into an ossified bureaucratic kleptocracy. Xi Jinping can 
attempt to inculcate ultimate egalitarian aspirations into the DNA of the party, but everything in 
history tells us that he will not succeed. Wealth flows to power and undermines egalitarian 
aspirations and servant leadership. Avoiding that requires the multiple sources of societal
power   to check one another that Leninist doctrine prohibits:

Stephen S. Roach: Chinaa€™s Animal Spirits Deficit'. a€~A longtime China optimist fears the recent 
tech crackdowns represent a tipping point: When it comes to the Chinese economy, I have been a 
congenital optimist for over 25 years. But now I have serious doubts. The Chinese government has 
taken dead aim at its dynamic technology sector, the engine of Chinaa€™ s New Economy. Its recent 
actions are symptomatic of a deeper problem: the statea€™ s
efforts to control the energy of animal spirits. The Chinese Dream, President Xi Jinpinga€™ s 
aspirational vision of a a€oegreat modern socialist countrya€D by 2049, could now be at risk. At 
first, it seemed as if the authorities were concerned about a one-off personnel problem when they 
sent a stern message to the irreverent Jack Maa€l

LINK: <https://www.thewirechina.com/2021/Q8/01/chinas-animal-spirits-deficit/>

8) In many ways, the right wing of today in America is making the same arguments that the right 
wing made 60 years ago: a€oeOur formal system is colorblind, so what is the problem?a€D It is 
certainly the case that today the forms of discrimination on the basis of race that sail flying the 
false flag of formal color-blindness are much less vicious then the forms of 1960. In some other 
country this reduced viciousness might be a oretty big deal. But this is
America. If we do not do much better, and still claim to be Americans, then we are liars:

Matthew Yglesias: Martin Luther King Called for Radical Redistribution of Material Resources'. 
a€~Formal equality mostly characterized the United States before the civil rights revolution. The 
pre-Brown understanding was that separate accommodations were permissible as long as they were 
a€oeseparate but equal.a€Da€l Thata€™ s the context for Kinga€™ s speecha€l. King isna€™ ta€ I 
saying a€oeequal access to all public accommodations, whether run
by the government or private enterprise^”whata€™ s the big deal?a€D Hea€l wants real access to the 
ballot, not just a requirement that voter suppression measures be facially race-neutrala€l. And 
hea€™ s talking about generating meaningful economic opportunities. Ita€™ s called the March on 
Washington for Jobs and Justicea€I. Kinga€™ s version of that dream was the endpoint of a program 
of massive material redistribution to build a radically more
egalitarian societya€l

LINK: <https://www.slowboring.eom/p/martin-luther-king-called-for-radical>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€ I weblog-like newslettera€l here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)


7) Does the Chinese Communist Party work for Chinaa€™ s bourgeoisie, or does Chinaa€™ s bourgeoisie 
work for the Chinese Communist Party? Under Xi Jinping the party has decided that it must take very 
strong steps to ensure the second. Stephen Roche thinks that the consequences for Chinaa€™ s 
economy will be devastating. I tend to agree. But I would make one more point, a point that I think 
is very important: the von Hayekian point that an
authoritarian party that seeks to eliminate all alternative sources of societal power than itself 
turn first into a kleptocracy, and then into an ossified bureaucratic kleptocracy. Xi Jinping can 
attempt to inculcate ultimate egalitarian aspirations into the DNA of the party, but everything in 
history tells us that he will not succeed. Wealth flows to power and undermines egalitarian 
aspirations and servant leadership. Avoiding that requires the multiple sources of societal
power   to check one another that Leninist doctrine prohibits:

Stephen S. Roach: Chinaa€™s Animal Spirits Deficit: a€~A longtime China optimist fears the recent 
tech crackdowns represent a tipping point: When it comes to the Chinese economy, I have been a 
congenital optimist for over 25 years. But now I have serious doubts. The Chinese government has 
taken dead aim at its dynamic technology sector, the engine of Chinaa€™ s New Economy. Its recent 
actions are symptomatic of a deeper problem: the statea€™ s
efforts to control the energy of animal spirits. The Chinese Dream, President Xi Jinpinga€™ s 
aspirational vision of a a€oegreat modern socialist countrya€D by 2049, could now be at risk. At 
first, it seemed as if the authorities were concerned about a one-off personnel problem when they 
sent a stern message to the irreverent Jack Maa€!

LINK: <https://www.thewirechina.com/2021/08/01/chinas-animal-spirits-deficit/>

8) In many ways, the right wing of today in America is making the same arguments that the right 
wing made 60 years ago: a€oeOur formal system is colorblind, so what is the problem?a€D It is 
certainly the case that today the forms of discrimination on the basis of race that sail flying the 
false flag of formal color-blindness are much less vicious then the forms of 1960. In some other 
country this reduced viciousness might be a oretty big deal. But this is
America. If we do not do much better, and still claim to be Americans, then we are liars:

Matthew Yglesias: Martin Luther King Called for Radical Redistribution of Material Resources: 
a€~Formal equality mostly characterized the United States before the civil rights revolution. The 
pre-Brown understanding was that separate accommodations were permissible as long as they were 
a€oeseparate but equal.a€Da€! Thata€™ s the context for Kinga€™ s speecha€!. King isna€™ ta€! 
saying a€oeequal access to all public accommodations, whether run
by the government or private enterprise^ ”whata€™ s the big deal?a€D Hea€! wants real access to the 
ballot, not just a requirement that voter suppression measures be facially race-neutrala€!. And 
hea€™ s talking about generating meaningful economic opportunities. Ita€™ s called the March on 
Washington for Jobs and Justicea€!. Kinga€™ s version of that dream was the endpoint of a program 
of massive material redistribution to build a radically more
egalitarian societya€!

LINK: <https://www.slowboring.eom/p/martin-luther-king-called-for-radical>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality
Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

