Subscribe now

CONDITION: Semester Start wiA34 a Bang!

We are going to start with a history-of-economic-thought event! <https 
://n2pe.berkeley.edu/events/blessed-be-the-market/>:

Glory Liu @miss_glory

dY“£ Friday, Jan. 13th 1pm PT/4pm ET Join me, Jacob Soil, and @delong in a discussion of our recent 
books and the intellectual origins of market society, register/more info dY‘      
n2pe.berkeley.edu/events/blesseda€! @N2PE Network @USCDornsife @PrincetonUPress @BasicBooks

BLUM CENTER

The Market Giveth; The Market Taketh Away:

Blessed Be the Name of the Market?

From Cicero to Mitch McConnell, via Adam Smith
Friday, January 13, 2023 at 1:00pm Pacific Time via zoom

RSVP: https://n2pe.berkeley.edu/events/blessed-be-the-market/

An Online Symposium Featuring:

Glory M. Liu Jacob Soil       Brad DeLong


HARVARD

Faculty of Arts and Sciences

(i»MirTE( OH     IK frOCUU. SWOttS

Author of:

USCDomsifc

CUkwt of Lcnrfv Am mJ Sdrtuv


https://tinyurl.cofn/yicnbhv4

https :/A inyuri.com/4e8Shef7    https:/Ainyuricom/4zvcmn95

D A C T n


l~/ UNIVERSITY
PRESS

DA D 1

BOOKS

11:18PM a"™ Jan4.2023

10Likes4Re tweets

The Blum Center @Blum Center

Our own @delong will join a panel a€” cosponsored with @N2PE_Network a€” to discuss the 
intellectual origins of market society and how Adam Smith became an icon of American capitalism: 
Jan 13,1pm PT. RSVP now!

ADAM


SLOUCHING

AN ECONOMIC HISTORY
OF THE TWENTIETH CEHTURV

J. BRADFORD DELONG

SMITH’S

AMERICA

HOW A SCOTTISH P11 I LOSO 1’ H K K BECAME

n2pe.berkeley.eduThe Market Giveth; The Market Taketh Away: Blessed Be the Name of the Market? - 
Network for a New Political Economy The Network invites you to a conversation between Glory M. Liu 
(Harvard), Jacob Soil (USC), and Brad DeLong (Berkeley) about the intellectual origins of market 
society and how the Scottish philosopher Adam Smith became an icon of American
capitalism. The discussion builds on Dr. Liua€™ s new book Adama€!

11:38 PM r™ Jan 4,2023

4Likesl Re tweet


Share

FIRST: Aze Beginning of My Slouching Towards Utopia, wiA% My Commentary:

In retrospect, I needed a paragraph before this to start off Slouching Towards Utopia 
<bit.ly/3pP3Krk>. Too many people have been disappointed that the book is actually not much about 
the industrial research lab and the modern corporation, but rather about the consequences of the 
changes and transformations they midwifed. (It is very much about globalization.):

What I call the a€oelong twentieth centurya€D started with the watershed-boundary crossing events 
of around 1870a€”the triple emergence of globalization, the industrial research lab, and the modern 
corporation^’’which ushered in changes that began to pull the world out of the dire poverty that 
had been humanitya€™ s lot for the previous ten thousand years. What
I call the a€oelong twentieth centurya€D ended in 2010, with the worlda€™ s leading economic edge, 
the countries of the North Atlantic, still reeling from the Great Recession that had begun in 2008, 
and thereafter unable to resume economic growth at anything near the average pace that had been the 
rule since 1870. The years following 2010 were to bring large
system-destabilizing waves of political and cultural anger from masses of citizens, all upset in 
different ways and for different reasons at the failure of the system of the twentieth century to 
work for them as they thought that it should.

In between 1870 and 2010, things were marvelous and terrible, but by the standards of all of the 
rest of human history much more marvelous than terrible.

There we have my first claim about the history of the long 20th century: that, both compared to all 
past centuries and on an absolute scale, the history of the long 20th century was indeed, as Eric 
Hobsbawm says, the history of an Age of Extreme sa€”but those extremes were much much much more 
marvelous than terrible. The arc of long 20th-century history was, by and large and broadly, with
many hesitations, backward slippages, and complications, toward not justice but at least toward 
hope, hope for someday a truly human world.

The one-hundred and forty years 1870-2010 of the long twentieth century were, I strongly believe, 
the most consequential years of all humanitya€™ s centuries.

Here is my second claim: that the long 20th century was the most consequential century in 
humanitya€™ s history, ever. Why? Because back in 1870 humanity was still desperately poor. Now 
some of us are very richa€”the upper-middle classes of the global north are rich beyond the most 
fabulous dreams of luxury dreamed by previous ages. And most of us are, by the standards of all 
previous
centuries, very comfortable and long-lived indeed. And that all of us are not so is a great 
scandal.

And it was the first century in which the most important historical thread was what anyone would 
call the economic one, for it was the century that saw us end our near-universal dire material 
poverty.

Here is my third claim: That in the long 20th century, for the very first time in human history, 
the principal axis of history was economica€’’rather than cultural, ideological, religious, 
political, military-imperial, or what have you. Why was the long 20th century the first such 
century in which history was predominantly economic? Because before 1870 the economy was changing 
only slowly, too
slowly for people's lives at the end of a century to be that materially different from how they had 
been at the beginning. So the economy was thus the painted-scene backdrop behind the stage, rather 
than the action on the stage. (Now do note that you can still say that the principal axis of any 
millennium's history is economic, for over millennia things do change.)

But back up: what I have said here simply establishes that the principal axis of the history of the 
long 20th century could have been economica€”that the economy was changing and that enough economic 
damn things were happening one after the other to make it a player in history. But was it a lead 
actor? One of the major themes of my book is going to be: Yes, it was the lead actor.


My strong belief that history should focus on the long twentieth century stands in contrast to what 
othersa€”most notably the Marxist British historian Eric Hobsbawma€”have focused on and called the 
a€~short twentieth centurya€™, which lasted from the start of World War I in 1914 to the fall of 
the Soviet Union in 1991.

This is a minor digression: My Grand Narrative of the 20th century is not the only Grand Narrative 
one could construct. We have to have some Grand Narrative, some single most-important plot 
threada€”if we don't, we almost cannot think at all, for we really have almost no way to think 
other than in narrative. I think mine is the most important. But others disagree. And it is 
important never to
forget that every Grand Narrative allows and enables you to see some thingsa€”hopefully the most 
important things to youa€”very clearly indeed, but blocks your vision of other things.

Such others tend to see the nineteenth century as the long rise of democracy and capitalism, from 
1776 to 1914, and the short twentieth century as one in which really-existing socialism and fascism 
shake the world.

In fact, I believe that, in the western academy, the predominant major Grand Narrative, at least 
implicitly, of the 20th century is that it was really-existing socialism vs. fascism, and 
really-existing socialism knocking itself out in the process of winning its victory, leaving 
consumer capitalisma€”a€oethat old bitch gone in the teetha€D, as the other great post-WWII British 
Marxist historian E.P.
Thompson calls it chttps://marxists.org/archive/thompson-ep/1973/kolakowski.htma€!>, as the 
unworthy victor in the struggle over systems of political-economic organization.

Needless to say, I do not take this view.

I see the three-part mid-century struggle between the systems as, not a sideshow, but as something 
taking place outside of the center ring.
Histories of centuries, long or short, are by definition grand narrative histories, built to tell 
the authora€™ s desired story.

You cannot write a history of an entire century without committing yourself to some Grand 
Narrativea€’’without a spearpoint you cannot conduct a successful hunt, and without a central 
thread for them to follow, humans, who think in narratives, cannot grasp and remember your story. 
Thus the necessity of the spearpoint. It will be imperfect and "false". But it is necessary and 
essential. You
have to hold both the necessity and the imperfectness in your mind simultaneously, always, as you 
read and think. The map is not the territory. The map, however, is the map. Your history will then 
stand or fall based on how well you back that narrative.

Setting these years, 1914a€“1991, apart as a century makes it easy for Hobsbawm to tell the story 
he wants to tell.

Hobsbawma€™ s choice of period was calculated to provide heavy weight for the spearshaft behind the 
spearpoint of the particular Grand Narrative he wished to tell. Indeed, if you start and end on 
Hobsbawma€™ s datesa€”1917 and 1990a€”it is very hard not to wind up telling some version of his 
story. It may well not have the valence he gives it: of World Communism as the tragic and
doomed hero of the century, defeating fascism but being so poisoned by the circumstances of its 
development and struggle that it then expires after a long decline, leaving its unworthy rival 
consumer capitalism in control, and thus closing off humanity's road to utopia. The 1917-1990 short 
20th century can be told with Frank Fukuyama's "end of history" valence instead. But, as I said, 
while that
is certainly a story, I do not think it is THE story that people 500 or 1000 years from now will 
.think is important and tell when they tell the story of the years on both sides of 1950.

But it does so at the price of missing much of what I strongly believe is the bigger, more 
important story.

I really dona€™t think either really-existing socialism or fascism is, in the long run of human 
destiny, worthy of being a protagonist (or an antagonist) in big-think broad-sweep history. I mean: 
really-existing socialism was a dead end, a false path, a horrible warning in terms of 
political-economic systems. And as for fascism... well... if it turns out that future historians 
want to tell political
history not as a whig progressive but rather as an Aristotelian 
alternation-and-decay-and-replacement-of-rA©gimes story, then fascism will have its place as a form 
of tyranny in the age of mass and social media, much as Thoukydides discusses the role of 
Peisistratos and his supposed championing of the cause of the hyperakrioia€.”with the exception 
that Peisistratos did actually have policies
to boost the prosperity of the hyperakrioi, and did make Athens great. But if we do better than 
Aristotelian alternation in political rA©gimes in the long run, fascism and its cousins will also 
be seen as dead ends, horrible warnings, stories that we tell to remind us how horrible people can 
be to one another, rather than the protagonist of some Grand Narrative principal thread of human 
history.

The bigger, more important story is the one that runs from about 1870 to 2010, from humanitya€™ s 
circa-1870 success in unlocking the gate that had kept it in dire poverty, up to its circa-2010 
failure to maintain the pace of the rapid upward trajectory in human wealth that the earlier 
success had set in motion.

I think that is the worthy story of the history of the 20th century has as its protagonist neither 
really-existing socialism, nor really the a€oefree worlda€D that triumphed over the 
totalitarianisms. I think that the worthy story is, rather, humanitya€™ s escape from Malthusian 
povertya€”and from societies in which the class of people with leisure to think deeply and 
nutrition to think about
something other .than how hungry they are is small, and is composed of those who have figured out 
how to unproductively take an outsized share by force and fraud. This escape from the realm of 
material necessity into the realm of freedom, choice, and options is, I think, the proper 
storya€”and the big story. And its proper protagonist is humanity.

And if you havena€™t bought the book, I have now gotten enough favorable feedback from non-friends 
to be able to very confidently say: you really should but ita€”and I am not just saying that 
because I am the author. <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ: The Entrepreneurial State:

No answers, but lots of good questions:

Caleb Whatney: But Seriously, How Do We Make an Entrepreneurial State?: a€.~How to Make an 
Entrepreneurial State: Why Innovation Needs Bureaucracy

by Rainer Kattel, Wolfgang Drechsler, and Erkki Karoa€! Building ona€! Mariana Mazzucato... a fiery 
defense of the essential role the public sector will need to play in supporting innovation^!. But 
without a clear plan for improving state capacity, such efforts often prove to be wasteful and 
ineffective.  How to Make an Entrepreneurial State gets mired in high-level

abstractions and historical case studies, and ultimately neglects practical questions. A better 
title for the book might be a€oeWhy to Make an Entrepreneurial Statea€Da€”the a€oeHowa€D is 
scarcely to be founda€!. Advanced Research Projects Agency, the Japanese Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry, and the Swedish innovation agency Vinnovaa€! certain
themesa€! repeata€! the need for flexible hiring rules, the importance of attracting a nationa€™ s 
best and brightest into public service, and the significance of overarching a€oemissionsa€D....

So, how does one actually make an entrepreneurial state? There is no single correct model, and in 
fact, an essential element of entrepreneurship is the ability to correct course and revise plans in 
real timea€L Nimble new agencies are started to meet new challengesa€! but eventually solidify into 
a a€oenormala€na€! structure.  We need to think carefully about the

bureaucratic incentives to experiment. And by a€oeexperimenta€na€! I mean the scientific sense of 
experimental design, data collection, and evaluationa€l. One of the ongoing public reckonings 
relevant to the present discussion is why, exactly, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
(CDC) failed so extensively at controlling and preventing diseasea€!. At
nearly every turn, the CDC slow-walked the response and avoided taking proactive stepsa€!. Rochelle 
Walensky has acknowledged as much and specifically cited the tendency of the agency to act like an 
academic institution rather than an emergency respondera€l. This is a startling contrast with the 
origins of the CDC in the 1940s as a quasi arm of the U.S.
militarya€l. The truth is that we dona€™t really know how to make an entrepreneurial state. 
Therea€™ s no single template that can be applied uniformly to rescue us from bureaucratic 
complacency. But the nature of entrepreneurship is to go out there and try new things...

Leave a comment

BRIEFLY NOTED:

ONE IMAGE: Aze House Right Now Has Zero Members:

House Session - January 4, 2023 s


NOMINATIONS FOR OFFICE OF SPEAKER

Pursuant to law and precedent, the Clerk directed the Reading Clerk to
call the roll for the Election of the Speaker. Accordingly, the Honorable
Mike Gallagher of Wisconsin placed the name of the Honorable Kevin
McCarthy into nomination for the Office of Speaker, the Honorable Pete
Aguilar   of California placed the name of the Honorable Hakeem S.
Jeffries                                                           into nomination for the Office 
of Speaker, and the Honorable Chip

Roy of Texas placed the name of the Honorable Byron Donalds into
nomination for tho Offino of Snoakor No othor nominations worn nut


Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

• Marty Weitzman: Prices vs. Quantitiesa€! The best comparative systems paper ever written, IMHO.

•  Martin Sandbu: When wage inflation is good for voua€! As I sav. reneatedlv. we need a theory of 
the natural rate of inflation if we are to do macro orooerlv at all. We do not have one.


•  Marcelo Rinesi: Azis by Noah Smith May Well Be Better A34an Anything I Read in All 2022, & 
BRIEFLY NOTED: a€~The near-future of AI in science IMHO looks more like this: https 
://arxiv.org/abs/2212.13254 Using ML to augment existing knowledge in areas so complex that all the 
data we have ever had is probably not enough to even get a good handle on things without a
lot of previous theorya€! yes. I have been told that Chat-GPT3 has been trained on half the words 
on the Internet, and there are not that many more words. That implies that this particular lemon 
has already been nearly squeezed..

• Matt Yglesias: American transit agencies should prioritize ridership over other goals: a€~It's 
the only way to get costs under controla€!. Wasting money is really, really easy when nobody is 
specifically telling you not to. Ita€™ s no secret that the California High-Speed Rail Authority is 
not prioritizing cost-effectiveness; they openly brag about their emphasis       on other goals, 
like
small business participation and the creation of good-paying jobsa€! A very good plea for tuning 
our bureaucratic organization's so that they each have a mission to do one good thing, and only one 
good thing.

• David Glasner: My Paper a€oeRobert Lucas and the Pretense of ScienceaCD Is now Available on SSRN 
chttps ://papers .ssrn .com/ sol3/papers .cfm?abstract id=4260708>a€! Cutting-edge fashionable 
macro theory, since the start of my career still seems to me like a nightmare, from which we are 
unsuccessfully, struggling to awake.

• Richard Henderson: Five Things You Need to Know to Start Your Day: ^“Fed Frustration: Federal 
Reserve officials last month affirmed their resolvea€! cautioned against underestimating their will 
to keep interest rates higha€!. The tone of the minutes ofa€! Dec. 13-14 gathering suggested 
frustration that this was undermining the central banka€™ s efforts         to bring price
pressures under controla€! This plus the next four are powerful straws in the wind that the biggest 
macroeconomic risk right now is that the Federal Reserve over does it, and winds us back in a 
possibly deep recession and secular stagnation.

•  Colby Smith: US inflation has not a€~turned the corner yeta€™: a€~Gita Gopinath, deputy managing 
director of the IMF, said there is a a€~very narrow patha€™ for the US to avoid a recession this 
yeara€!. It is too early for the Federal Reserve to declare victorya€!. Gita GopinathaC! urged the 
US central bank to press ahead with rate rises this year despite a recent moderation
in headline inflationa€!

•  Kristine Aquino: Fed resolve: a€~The Fed underlined its determination to stamp out inflation in 
the minutes released yesterday for the December meeting of the FOMC. Officials noted that a 
"misperception" of the Fed's reaction function would complicate the bank's goal of restoring price 
stabilitya€!

•  Kristine Aquino: Disappearing jobs: a€~While official data still seem to indicate a strong US 
jobs marketa€! anecdotal evidence suggests a pocket of weakness in tech. Amazon is laying off more 
than 18,000 employees a€” the biggest reduction in its history. And Salesforce will cut about 10% 
of its workforce because it said it hired too many people during the pandemica€!

•  Chris Anstey: The Great Escape: a€~With central banks around the world still engaged in the most 
aggressive monetary tightening drive in decades, now wouldna€™ t seem to be an ideal moment to 
publish a book titled a€oeFiscal Policy Under Low Rates.a€D Neverthelessa€! Olivier Blanchard says 
his worka€! embodies an eminently relevant framework for policymakers
going forward. For one thing, he thinks the era of relatively low interest rates isna€™t over...

•  Dan Gillmor: Journalists (And Others) Should Leave Twitter. Herea€™ s How They Can Get Started: 
a€~Journalists a€” among many information providers and users a€” should move to decentralized 
systems where they have control of what they say and how they distribute it. And philanthropic 
organizations have a major role to play. Here is a way forwarda€! Vote-with-your-
feet for a better public sphere!

•  Zvi Mowshowitz: Covid 1/5/23: Various XBB Takes: a€~People doing their Obligatory Thread on 
Latest Variant, in this case XBB. All reach broadly compatible conclusionsa€!. 1. XBB is taking 
over. 2. XBB is no more or less dangerous than previous variants. 3. It will however extend the 
winter wave longer than it would have lasteda€! Get yourself boosted and re-boosted,
people!

Get 33% off a group subscription

AJs:

One way to understand the Neoliberal Turn is that social democracya€™ s focus on equality and on 
the welfare rights of citizens ran into the buzzsaw of Aristotle's principle that justice requires 
treating equals equally, but unequals unequally. And that the a€ceunequalsa€D here are those who 
are perceived as not trying to hold up their end of the social contract. This remains an enormous
problema€’’especially when a majority or a near-majority judges, that those whose skin is a 
different color or who speak with a different accent, or ipso facto, not holding up their end of 
the social contract:

Sam Freedman: The Changing Politics of Aspiration + Fairness: a€~Ia€™ m interested ina€! particular 
changes in how voters see key concepts like a€ceaspirationa€D and a€oefairnessa€n. Back in the 90s 
it was a new approach to these ideas that underpinned the transformation ofa€! Laboua€!. Phillip 
Goulda€! Tony Blair and Peter Mandelsona€! focus on the
aspirational working and lower middle classes, a consequence of Goulda€™ s own early life growing 
up in Woking. He was enormously frustrated by the inability of Labour in the 80s and early 90s to 
speak to these voters and their entirely reasonable desire for a better life, a higher wage, a new 
car, or a refitted kitchen. The Tories did seem able to offer this, whether by
allowing people to own their council flat, offering shares in newly privatised companies that could 
be sold on for profit, or through tax cuts. All of this came at the price of higher inequality, 
which was why Labour fought it all so hard. But they discovered that seeking to defend the most 
vulnerable groups wasna€™ t enough, by itself, to win an election.

The left-wing conception of fairness as equality, Gould argued, simply didna€™ t fit with the 
electorate^™ s model: a€oeThe view was growing that those who worked hard and behaved responsibly 
were not being fairly rewarded, while others made gains they did not deserve, had not worked for, 
were not entitled toa€!. When people are asked what fairness means
they invariably answer by one form or another of the same formulation: stop people abusing the 
system, give people who work hard a fair deal.a€Da€! Blair was the son of an aspirational Tory, for 
him it wasna€™t just strategy or triangulation, it was an essential part of his political identity. 
For Starmer and most of the current shadow cabinet it feels a bit more strained
because they were brought up believing more in the traditional Labour model of fairnessa€!. In 1992 
Gould, Blair and Brown tried to imbue Labour with a more aspirational message but Kinnock and Smith 
couldna€™t make it stick, and never really got it, at least not in such a visceral way. Some 
commentators think the same could still happen to Starmera€!

Ah! Wow! Very interesting!

Porlock: Comment on Twitter on Fire!, & BRIEFLY NOTED: a€~In re: J M Keynes: a€oeThe 20th century 
transformation of the word a€~economya€™ to mean not household (or public) stewardship of 
resources, but rather frugalitya€!a€D Ahem. In Marlowe's Faust, Dr Faustus says, a€oeBid Onkaymeon 
[sp?] farewella€D, referring the Greek a€oeOn kai me
ona€U, meaning a€oebeing and not beinga€D: the kind of thing that philosophers have worried over 
from the earliest times. An early edition (the first, I think) corrected this to the simple and 
understandable and wrong a€oeBid Economy farewella€D. Or so I have read. I pondered this for a time 
till I realized that Economy here meant Frugality, to which Faustus could
bid farewell now that he had Mephistopheles working for him. Hence, not just a 20th century 
corruption. [All of this subject to correction by those who know literary history better than I]a€!

Ah. I had not realized that Jeffersona€™ s Manual is what is controlling us now:

Matt Tait: The House has No Members and the Bootstrapping of Power: a€~If therea€™ s no 
Representatives from the previous Congress, and therea€™ s not (yet) any sworn-in Representatives 
from the new Congress, then by what authority is anyone in that chamber even electing a Speaker in 
the first place? Thata€™ s a great questiona€! a fun question to work
througha€!. Bootstrapping authorities and power-transfer ceremonies are fascinating to mea€!. The 
oath being a hard requirement for transitioning from a Representative-elect to a full member comes 
directly from Article IVa€!. Not only does the House have no members; it has no Rules eithera€!. 
What happens when the House has no Rules? The answer is we look
first    to the Constitution itself, and then to general parliamentary law, as described in the 
applicable provisions of Jefferson's Manuala€.\. Jeffersona€™ s Manual is actually a fantastic 
example in its own right of Americaa€™ s constitution that dona€™ t sit in the main body of the 
Constitution itself, in a way that Britain embraces and America likes to pretend isna€™ t
the casea€!. These rulesa€! provide for the Clerk of the House to Chair debate in the chamber until 
a Speaker is selected; for debate to occur at all; and for certain motions (such as a motion to 
adjourn) to be passed; for the yays and nays to be counted; and for basically everything else to 
fall to a ruling by the Chair which can be appealeda€!

I confess I do not see where the 2026 earnings expectations of $9.00 a share are coming from:

Andrew Dickson: QK, 2022 was a disaster for Tesla. What next?: Ita€™ s all about fundamentals'. 
a€~Fundamentals were exceptional over the past few yearsa€!. Sellsidea€! in early 2020 projected 
that the companya€™ s earnings-per-share three years out (in 2023) would be about $1.80a€! $28 a 
sharea€! an out-year P/E ofa€! 16. Today, 2026 expectations are

$8.82, and the stock isa€! $ 110a€!. A fivefold increase in the fundamental expectations of the 
firm, and nearly a fourfold increase in the share price. Sure, yes, when the stock flirted with 
$400 last year, thing were a bit nuttya€”but is it that crazy today?a€! Sellside analysts 
anticipate 25 per cent EPS growtha€!. If youa€! love $TSLA, then model it out and buy it; and if
you end up overshooting, then sell ita€!. You may have views abouta€! wild card[s in]a€! the 
valuation of Tesla. But the main driver will probably remain the automotive business. In the 
meantime, every stocka€! is a sell at some price, and everything is a buy at some price too. That 
isna€™ t Drew Dickson speaking, ita€™ s Ben Grahama€!

Trend lines for existing institutions are more likely than not to slowly head south: entropy rules, 
offset by innovation and entrepreurial institution-building. That said, U.S. higher education is 
still by far the best in the world: slow decline is still very damned good:

Dan Drezner: Is Higher Education Headed in the Wrong Direction?: Thoughts on a Tyler Cowen column'. 
a€~The past few years have been hard in the ivory tower. The growing bureaucratizationa€! has been 
a cognitive drag. In order to appease every university directive, my course syllabi are beginning 
to resemble the terms-of-service agreements that folks never
reada€!. DEIa€! well-intentioneda€! institutionalized^! to make it seem morea€! an exercise in 
performativitya€!. The erosion of trust in expertise, the polarization of public attitudes, and the 
rise of a plutocratic class that believes in disruption A^ber allesa€.”are still therea€!. If 
anything, Cowen misses a few issues, like explicit state efforts to censor university
instruction, the decline in international students affecting the bottom line of universities, and 
the adjunctification of higher educationa€!. That said... I am unconvinced by Cowena€™ s claim that 
the grass is greener somewhere elsea€!. [And] the optimist in me is not persuaded that the 
trendlines will continue to go southa€!. What do you think?a€!

Subscribe now
Leave a comment



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Donate Subscriptions

