TTh 8:00-9:30
OK:

Now I have to write 4 40 page essaysa€!

0. Introduction

2022-01-17 Tu: Introduction: Economic Growth in Historical Perspective

1. Ensorcelled by the Devil of Malthus

2022-01-19 Th: Production, Fertility, & Malthusian Equilibrium
2022-01-24 Tu: Domination & Inequality in Malthusian Economies
2022-01-26 Th: Efflorescences & Dark Ages

2022-01-31 Tu: a€oeModerna€D Sectors & Attitudes in the Malthusian Age

2. Slow Invention & Innovation Before 1870

2022-02-02 Th: Intellectual Creativity in Pre-1500 Civilizationsa€’’Technological Creativity
2022-02-07 Tu: The Purpose of Ideas in Pre-1500 Civilizations

2022-02-09 Th: Understanding Technology in Classical Antiquity

2022-02-14 Tu: Technological Development in the Late-Antiquity Pause & the MediAIval Age

3. Why the Hinge in 1870 in the Dover Circle?

2022-02-16 Th: Market Sectors in Malthusian Economies
2022-02-21 Tu: Rule-of-Law & Social Plasticity

2022-02-23 Th: Af

2022-02-28 Tu: After Columbus
2022-03-02 Tu: After Steampower
2022-03-07 Tu: The Hinge of 1870

4. The Post-1870 Build-Out of Industrial & Post-Industrial Technology

2022-03-09 Th: The Industrialization of Agriculture
2022-03-14 Tu: Utilizing Stored Sunlight

2022-03-16 Th: From Commercial Gunpowder-Empire to Steampower & Beyond
2022-03-21 Tu: The Second Industrial Revolution

2022-03-23 Th: Mass Production

2022-04-04 Tu: The Global Value-Chain Economy
2022-04-06 Th: Into the Info-Biotech Economy

5. The Political Economy of Modern Economic Growth Society

2022-04-11 Th:

2022-04-13 Th:

2022-04-18 Tu:

2022-04-20 Th:

6. Conclusion

2022-04-25 Tu: The Future of Economic Growth
2022-04-27 Th: Review & Conclusion

I wish I had answers to give Adam to the questions he asks:

•  Earlier this fall at Berkeley the extremely learned Robert Brenner lectured me for 45 minutes 
about how the true causally-thin nexus came much earlier: with the emergence, in the two centuries 
after the Black Death, in the 300 mile-radius circle around Dover, of market-bourgeois class 
relations, and thus the transformation of (a) a society of peasants, knights, lords, and
the occasional merchant into (b) a society of laborers, craftsman, merchants, farmers, landlords, 
mercenaries, and plutocrat-politicians.

• Had we managed to get Joel Mokyr as a discussant at the SSHA, he would surely have said that the 
causally-thin counterfactual nexus word was the founding of the Royal Society and nullius in verba, 
a€oenothing by worda€D. This shift from (a) ideas spreading primarily because they are useful to an 
upper class A©lite running a force-and-fraud domination-and-
exploitation scheme on the rest of society, to (b) ideas spreading because they are true of 
empirical reality.

•  Nate Rosenberg and David Mowery would say that it was the diffusion of the steam engine that 
created a critical mass of engineers in the first two-thirds of the 1800s that was the key, and 
that once you had that critical mass the development f the industrial research lab was inevitable. 
Alfred DuPont Chandler would say similar things about the railroad: you had to build a
corporation as we know it to run a railroad, and, once done, the advantages of diffusing that 
organizational form to other technology-frontier industries would become obvious.

• Others would find different causally-thin critical nexuses:

o The consequences of the British-Dutch naval victories in the Wars of the League of Augsburg and 
of the Spanish Succession.

o The Glorious Revolution of 1688.

o Emperor Heinrich IV Salier, reportedly standing in the snow outside of the castle at Canossa in 
1077, and the establishment there and then of the principle that the law is not just a tool for but 
binds even the most powerful.

o Or you might even go back to the emergence of a strict monotheisma€”a God focused not on this 
world but on heaven and hella€”in which case in this world one should praise the Lord, yes, but 
what is important here and now is to pass the ammunition.

I wish I had a good answer. But already this year both Mark Koyama and Jared Rubin and Oded Galor 
have put in their own bids on these issues, set forth their own excellent analyses:

Most social energy back then was devoted to the elite's (a) running a force-and-fraud, 
exploitation-and-domination machine, (b) elbowing other potential elites out of the way, and then 
(c) utilizing their ill-gotten gains in building a high culture in which the non-elite were 
villains and churns.
After 1870, technological progress took off like a rocket. It rapidly became clear that there was a 
good chance that humanity would soon, in historical timescales, gain the technological powers to 
bake a sufficiently large economic pie that everybody could have enough.

Then, having baked a sufficiently large, Economic pie, all humanity would have to do is solve the 
second order problems of slicing the pie, and then tasting the pie a€“ utilizing our 
soon-to-be-immense collective wealth to enable people to flourish, to live lives that were safe, 
secure, healthy, and happy.
Before 1870, the road to anything one might claim as even a semi-utopia was closed. After 1870, the 
road was open.

What is that? You say that 1712 and the invention of the steam engine, not 1870, is the hinge of 
history? Maybe you are right. But I think you're probably not. Globally, economic growth from 1770 
to 1870, in the century of the steam engine, was insufficient for humanity to gain more than a few 
steps in the race betweentechnological invention and Malthusian fertility.Over 1770 to
1860, only perhaps 1/3 of growth comes from technological progress proper. The second third comes 
from concentrating the industry of the world in the place where manufacturing production is most 
efficient. The last third comes from the natural resource bonanza of extremely cheap coal because 
the last glaciers scraped off all therock that had covered it. But the extremely cheap
cold was close to gone by 1870. And you can only globalize and gain the efficiency benefits from 
concentrating manufacturing once.

Absent the technological-acceleration sea-change in 1870,1 claim that the most likely 
counterfactual would be for growth to slow after 1870 and humanity to remain under the Malthusian 
harrow in a a Steampunk World.


But, for the purpose of my book, this is a side issue. We can debate 1712 or 1870 until the cows 
come home. Indeed, economic historians will debate it as long as the human species lasts—and 
perhaps longer. My book wants to look forward from 1870, not backward at the earlier 1800s, the 
1700s, and the times before.

while the U.S. was a€oethe furnace where the future was being forgeda€D my probably excessive focus 
on it as in some sense the leading point-guard of humanitya€™ s slouch towards utopia harmed the 
book. A greater share of my points could and should have been made by drawing examples from 
elsewhere in the global north rather than falling-back on the U.S. examples with
which I am most comfortable.

while we have made extraordinary progress at figuring out how to bake a sufficiently large economic 
pie so that, potentially, everyone can have enough, the problems of slicing and tasting that 
economic pie have completely flummoxed us. Thus while we are rich and powerful beyond the wildest 
dreams of avarice of previous centuries, that is all. We can neither equitably distribute
our wealth nor properly utilize it to live wisely and well, so that people feel safe and secure, 
and live lives in which they are healthy and happy. To say a€oehave not been distributed 
particularly evenlya€D and a€oeour desires have growna€D catches only half of it. Distribution has 
not been inept, but has been positively poisonous. And utilization has fallen vastly short not just
because of our rising expectations: people 200 years ago would also have hoped along with us for a 
world in which they were not stalked by flying killer robots, and in which sinister people in steel 
and glass towers did not attempt to hypnotize them via dopamine loops to glue their eyes to screens 
in terror so they could be sold fake diabetes cures and crypto grifts.

When it comes to Matta€™ s criticisms [8] through [10], however, I do want to push back: I really 
think that the Grand Narrative of the Long 20th Century is success at baking and failure at slicing 
and tasting a sufficiently large econoic pie, and that while we do not know what the Grand 
Narrative of the era that started sometime after 2000 will be, it will be something different. I do
see fossil-fuel emissions-generated global warming as a huge challenge not so much because of 
technocratic and geoengineering concerns but because of political economy concernsa€”and I note, in 
support of that belief, that Matt Klein cannot bring himself to say a€oeglobal warminga€D, let 
along a€oefossil-fuel emissions-generated global warminga€D. As for the causes of the
Great Depression, I see the Bank of France and the Federal Reserve as mediator-causes in the 
Friedman-Schwartz story, and debt as an accelerant of an ongoing process rather than as a spark.

We humans are an anthology intelligence both with respect to knowledge and information and with 
respect to work and production. Put the one side are we manage ourselves in the realm of thought. 
How do we manage ourselves in the realm of work and production? Or, rather, how does each of us try 
to tune our by-now extremely sophisticated and fine division of labor so that we
can accomplish our own purposes?

Well, basically, there are three ways that we can appropriate for ourselves things out of the 
common pool created by our extremely sophisticated division of labor in production and work. We can 
do so by force, by fraud, or by win-win exchange. Which of those we choose is determined by how 
much we regard ourselves as invested in the well-being of others, how much effort each
of these modes of action is for us, and how valuable is the work of those whose efforts we are 
trying to control and appropriate. When something becomes or when someonea€™ s work becomes more 
valuable, it is worth more of our energy to appropriated”and this can either be good or bad for 
those who make all the valuable things, depending:

[11] Delong has a throwaway comment that the slowdown in productivity growth (as opposed to total 
growth) since 1970 could be explained in part by the fact that a€oeenergy diverted away from 
producing more and into producing cleaner would quickly show up in lower wage increases and 
profitsa€D (431). Ia€™m not sure I buy this but I would have
appreciated more of an explanation either way...

[12]Finally, I would have liked more on this (453): a€oelt is normal for a plutocratic elite, once 
formed, to use its political power to shape the economy to its own advantages. And it is normal for 
this to put a drag on economic growth. Rapid growth like that which occurred between 1945 and 1973, 
after all, requires creative destruction; and, because it is the
plutocratsa€™ wealth that is being destroyed, they are unlikely to encourage it.a€D A different 
version of the book would have used this to frame a long discussion of antitrust and public choice 
theory. More generally, I would love to know the extent to which the post-1870 boom was due to the 
suppression of this a€cenormala€O behavior. If so, what
caused that? And how can we restore the dynamism and competition that Schumpeter recognized was so 
essential for progress?a€!

1/ How do you define progress?

Three elements:

First, getting out from under the hammer of necessity, which for most of human history has been the 
Harrow of Malthus: A world in which you see half your babies die, your life expectancy is 25, you 
go to bed hungry lots of the time, and much of your planning has to be simply, "How do I keep this 
biological machine going for one day?" Progress is getting
away from that: acquiring power to manipulate nature, and power to successfully, and politely, and 
peacefully organize humans to actually get things done. Progress is power to escape from the 
kingdom of necessity, and enter the kingdom of freedom.

Second, progress has to be relatively egalitarian. An A©lite of thugs with spears assisted by tame 
accountants, propagandists, and bureaucrats running a force-and-fraud 
exploitation-extraction-and-domination grift rA©gime does not become a€oeprogressa€D when you add 
laser weapons to it. Ming the Merciless, Emperor of Mongo, is not what we are looking
for.

And third, there's the question of actually using your power to manipulate nature and figure out 
how to organize ourselves, so we can actually have a sophisticated functioning, hence highly 
productive division of the labor, figuring out what we then want to do, in order that we live lives 
is worth living.

2/ What are the essential elements required for progress to happen?

Technological powera€”plus what humans want in terms of reward and respect, so that we can organize 
ourselves in what Charlie from Trier said the goal was: a€oea free society of associated 
producersa€D. People not only need to have material stuff and social powers to achieve their 
purposes, they also need to feel that they are respected, and even more they
need to feel that they're making a contribution. Those three elements have to be built on top of 
technological competence and excellence. As for the utilization of technological power, you have 
got to say: "Let 100 flowers bloom." Progress will be when people can thoughtfully let their best 
selves choose what the goals they wish to accomplish in their lives are

3/ What would a a€oeprogress agendaa€D look like? What changes are required in how we approach our 
most significant problems?

Much more attention to the downsides of technology. Winston Churchill, writing after World War I, 
looking backward, noted how the people like him who had marveled at all the technological 
inventions of 1870 to 1914 had not fully realized what that meant for how destructive war would be. 
And Churchill had been First Lord of the Admiralty: the person in
charge of procuring the guns with the 15-inch barrels that throw multi-ton shells 15 miles where 
they then go boom. Where our technology is taking us, and how we need to form it in such a way that 
it empowers people rather than bureaucracies and the... I don't want to say remnants, but the 
functioning force-and-fraud exploitation, extraction, and domination
machine, the thugs with spears with their tame accountants, propagandists, and bureaucrats. Stewart 
Brand's Whole Earth Catalog, Steve Jobs and company's 1984 Macintosh commercial. Technology in the 
service of the individual human mind, rather than technology in terms of the inhuman systems that 
dominate us all.

4/ What do you see as some of the most significant barriers to progress right now?

We are jumped-up East African Plains Apes, with brains arely competent to figure out where we left 
the keys in the morning. To ask us to think deeply and well about how to organize an 8 billion-node 
anthology intelligence for collective progress and human betterment, is well beyond us. The 
barriers are our fear and contempt, for when we get ourselves in a
good place and recognize that we might well have been the people on the other side of the globe who 
have big problems then we can pull out an enormous altruistic, charitable effort to help people far 
away who we never knew and never will know. We have been growing this moral sense for quite a long 
time. It is a very good sense to grow.

5/ What are the easiest opportunities for progress in your opinion? What are the areas in which a 
few critical interventions or changes could unlock a disproportionate amount of progress?

The government should be funding a lot more research and development. Michael Kremer's ideas about 
big prizes for actually accomplishing missions. The market is a very nice mercenary institution in 
its place. But there is absolutely no way that it can generate the right kind and right amount of 
science and technological development. Science is an absolutely
wonderful fiduciary institution, as Michael Polanyi would have put it, but it generates knowledge 
that's relatively abstract: the kinds of knowledge that a person or a team can discovered then get 
enormous reputation credit for. There's this space in the middle of developing useful technologies 
and figuring how to apply them. It requires the public spirit and
the enthusiasm about deploying and disseminating it of the scientist, but also the focus on the 
bottom line and a€oelet's make this actually work cheaply at scale" that the market-driven 
corporation can achieve. So we really need something in the middle: something that marries the 
Cathedral and the Bazaar.

6/ And conversely, what do you see as the most important places we need to make progress (even if 
ita€™ s going to be more difficult)?

We have managed to successfully transfer public health technology all around the glob. Pretty much 
everyone's life expectancy at birth now is 70 or more, But the world is still extraordinarily, 
astonishingly unequa: there are still 500 million of our brothers and sisters who live at less than 
$3 a day in real terms. And, even in the United States, greater San
Francisco is four times as rich as rural Mississippi.

Figuring out how to do for the ability to productively contribute to the global division of social 
labor what we figured out how to do in spreading public health technologies around the world 
successfullya€’’that is job one. Job two is to push ahead the technological frontier. And, of 
course, then there are jobs three and jobs four: keep nuclear weapons from
blowing us up, and keep global warming from cooking the planet, probably by causing someone to use 
nuclear weapons.

The fact that the monsoon is 200 miles south of where it ought to be this year, with consequences 
that are not funa€”that is not a canary in the coal mine. It's a giant awk that's screeching at 
maximum volume.

7/ People seem to be more pessimistic about the potential for progress moving forward than they 
have been in the past. Do you think thata€™ s true and if so, why?

No. There are now 8 billion of us. We're better educated than before. We can better communicate 
than before. We have been a successful anthology intelligence since we learned to speak at various 
scales. At bigger scale we should be more poweful and competent.

One argument is that we've finally reached the scale beyond which the anthology intelligence that 
is the human group can function, that our global anthology intelligence human mind is going insane. 
And if humanity is best thought of as a global anthology intelligence, it is a very, very loosely 
wrapped one. It is not tightly wrapped at all.

But communication is on our side. It is much harder now for fights among friends and neighbors to 
end in deadly violence, than it is if you were say, in the Highlands of Scotland where you rarely 
see strangers, in which case it's very easy to divide people into clan members to be helped and 
assisted, clan enemies to be killed, and strangers to be simply robbed. It
ought to be harder and harder to do this. It ought to require more and more effort on the part of 
those who are performing the ethno-nationalist grift: "I'm going to get some kind of power by 
persuading you that people who look slightly different than you, who live in a slightly different 
place than you, or who, God forbid, want to major in lesbian dance
therapy, are your enemies, and you need me to figure out how you can efficiently and effectively 
kill them, or at least keep them down."

That is becoming a harder and harder thing to do as communication becomes better and better. But 
that'sjust a hope.

The arc of the universe does not tend in any direction at all, except possibly to heat death 
followed by random Boltzmann brains due to quantum fluctuations.

9/ How can we work to ensure that progress benefits everyone?

Adopt the hard utilitarian mindset: The greatest good of the greatest number, with a strong 
recognition of how fast the marginal utility of wealth declines. Trust in human agencya€”in 
technologies that get people the information and then ask them to take action, as opposed to 
technologies to force people to do what some planner at the top has decided. We need
gardeners and fertilizers, not bosses and commanders. That is where we're trying to guide our 
technologies. Authoritarian state surveillance capitalism, no matter how many utopian and 
egalitarian aspirations it has, is probably not the right place to go.

10 / Are you optimistic about the future?

As I person, I am generally happy. I don't know whether I'm optimistic. When people ask me if I am, 
I reach either for Gramsci or for Camus. Even if you have pessimism of the intellect, you aren't 
going to get anything done if you do not have optimism of the wil. Depression is a biological 
mechanism to make you move little while you heal. That's not the right
response to anything today. Camusa€™s line is: "We must imagine Sisyphus happy.a€D That is 
deliberately ambiguous. Is it the logic of the situation that compells us, when we consider it 
fully, to realize that it is impossible for a rational being to think that Sisyphus is anything but 
happ?. Or is it that if we do not think Sisyphus is happy then we cannot live,
and   so we go kill ourself today. That ambiguity is an important thing to register.

Before 1870, there was no possibility that the economic pie could be big enough. Slow technological 
progress, the necessity under patriarchy of trying to have more sons in the hope that at least one 
would survive, and natural resource scarcitya€’’those put mankind under the Malthusian harrow, in 
dire poverty. Most social energy back then was devoted to the elite's (a) running a
force-and-fraud, exploitation-and-domination machine, (b) elbowing other potential elites out of 
the way, and then (c) utilizing their ill-gotten gains in building a high culture in which the 
non-A©lite were villains and churns.


After 1870, technological progress took off like a rocket. It rapidly became clear that there was a 
good chance that humanity would soon, in historical timescales, gain the technological powers to 
bake a sufficiently large economic pie that everybody could have enough.

Then, having baked a sufficiently large economic pie, all humanity would have to do is solve the 
second order problems of slicing the pie, and then tasting the pie a€“ utilizing our 
soon-to-be-immense collective wealth to enable people to flourish, to live lives that were safe, 
secure, healthy, and happy.
Before 1870, the road to anything one might claim as even a semi-utopia was closed. After 1870, the 
road was open.

We can see this if we make the heroic leaps of (a) trusting our estimates of human productivity 
levels and living standards in the past, and (b) identifying the level of technology a€’’the value 
of the stock of useful ideas about manipulating nature and organizing humans deployed in and 
diffused throughout the world economya€”as proportional to average real income times the square
root of population.

Then we see that back before 1500 it was a very good century in which technology improved by more 
than 5% in a century^.”and, no, the march upward was not as an increasing pace. Over the 1500-1770 
Imperial-Commercial era the rate of technology growth jumped up to 15%/century: the Columbian 
Exchange, the rest of full globalization, and a historically unique tinkering­
inventing culture at the western edge of Eurasia playing about equal roles in the acceleration. 
Over the 1770-1870 Industrial-Revolution century deployed-and-diffused technology grew by 55%, with 
the benefits of concentrating the entire manufacturing of the globe in the region most productive, 
a unique engineering-inventing culture in the 300-mile radius circle around Dover,
England, and the very lucky fact that the last glaciers had given us access to mines better than 
gold mines: mines of unbelievably cheap and accessible coal.

But you can only concentrate global manufacturing once. And you can only mine the near-surface coal 
once.

And even at the boosted 1770-1870 pace, growth did not get humanity out from under the Malthusian 
harrow. It was in the 1870s that John Stuart Mill published the last edition of his -Principles of 
Political Economy_, and he was then still claiming:

Hitherto it is questionable if all the mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the daya€™ s 
toil of any human being. They have enabled a greater population to live the same life of drudgery 
and imprisonment, and an increased number of manufacturers and others to make fortunesa€!

After 1870, however, the economy went into gear: a 2.1%/year technology growth rate; a 33-year 
doubling time. Previously unimaginable economic growth revolutionized human life over and over, 
generation by generation, in not just one episode of Schumpeterian creative destruction but in 
repeated, never-ceasing episodes.

The problem of baking a sufficiently large economic pie so that everyone could, potentially, have 
_**enough**_ became visible. Accomplishing that seemed straightforward: let science rip to 
discovery, let engineering too rip to develop the fruits of science, and then let the market 
economy rip to deploy and diffuse the technologies of human benefit. And the market economy could
do this, for if market prices are properly aligned are properly aligned with social values, the 
market economy is a magnificent crowdsourcing machine for humanity to use to solve the problems 
that it can be set. And the market can be set the problem of applying technology to produce wealth.

As of now, we have long since achieved what previous centuries would have seen as a solution to the 
problem of baking a sufficiently large economic pie to serve as the foundation for a proper utopia.
But somehow our utopia is not here.

After 1870 the problem of baking a big-enough pie was on track to being solved. And then? The 
problems of slicing and tasting the pie were seen by our predecessors as second-order problems, or 
barely problems at all. With potentially _**enough**_, there is no reason to maintain the 
force-and-fraud exploitation-and-domination machine that A©lites before 1870 had used to slice
the pie to their benefit. And the problem of tastinga€’’utilizing our technological powers to live 
life wisely and well, to empower human flourishing to produce safety, security, health, and 
happinessa€’’should not be beyond the powers of a humanity that can invent AC power and the 
microprocessor, should it.

What went wrong? What happened.

This, I think, my book has nailed. Letting the market economy rip to solve the problem of making 
enough had consequences. The repeated, sequential, Schumpeterian creative-destruction economic 
revolutions meant that all was solid melted into aira€”all established patterns and orders were 
steamed away. Again and again. Men (and women) did have to try to build new institutions
to manage the problems and opportunities of production, distribution, and utilization that the 
onrushing technological cornucopia brought.

But, as Friedrich Engelsa€”this was Engels more than Marxa€”all of the rest of society must grow 
out of and be compatible with the technological base that is the shape of the forces of production. 
Revolutionizing technology every generation meant that the societal software running on the 
forces-of-production hardware needed to be rewritten on the fly as well. What had worked a
generation ago, as for as socio-economo-political order was concerned, would not work now. What was 
cobbled together to fit the situation now would be buggy and crash in less than a generation. That 
was what post-1870 meant. And that was a new dynamic pattern for human history.

But there was more. The market economy had to be unleashed to apply technology to wealth creation. 
But the market economy produces wealth. It does not produce anything that society would regard as 
just.

Friedrich von Hayeka€”the genius who most clearly saw the value of the market economy for 
crowdsourcinga€’’warned us not ask for social justice. Attempting to achieve it would undermine the 
market economya€™ s ability to do what it could do, and put us on, well, The Road to Serfdom. 
a€oeThe market giveth, the market taketh away: blessed be the name of the marketaGD
had to be our only gospel.

But, as the genius Karl Polanyi put it, people will not stand for being told "blessed be the name 
of the market" that there are no rights but property rights, and Friedrich von Hayek is their 
prophet. People instead insist that a€oethe market was made for man, not man for the marketa€D. 
People saw themselves as deserving communities, incomes, and stability. They needed their
Polanyian rightsa€”to economic security, to an income level proportional to what they deserved, 
that other people should have income levels proportional to what they deserved too, in a connected 
society that gave them respect and placea€”plus that you should have some power in society even if 
you had no wealth. Trying to bring about the stark utopia of market society would
thus  be overwhelmed by social-political movements seeking social justicea€”and society might think 
that what was just could turn disastrous: :Hitler got substantial buy-in to his version, involving 
the extermination Jews and the demographic replacement of the population of Eastern Europe by 
ethnic Germans.

And, off in the corner, we have John Maynard Keynes whimpering: if only governments allowed his 
technocratic students to conduct a sensible monetary policy, along with a "somewhat comprehensive" 
socialization of investment, everyone would have a job in a tight labor market that gave some 
social power to the working class, technology plus compound interest would wreak
marvels, rock-bottom interest rates would "euthanize" rentiersa€”they could only exert social power 
only at the cost of spending down their capitala€”and so humanity would solve the problems of 
production and distribution, leaving humanity to grapple with its real problem: that of utilization 
of our wealth to create a truly human world.

If we had time, we could go through the generations, the modes-of-production, the political-economy 
orders. But let me just say that it was was within these parametersa€”von Hayekian, Polanyian, 
Keynesiana€”that people frantically tried to rewrite society's socio-economic running code on the 
fly to cope with the technological changes in the underlying forces-of-production
hardware.

Perhaps humanity, did indeed come close to an institutional-societal setup to tackle the problems 
of slicing and tasting. Post-WWII "social democracy" in the rich countries was a good try. 
Keynesian focus on full employment (and low interest rates to make amortizing the WWII-era debt 
easy), Beveridgian equality-through-redistribution (and public provision), plus a little Pigovian
externality-compensation produced the Thirty Glorious Years.

But somehow social democracy failed its sustainability test, and was replaced by neoliberalism, 
which stubbornly persists in spite of its failure to fulfill any of its promises except that it 
would make the rich much richer with much more social power. Society may not know what "social 
justice" is, but it knows that it manifestly does not consist of giving benefits to and making life
easy for those it assesses as "undeserving".

And so the wheel turned. Here we are. Why are not the good people of the global north happier and 
more satisfied with the techno-utopian marvels that have been delivered to them? Why has great 
wealth in historical perspective produced not reduced but increased economic anxiety? And how does 
that economic anxietyget transformed into ethno-nationalist fear and rage?

How is it that the neoliberal ordering of society still survives? In the global north, at least, it 
has not fulfilled its promise of restoring golden-age growth rates, or dismantling rent-seeking 
interests, or restoring society's moral center, or achieving a pro-producer form of social justice. 
In fact, it accomplished exactly none of the promises made byitsoriginal salesmen, savefor making
the rich richer and society more economically unequal. And yet it hung on.

Our current situation: in the rich countries there is enough by any reasonable standard, and yet we 
are all unhappy, all earnestly seeking to discover who the enemies are who have somehow stolen our 
rich birthright and fed us unappetizing lentil stew instead.

What do we do next? The answer to this question my book simply punts. That is for a younger 
generation than my failed one to decide. Global warming. Ethno-national terrorism on all scales 
from the individual AR-15 to the Combined Arms Army. Nuclear proliferation. Revived fascism. 
Technokleptocracy. I do quail.
As John Maynard Keynes wrote back in 1924, any call to follow a particular plan of action:

assumes... a plan exists.... [But] we lack more than usual a coherent scheme of progress, a 
tangible ideal. All the political parties alike have their origins in past ideas and not in new 
ideas.... No one has a gospel. The next move is with the head...

There was an interesting note on Twitter about Slouching Towards Utopia<Wit ly/3pP3Kik> yesterday 
AM:

Peter Baird: a€~DeLonga€™ s view of human rights: Hayek: only accrue to holders of valuable 
property; Polanyi: popular revolt adds a€□moral" rights . This seems to ignore society getting up 
in the am, splashing its face, and saying a€~what rights shall we affirm today?a€™ then watching 
Fox:

Peter Baird @ Remote West

@delong's view of human rights... Hayek: only accrue to holders of valuable property Polanyi: 
popular revolt adds "moral" rights ...seems to ignore society getting up in the am, splashing its 
face, and saying 'what rights shall we affirm today?' then watching Fox. @zachdcarter
6:26 AM r™ Oct 23,2022

4Likesl Re tweet

Well: yes. And also: no.


IIILVIIKJ IU                                         LVIIIUI                                        
              UIIJUSL

property rightsa€”can take forms that are: reactionary, socialist, authoritarian, social 
democratic, fascist, fundamentalist, nationalist, militarist, democratic, cultist, and probably 
more; moreover, such movements can often be captured or partially captured by those whose social 
power is based on the catallaxya€™ s past rewards to them gained by luck, force, and fraud.
Do remember: Jake Solla€™ s <https://t.co/VRln7S91JZ> book begins with Aristotle, Cato, & Cicero 
scared of and trying to grapple with the consequences of the mercantile catallaxy that they see 
disrupting the social justiice of the city-state of the oligarchic republic via its elevation of 
those devoted to chrematistike over the proper wielders of social power

One big difference between Jakea€™ s book and mine is that the period he coversa€”well, my index of 
the value of the stock of human technology deployed-and-diffused in the world economy stands at:

• 0.2 in -300 (a€oeancient mode of production^□, as Freddie from Barmen would say),

• 0.4 in 1400 (a€oelate feudala€D), and

• 0.8 in 1800 (a€oelate gunpowder-empirea€LJ). It then stands at:

• 1.6 in 1895 (a€oelate steampower/early 2nd Industrial Revolutiona€D),

• 3.2 in 1935 (a€oemass productiona€D),

• 6.4 in 1970 (a€oemass consumption^□),

• 12.8 in 2000 (a€oeglobal value chaina€D),

• and now we are moving into the a€ceinfo-biotecha€D economy.

It is not just one movement from status to contract and one grappling with the form and 
requirements of modernity. It is repeated technological revolutions that change how we live and, 
indeed, who we are. But it took 1700 years to go from ancient to feudal, 400 from feudal to late 
gunpowder-empire, but only 100 to go to late-steampower, and then 35 each for mass production, mass
consumption, global value-chain, and on into the future. And with each transformation of the 
mode-of-production trhe von Hayek-Polanyi tension takes a different form, and requires new ways 
ofa€! not of a€oeresolvinga€n, but rather of a€oepapering it overa€D.

Because the changes in the forces-of-production hardware since 1870 have been so fast and so 
furious, the chances of being able to land on a rough cobbled-together running 
socio-econo-political software code to create a stable society are rather low. This is in contrast 
to what happened before, in the times that Solla€™ s book covers, when there was a lot of time to 
repurpose, old
furniture, construct new, and in general adjust the relations-of-production (and -communication, 
and -domination) software to the forces-of-production hardware.

No, this does not mean that back before 1870 things were in any sense at all "better". They were 
perhaps more stable, in the sense that the structure of society was rarely abandoned. But there was 
lots of a differnet form of instability, in the sense of different potential A©lite factions 
spending nearly all of their attentionand their energy elbowing each otherout of the way.

And, of course, back before 1870 the principal end toward which societal energy was directed was 
not advancing knowledge and deploying technology to uncover a€oethe knowledge of causes, and secret 
motions of things; and the enlarging of the bounds of human empire, to the effecting of all things 
possiblea€D. It was, rather, running the force andfraud mechanism by which the
elite grabbed enough for its members and their families, since there was no prospect of there being 
enough for all.

Suppose that you are willing to accept my heroic assumption that a€cetechnologya€D is proportional 
to average real income per capita times the square-root of population, and suppose that you are 
willing to accept our guesses about past population and my hard-Malthusian view of 1500 and 
before...
Then you do indeed get an Axial Age -1000 to 150 technology proportional growth rate of 6% per 
century; a Late-Antiquity Pause 150 to 800 growth rate of 1.4% per century; and then a MediAlval 
800 to 1500 growth rate of 5% per century:

Global Longest-Run Global Economic Growth


Ideas
Growth

Date Rate

Ideas
Stock
Level     H

Real
Income/
Capita      y

Popula­
tion P
(millions)

Total
Income Y
(billions)

Population
Growth n

Efficiency-
Growth g


48000

-8000

-6000

-3000

-1000

150

0.002%      0.011       $1,200       0.2      $0.24         0.003%     0.000%

0.003%      0.036        $1,200        2       $2.4         0.006%     0.000%

0.009%      0.043         $900        5       $4.5         0.046%     -0.014%

0.018%      0.074         $900       15        $14         0.037%     0.000%

0.030%      0.136         $900       50        $45         0.060%     0.000%

0.060%      0.272         $900       200       $180         0.121%     0.000%


800

1500

1770

1870

2010

2100

0.014%      0.297         $900       240       $216         0.028%     0.000%

0.052%      0.429         $900       500       $450        0.105%     0.000%

0.149%      0.643       $1,100       750       $825         0.150%     0.074%

0.442%      1.000       $1,300      1300     $1,690         0.550%     0.167%

2.159%     20.557       $11,600      6900     $80,040         1.192%     1.563%

2.000%    108.893      $53,802      9000    $484,214  ?•        0.295%     1.705%

And it is pretty clear why. The aims of the A©lites who direct humanitya€™ s energies are devoted 
to maintaining the force-and-fraud exploitation-extraction-&-domination machine that theya€”the 
thugs-with-spears, their bosses, and their tame accountants, bureaucrats, and propagandistsa€”run 
on the rest of humanity as the only way that A©lite members can have enough for
themselves and their families. Ideas are judged primarily not by whether they are true or 
productive but by whether they reinforce the force-and-fraud machine. There is progressa€’’coinage 
in -600, after which you can construct a division-of-labor with more than your friends, neighbors, 
and relatives without having to go through the kings and priestsa€”the moldboard plow, double­
cropping rice, the merino sheep, and so forth. But it is slow as social energies are directed 
elsewhere.

And the 150 to 800 Late Antiquity Pause should make you doubt whether there was any arc of history 
making for an increasing technology growth rate.
Then with 1500 comes the Imperial-Commercial Revolution Age, and the rate of technology growth 
triples to 15% per century. As I see it:

• 1/3 of this is simply MediAlval (but now Gunpowder-Empire) business as usual,

• 1/3 of this is the Columbian Exchange and such, and

•  1/3 of this is a historically unique tinkering-inventing-recombining culture (Patrick WymanaC™ s 
book aCceThe Vergea€D is, I think, very good on this) at the western edge of Eurasia.

Is this a sea-change in thought and society? Maybe. But the builder of the Antikythera Device, the 
inventor of coinage, and that guy Ish-baal who thought up the idea of using a stylized picture of 
an ox to stand for a particular phoneme way back in the year -1000 might say you nay.
Then from 1770-1870 we get the Industrial Revolution Century: an additional tripling of the 
technology growth rate worldwide from 0.15% to 0.44% per century. Again I divide this into thirds:

•  1/3 from the globalization benefits of concentrating the entire manufacturing of the globe in 
the region most productive,

•  1/3 the very lucky fact that the last glaciers scraping off the post-Permian rock had given us 
access to mines of unbelievably cheap and accessible coala€”stored sunlight of an unbelievable 
concentration and ease of use once you had unlocked its secreta€”and

• 1/3 to a unique engineering-inventing culture in the 300-mile radius circle around Dover, England 
(plus offshoots).
The first two of these three tranches seem to me to have been overwhelmingly likely to have been 
transient.

And so, had technological progress continued after 1870 at 1/3 of the 1770-1870 ratea€”at 0.15 
%/yeara€’’humanity would still have been under the Malthusian harrow, with typical living standards 
constant at the rate that supported population growth of 0.3%/yeara€”8% per generationa€”and no 
demographic transition.
Call this Permanent Steampunk World.

2010 would then see the technologies of 1890 or so, but with a much larger and hence much poorer 
human population than in actual 1890.
Would that world have been a€oemoderna€n?

It would have had its Marx and its Freud. It would know relativity and quantum mechanics. But we 
are talking a typical world standard of living of $4 a daya€”not quite World Bank a€oedire 
povertya€D, but damned close.

But this no-Industrial Research Lab to rationalize and routinize discovery and development, and no 
Modern Corporations to rationalize and routinize development and deployment of the Second 
Industrial Revolution technologiesa€”does this make sense?

Quite possibly not. Nate Rosenberg and David Mowery would say you could not have the market economy 
of 1850 and the engineering profession and machine tool industry as they then stood and not go on 
to develop the IRL and the MC. And then the economy of 1850 was immanent in the society created by 
the early steam engine. And so on back to 1070 and the Investiture
Crisis, which establishes the principle that law is more than the servant of the powerful but binds 
even the most powerful. And possibly back before 1070 as well: you can find anticipations of the 
shift from gemeinschaft to Gesellschaft, rational inquiry into the operation of the world, and so 
on however far back you look, if you try hard enough.

I blush. I think both of the paragraphs I have constructed from excerpts from his review are 
correct.

We are well on the way to solving the problem of baking, a sufficiently large economic pie to 
create the potential for everybody to have enough. But as far as solving the problems of slicing, 
and tasting the piea€’’equitably distributing it, and utilizing our enormous technological wealth 
to empower all of us to live, lives in which we are safe and secure and healthy and happya€”we
are nowheresville. That would have surprised (most of) our predecessors: solving the problem of 
scarcity was thought to be the big problem. Once that was solved, governance would no longer have 
to take the form of an A©lite elbowing competing potential A©lites out of the way and running a 
force-and-fraud wealth-extraction con on humanity. Governance could take the form of
writing economy-social software for human interactions to run on top of the technology-driven 
forces-of-production hardware, and that software-writing exercise ought to have beena€”was seen by 
Utopians as inevitably beinga€’’straightforward.

Why do the problems of slicing and tasting the economic pie continue to flummox us when we have 
made so much progress at solving the problem of baking a sufficiently large pie? This I think the 
book has nailed. And I have already given enough overview thumbnails on this weblog to have become 
tired of repeating myself.

So let me just say that the overview is all very well, but there is a great deal to be learned by 
telling the stories of the individual failures to slice and tastea€”to equitably distribute and 
properly utilize our immense and increasing technology-driven wealth. And to get my selection from 
these stories, please buy and read the book: <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>!

2. Since 1980: The Rising Inequality Surprise

The second part of this talk is how my self of 40 years ago that I talked about beforea€”my 
twenty-year-old selfa€”would be very surprised to find his elder self here, talking about 
inequality as a first-order problem for human society.

That twenty-year-old self confidently expected his lifetime to see a great narrowing of income and 
productivity differentials across nations. Roadblocks formed by imperialism and 
colonialisma€’’external to a country and internala€”by distance, and by blinkered ideologies had 
greatly widened income and productivity differentials since 1800. But those historical forces were 
passing
away. Global development was on the agenda. And the profits to be made from raising productivity 
worldwide to Global North standards were so great that every exertion would be made to make it 
happen.

But, of course, that convergence has not happened.

Looking across nations, the world today is about as unequal as it was when I was born in 1960, 
albeit somewhat less unequal than at the moment of peak international income and productivity 
inequality in 1975.


Moreover, that twenty-year-old self confidently expected income and status differentials inside 
America to fall, not rise, over his lifetime. Racism and patriarchy seemed to be in retreat, and 
the underlying framework of social democracya€’’the New Deal Order, as historian Gary Gerstle likes 
to call ita€”gave us on the one hand full employment and rapidly increasing investment in
education which gave market power and productivity to labor, and on the other the social-insurance 
state and progressive taxation which significantly leveled pre-fisc inequality and disrupted 
plutocratic dynastic accumulation. The dominant political-economic understanding of how this New 
Deal Order had come about had been most compactly set out by the great Simon Kuznets,
with his heuristic of the a€oeKuznets Curvea€D. As my teacher Jeffrey Williamson summarized it in 
his Yale Kuznets lectures:

• As an agrarian economy industrializes, inequality rises simply because the modern-industrial 
sector pulls away from the traditional-agrarian one.

•  More important, however, is that, at least in the early stages of industrialization, 
technological progress is labor-savinga€”makes capital a substitute for rather than a complement to 
labora€”and so boosts returns to capital while lowering returns to labor.

•  Moreover, a largely agrarian poor class, not yet through the demographic transition cannot 
afford the human-capital investments in their children needed to rescue the next generation from 
poverty.

•  And last comes the substantial amplification of wealth disparities from the rewards to market 
position in increasing-returns and high fixed-costs industries.

The consequence? As industrialization takes place, income and wealth inequality rise, very 
substantially, producing a Gilded Age that the rich of later generations see as a Belle A%opoque.

All of these factors, however, are reversed in the later stages of industrialization. After the 
demographic transition is completed, resources to invest in human capital are ample. Rural-urban 
wealth gulfs are steamed away by the market. Technological progress becomes more 
labor-complementing than labor-substituting. Easier technological diffusion makes first-mover 
advantages of
less important. Plus there is more: even an oligarchic political society can believe in antitrust 
to curb its plutocracy; and, most important, literate working class can organize and flex its 
political muscles for first political democracy, and then social democracya€”steeply progressive 
taxes and an ample social insurance state

Simon Kuznets thus envisioned, and the near-consensus back when I was 20 or so agreed, that 
post-WWII social democracya€’’the New Deal Ordera€”was very much a Fukuyama-like a€oeend of 
historya€U. Yes, there were historical survivals from a worse past: the economic consequences of 
racism, sexism, past wealth dynasties and the transmission of wealth inequality. But
those were all ebbing away. Robber barons were replaced by corporate techno structures. Political 
democracy made wealth, the servant of rather than the master of society.

Once again, it did not happen.

Or, rather, it happeneda€”and then, with 1980, came the Neoliberal Turn. It turned out that social 
democracy a€”the New Deal Ordera€”was in no sense an a€oeend of historya€D. The future after 1980 
did not see increasing equality of opportunity that continued to reduce inequality of result. 
Instead, we entered into the Second Gilded Age, in which we are now enmeshed.. And
that is the end of the second part. The takeaways? The failure of post-colonial convergence, and 
the Neoliberal Turn of the early 1980s and the consequent coming of our Second Gilded Age, were 
great surprises to the supposed wise of previous generations.

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

3. Why the Neoliberal Turn?

And now I get to my third part: Why? Why the Neoliberal Turn?

Let me start this third part by focusing down, and dropping international income and wealth, 
disparities from my subject. They are probably the most important part of global inequality from 
the perspective of the human race as a whole. But I have limited time and limited knowledge. So let 
me focus on the reasons for the coming of the Neoliberal Turn, and our consequent Second
Gilded Age.

Let us first go back to the days of 150 and more years agoa€”the years when humanity was 
ensorcelled by the Devil of Malthus. Slow productivity growth ,poverty, and the patriarchal 
requirement that one have surviving sons if one were to have social powera€”those all meant that 
population pressed upon the limits of subsistence. There was simply no way that humanity could
possibly bake a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have enough.

What was one then to do, if one wanted enough for oneself and onea€™ s family?

The answer was straightforward: one strained every nerve and muscle to become part of an A©lite. 
That A©lite would then elbow other potential A©lites out of the way. It would then run a 
force-and-fraud domination-and-exploitation game on humanity, so that it could grab enough for 
itself. Thus politics and governance were, primarily, how that A©litea€’’thugs with spears, and
later with gunpowder weapons, assisted by their tame accountants, bureaucrats and 
propagandistsa€”ran this domination-and-exploitation game, using of the resources they extracted to 
maintain their dominance, and some to build and enjoy their high culture.

Come 1870, however, the spell of Malthus began to lift. Worldwide, technological progress over 1770 
to 1870 had been three times as rapid as over 1500 to 1770, which in turn had been three times as 
rapid as in the previous Agrarian-MediAival years. But even 1770a€‘T870 had not yet been fast 
enough to trigger the infant-mortality decline and the demographic transition to low
fertility, and hence the ability to invest in a mass education on a large scale. After 1870, 
however, the global rate of technological progress more than quadrupled to something like our 
current 2% per year. Better nutrition, followed by a growing ability and growing knowledge to make 
public health investmentsa€’’those started to push infant mortality on the way down. The
population explosion could not keep up with technological advance. Slowly and unevenly, the 
fertility decline began, and, haltingly and unevenly, real income growth began to accelerate.

Within a generation after 1870, it became apparent that humanity had found what John Maynard Keynes 
was to call a€oeEconomic El Doradoa€D. It became apparent that it would not be that many more 
generations before humanity could bake a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have 
enough. And then, after that, what would be the point of the domination-and-
exploitation machine run by the elite? Maintaining it was expensive. Why not have a free society of 
associated producers in which people rotated through the needed administrative tasks? It was not 
that anyone especially a€oedeserveda€n more. The true source, after all, of rapidly growing human 
wealth was not the sweat of those currently doing the work. It was, rather the
treasures                                                                                           
                                                                            of technological 
knowledge that all had inherited from our predecessors.

One answer was that a€cesoona€D was not a€cenowa€D, and that the domination-and-exploitation 
machine needed to be kept going in order to power the engine of research and development, capital 
accumulation, and economic growth. As John Maynard Keynes, fully flying his upper-class twit freak 
flag, put it in 1919. Let me read out a long passage:

Precisely the inequality of the distribution of wealtha€! made possible those vast accumulations of 
fixed wealth and of capital improvements which distinguished that age from all othersa€!. The 
immense accumulations of fixed capital which, to the great benefit of mankind, were built up during 
the half century before the war, could never have come about in
a Society where wealth was divided equitablya€!. This remarkable system dependeda€! on a double 
bluff or deceptiona€!. The laboring classesa€! from ignorance or powerlessnessa€! compelled, 
persuaded, or cajoled by custom, convention, authority, and the well-established order of Society 
into accepting, a situation in which they could call their own very
little of the cakea€!. The capitalist classesa€! theoretically free to consume it, on the tacit 
underlying condition that they consumed very little of it in practicea€L There grew round the 
non-consumption of the cake all those instincts of puritanisma€!. Saving was for old age or for 
your children; but this was only in theory,a€”the virtue of the cake was that it
was never to be consumed, neither by you nor by your children after youa€!. Society knew what it 
was about. The cake was really very small in proportion to the appetites of consumption^!. If only 
the cake were not cut but was allowed to growa€! a day might come when there would at last be 
enougha€! and mena€! could proceed to the nobler exercises
of their facultiesa€!. But these thoughts lead too far from my present purpose. I seek only to 
point out that the principle of accumulation based on inequality was a vital part of the pre-war 
order of Society and of progress as we then understood it, and to emphasize that this principle 
depended on unstable psychological conditions, which it may be impossible
to recreatea€!

In short, for Keynes in 1919 the maintenance of Edwardian class structures and Gilded Age-levels of 
wealth and income inequality was essential for the progress of human race. And the restoration and 
shoring up of the Belle A%opoque order of economic and social inequality was the principal task of 
post-WWI reconstruction. And in 1930 he stressed the point:
For at least another hundred years we must pretend to ourselves and to every one that fair is foul 
and foul is fair; for foul is useful and fair is not. Avarice and usury and precaution must be our 
gods for a little longer still. For only they can lead us out of the tunnel of economic necessity 
into daylighta€!

It has not quite been 100 years since 1930. But it has been 103 since 1919.

I cannot resist digressing to note that six years later Keynes had changed his tune. Under pressure 
from the Great Depression and the threats to liberal society then emanating from Moscow and Berlin, 
in 1936 he wrote about how:
The outstanding faults of the economic society in which we live are its failure to provide for full 
employment and its arbitrary and inequitable distribution of wealth and incomesa€!

Full employment was to be attained by letting Keynesa€™ s technocratic students run a low 
interest-rate monetary policy supplemented by a a€oesomewhat comprehensive socialization of 
investments□ to match investment effort to desired savings at full employment.

But wealth and income inequality? A low interest-rate policy, Keynes hoped, would lead to the 
euthanasia of the rentier, plutocrats would find themselves only able to exercise the social power 
banked up in their wealth by spending-down their capital, and so ceasing to be plutocrats.
However, do not go too far toward full equality!:

There is social and psychological justification for significant inequalities of incomes and wealth, 
but not for such large disparities as exist todaya€!. It is better that a man should tyrannise over 
his bank balance than over his fellow-citizensa€! It may still be wise and prudent statesmanship to 
allow the game to be playeda€! so long as the average man, or even
a significant section of the community, is in fact strongly addicted to the money-making passiona€!

But also:

It is not necessarya€! that the game should be played for such high stakes as at present. Much 
lower stakes will serve the purpose equally well, as soon as the players are accustomed to thema€!.

In my Slouching Towards Utopia book I speak of the post-WWII global-north social democracy that 
Simon Kuznets thought of as the end-state of the inequality story as: the shotgun marriage of 
Friedrich von Hayeka€™ s insights into the market as a social device for crowdsourcing solutions to 
human problems with Karl Polanyia€™ s insights into the refusal of humanity to accept
any order in which the only rights that count are property rights and only the rich have social 
power and voice, blessed by John Maynard Keynes. I think that gets his final position asa€! 
presiding minister?a€! Father-in-law?a€! of social democracy broadly right.

This was, as I said in part 2, supposed to be a€oeThe End of Historya€D: political democracy in 
tandem with social democracy, as the surviving remnants of plutocracy, patriarchy, and racism died 
away.
So why then the Neoliberal Turn?

To put it broadly, there are three theories.

The first is a€oeunlucky accidenta€Da€”you hear this, I suppose, most often from Paul Krugman. It 
was the inflation of the 1970s that destabilized belief in the New Deal Order, and the 
Neoliberalsa€”those who believed that the rich needed to be made richer so that they focused their 
energies on being job creators rather than evaders of punitive taxes, who believed that the non­
rich needed to be made poorer to incentivize them to cease being slackers and moochers, and that 
the market did things for good reasons, meaning that whatever income distribution the market 
generated was there for good reason which people should not disputea€”who then picked up the 
pieces.

The second is Thomas Pikettya€™ s theory. In broad and oversimplified strokes, it is that tenor of 
politics is largely determined by the concentration of wealth, and that even when the political 
power of potential plutocrats is at a low ebb they still have sufficient influence to maintain the 
typical rate of profit at 5% per year. Thus take 5% per year. Subtract from that the proportion of


And there is something worse than the social democratic state forcing you to be a moocher. It is 
watching it enable others to get away with being moochers themselves. We heard this on Mitt Romney 
a€™ s posta€“2012 election conference call:

The presidents™ s campaigns! focused on giving targeted groups a big giftS! forgiveness of college 
loan interests! free contraceptives were very big with young, college-aged womenS!. [For] African 
American voters, S'ObamacareS™ was a huge plusS! getting free healthcare worth, what, $10,000 a 
family, in perpetuity, I mean this is hugeS!.
With regards to Hispanic voters, the amnesty for the children of illegalsS!

And in Mitt RomneyS™ s leaked dinnertime conversation:

There are 47 percent who are with him: who are dependent upon government, who believe that they are 
victims, who believe the government has a responsibility to care for them, who believe that they 
are entitled to health care, to food, to housing, to you-name-itS!. My job is is not to worry about 
those people. IS™ 11 never convince them they should take
personal responsibility and care for their livesS!

Now Mitt Romney is not a bad man. He will be either my 51st or 52nd favorite out of the 100 
senators in the next congress. And he has a strong, visceral aversion to social democracy precisely 
because it offers a drop of Sceto each according to their needsSD.

The takeaway: social democracyS”the New Deal Ordera€’’failed its sustainability test at the end of 
the 1970s. Perhaps it could have been revived and restored, even if somewhat zombie-like. Certainly 
those of us who worked for Bill Clinton or Tony Blair thought so. But I think people go too far 
when they see the coming of the Second Gilded Age as unhappy accident, or even as
simply the consequence of r > g in a world of demographic and productivity slowdown.

There are an embarrassingly large number of powerful candidates for the Neoliberal Turn ranging 
from the large political megaphones that money can buy through the vulnerability of social 
democracies to rent-seeking to the deep structure of human or perhaps only Indo-European language 
thought in placing a very high value on reciprocal gift-exchange as social glue. That the even
moderate steps toward less income and wealth inequality taken during the age of social democracy 
proved unsustainable should give all those who wish for it pause.

Leave a comment

4


And there is something worse than the social democratic state forcing you to be a moocher. It is 
watching it enable others to get away with being moochers themselves. We heard this on Mitt Romney 
a€™ s posta€“2012 election conference call:

The presidents™ s campaigns! focused on giving targeted groups a big giftS! forgiveness of college 
loan interests! free contraceptives were very big with young, college-aged womenS!. [For] African 
American voters, S'ObamacareS™ was a huge plusS! getting free healthcare worth, what, $10,000 a 
family, in perpetuity, I mean this is hugeS!.
With regards to Hispanic voters, the amnesty for the children of illegalsS!

And in Mitt RomneyS™ s leaked dinnertime conversation:

There are 47 percent who are with him: who are dependent upon government, who believe that they are 
victims, who believe the government has a responsibility to care for them, who believe that they 
are entitled to health care, to food, to housing, to you-name-itS!. My job is is not to worry about 
those people. IS™ 11 never convince them they should take
personal responsibility and care for their livesS!

Now Mitt Romney is not a bad man. He will be either my 51st or 52nd favorite out of the 100 
senators in the next congress. And he has a strong, visceral aversion to social democracy precisely 
because it offers a drop of Sceto each according to their needsSD.

The takeaway: social democracyS”the New Deal Ordera€’’failed its sustainability test at the end of 
the 1970s. Perhaps it could have been revived and restored, even if somewhat zombie-like. Certainly 
those of us who worked for Bill Clinton or Tony Blair thought so. But I think people go too far 
when they see the coming of the Second Gilded Age as unhappy accident, or even as
simply the consequence of r > g in a world of demographic and productivity slowdown.

There are an embarrassingly large number of powerful candidates for the Neoliberal Turn ranging 
from the large political megaphones that money can buy through the vulnerability of social 
democracies to rent-seeking to the deep structure of human or perhaps only Indo-European language 
thought in placing a very high value on reciprocal gift-exchange as social glue. That the even
moderate steps toward less income and wealth inequality taken during the age of social democracy 
proved unsustainable should give all those who wish for it pause.

Leave a comment

4. What to Do?

Finally, I arrive at the fourth part of my talk: Given all this, what should I do? What should we 
do? What should you do?

Remember, first, that economicsa€™ s utilitarian roots place an extremely high value on equality. 
We have every reason to think that the marginal utility of consumption declines steeply with 
wealth, even after we have gotten out of the range where a 50% increase in family wealth, cuts 
infant mortality by 50% and raises adult height by 2 inches. Any aversion to interpersonal
comparisons of utility turns out, in practice, to be a claim that maybe it does not matter if they 
are poor because they would not appreciate the finer things. It is obvious how to judge any such 
claims.

Remember, second, that economicsa€™ s libertarian roots also place an extremely high value on 
equality. Absolute wealth is power over nature. Relative wealth is social power: power to seek the 
attention and assistance of others, to have a voice in what we are collectively going to doa€”and 
it is collectively, because on our own each of us would have a life nasty, brutish, and likely
to be short. As John Stuart Mill wrote, the lives of the poor are lives of degradation and 
imprisonment. If one is locked in a cage, it does not matter much whether there is no key or 
whether one is just not rich enough to buy a key

Remember, third, ethical philosophy also places an extremely high value on equality. We have none 
of us made anything by our hand and brain alone, but only through what has been freely gifted to us 
in the form of this planet and of the accumulated stock of human wisdom, to which we are all heirs.

We understand why, before 1870, human societies were greatly unequal: humanity had no chance of 
baking a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have enough. Those who did have enough did 
so by virtue of their participation in the A©litea€™ s domination-and-exploitation scheme. Since 
1870 humanity has accomplished a great deal: we now have the technological
powers to bake a sufficiently large economic pie that everyone living before 1870 would have seen 
as certainly more than enough. Yet, although we have solved the problem of baking a sufficiently 
large economic pie, The problems of slicing and tasting ita€”of equitably distributing our 
collective wealth, and of utilizing it wisely and well so that people live lives in which they feel
safe and secure, and are healthy and happy a€’’those continue to flummox us, more or less 
completely.

That the social democratic order collapsed so rapidly around 1980 makes me think we should look 
back and try to figure out why it had not collapsed earliera€”what had changed then? I am tempted 
to put forward the hypothesis that what had changed was the aging of those with visceral memories 
of the Great Depression and of World War II, who had in the front of their minds an
unusually strong degree of empathy with others, remembering how the world, chance, and fate had 
demonstrated that we were all in this together.

So perhaps the first step is to recognize that this loss of solidarity is odd, for we are all in 
this together.

In his Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argues against those who claim that a more unequal society is 
a better society, for in a more unequal society the rich and the government can get more work out 
of the poor for the same amount of coin. Adam Smith pulls an intellectual-judo move, drawing on 
expectations about gift-exchange:

No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are 
poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body 
of the people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves 
tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodgeda€!

There are people in Pakistan whom I do not know who wove the carpets that are on the floor of my 
house. Whenever one of dogs looks like it might vomit, we frantically hustle them outside because 
the rugs are things of great beauty, which enrich our lives. In fact we should spend more time than 
we do looking down at them and admiring them. The thing about a well-functioning
gift-exchange relationship is that each party benefits greatly on net, and each party believes that 
the current favor balance is against it, so it needs to do more and thus to strengthen the 
relationship.

Every time I walk on any of my carpets, I should think: I am really one-down with respect to the 
balance of favors vis-A -vis the people in Pakistan who wove this, and I should strive harder to 
appreciate the artistic gift they have given me, and find more ways to better their lives. I should 
take care that theya€™re somewhere close to the front of my mind.
I wish I had more to offer you. But I do, at least, have this. Thank you very much.

As Michael Walzer once told me, when one starts a book project one is confident that at the end, 
when one holds the finished copy in onea€™ s hands and opens it, one will see letters of fire that 
will by the logic of iron necessity inscribe their truth directly on the minds and souls of 
readers, and that the book will be      i„Ipi a1/^, I±d1/4°i]ia1/2y, a treasure for all time. But
when the actual book appeareda€”no letters of fire, no direct truth, just chicken-scratchings that 
were not even the shadows on the wall of the cave, but rather vague gestures in the direction of 
shadows from which a good-hearted and hard-working reader might learn something. Basic is not in 
the business of publishing thousand-page books. And I very much doubt that I could have
successfully executed a thousand-page book: the difficulty of the dive goes with the square of the 
number of pages. I wound up writing a book looking forward from 1870 that is overwhelmingly about 
the political-economy consequences of the magnificent explosion in the rate of technology-driven 
growth, with occasional side-glances at the parts of the original project that I was
unable   to execute.


And there is something worse than the social democratic state forcing you to be a moocher. It is 
watching it enable others to get away with being moochers themselves. We heard this on Mitt Romney 
a€™ s posta€“2012 election conference call:

The presidents™ s campaigns! focused on giving targeted groups a big giftS! forgiveness of college 
loan interests! free contraceptives were very big with young, college-aged womenS!. [For] African 
American voters, S'ObamacareS™ was a huge plusS! getting free healthcare worth, what, $10,000 a 
family, in perpetuity, I mean this is hugeS!.
With regards to Hispanic voters, the amnesty for the children of illegalsS!

And in Mitt RomneyS™ s leaked dinnertime conversation:

There are 47 percent who are with him: who are dependent upon government, who believe that they are 
victims, who believe the government has a responsibility to care for them, who believe that they 
are entitled to health care, to food, to housing, to you-name-itS!. My job is is not to worry about 
those people. IS™ 11 never convince them they should take
personal responsibility and care for their livesS!

Now Mitt Romney is not a bad man. He will be either my 51st or 52nd favorite out of the 100 
senators in the next congress. And he has a strong, visceral aversion to social democracy precisely 
because it offers a drop of Sceto each according to their needsSD.

The takeaway: social democracyS”the New Deal Ordera€’’failed its sustainability test at the end of 
the 1970s. Perhaps it could have been revived and restored, even if somewhat zombie-like. Certainly 
those of us who worked for Bill Clinton or Tony Blair thought so. But I think people go too far 
when they see the coming of the Second Gilded Age as unhappy accident, or even as
simply the consequence of r > g in a world of demographic and productivity slowdown.

There are an embarrassingly large number of powerful candidates for the Neoliberal Turn ranging 
from the large political megaphones that money can buy through the vulnerability of social 
democracies to rent-seeking to the deep structure of human or perhaps only Indo-European language 
thought in placing a very high value on reciprocal gift-exchange as social glue. That the even
moderate steps toward less income and wealth inequality taken during the age of social democracy 
proved unsustainable should give all those who wish for it pause.

Leave a comment

4. What to Do?

Finally, I arrive at the fourth part of my talk: Given all this, what should I do? What should we 
do? What should you do?

Remember, first, that economicsa€™ s utilitarian roots place an extremely high value on equality. 
We have every reason to think that the marginal utility of consumption declines steeply with 
wealth, even after we have gotten out of the range where a 50% increase in family wealth, cuts 
infant mortality by 50% and raises adult height by 2 inches. Any aversion to interpersonal
comparisons of utility turns out, in practice, to be a claim that maybe it does not matter if they 
are poor because they would not appreciate the finer things. It is obvious how to judge any such 
claims.

Remember, second, that economicsa€™ s libertarian roots also place an extremely high value on 
equality. Absolute wealth is power over nature. Relative wealth is social power: power to seek the 
attention and assistance of others, to have a voice in what we are collectively going to doa€”and 
it is collectively, because on our own each of us would have a life nasty, brutish, and likely
to be short. As John Stuart Mill wrote, the lives of the poor are lives of degradation and 
imprisonment. If one is locked in a cage, it does not matter much whether there is no key or 
whether one is just not rich enough to buy a key

Remember, third, ethical philosophy also places an extremely high value on equality. We have none 
of us made anything by our hand and brain alone, but only through what has been freely gifted to us 
in the form of this planet and of the accumulated stock of human wisdom, to which we are all heirs.

We understand why, before 1870, human societies were greatly unequal: humanity had no chance of 
baking a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have enough. Those who did have enough did 
so by virtue of their participation in the A©litea€™ s domination-and-exploitation scheme. Since 
1870 humanity has accomplished a great deal: we now have the technological
powers to bake a sufficiently large economic pie that everyone living before 1870 would have seen 
as certainly more than enough. Yet, although we have solved the problem of baking a sufficiently 
large economic pie, The problems of slicing and tasting ita€”of equitably distributing our 
collective wealth, and of utilizing it wisely and well so that people live lives in which they feel
safe and secure, and are healthy and happy a€’’those continue to flummox us, more or less 
completely.

That the social democratic order collapsed so rapidly around 1980 makes me think we should look 
back and try to figure out why it had not collapsed earliera€”what had changed then? I am tempted 
to put forward the hypothesis that what had changed was the aging of those with visceral memories 
of the Great Depression and of World War II, who had in the front of their minds an
unusually strong degree of empathy with others, remembering how the world, chance, and fate had 
demonstrated that we were all in this together.

So perhaps the first step is to recognize that this loss of solidarity is odd, for we are all in 
this together.

In his Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argues against those who claim that a more unequal society is 
a better society, for in a more unequal society the rich and the government can get more work out 
of the poor for the same amount of coin. Adam Smith pulls an intellectual-judo move, drawing on 
expectations about gift-exchange:

No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are 
poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body 
of the people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves 
tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodgeda€!

There are people in Pakistan whom I do not know who wove the carpets that are on the floor of my 
house. Whenever one of dogs looks like it might vomit, we frantically hustle them outside because 
the rugs are things of great beauty, which enrich our lives. In fact we should spend more time than 
we do looking down at them and admiring them. The thing about a well-functioning
gift-exchange relationship is that each party benefits greatly on net, and each party believes that 
the current favor balance is against it, so it needs to do more and thus to strengthen the 
relationship.

Every time I walk on any of my carpets, I should think: I am really one-down with respect to the 
balance of favors vis-A -vis the people in Pakistan who wove this, and I should strive harder to 
appreciate the artistic gift they have given me, and find more ways to better their lives. I should 
take care that theya€™re somewhere close to the front of my mind.
I wish I had more to offer you. But I do, at least, have this. Thank you very much.

As Michael Walzer once told me, when one starts a book project one is confident that at the end, 
when one holds the finished copy in onea€™ s hands and opens it, one will see letters of fire that 
will by the logic of iron necessity inscribe their truth directly on the minds and souls of 
readers, and that the book will be      i„Ipi a1/^, I±d1/4°i]ia1/2y, a treasure for all time. But
when the actual book appeareda€”no letters of fire, no direct truth, just chicken-scratchings that 
were not even the shadows on the wall of the cave, but rather vague gestures in the direction of 
shadows from which a good-hearted and hard-working reader might learn something. Basic is not in 
the business of publishing thousand-page books. And I very much doubt that I could have
successfully executed a thousand-page book: the difficulty of the dive goes with the square of the 
number of pages. I wound up writing a book looking forward from 1870 that is overwhelmingly about 
the political-economy consequences of the magnificent explosion in the rate of technology-driven 
growth, with occasional side-glances at the parts of the original project that I was
unable   to execute.


And there is something worse than the social democratic state forcing you to be a moocher. It is 
watching it enable others to get away with being moochers themselves. We heard this on Mitt 
Romneya€™ s posta€“2012 election conference call:

The presidents™ s campaigns! focused on giving targeted groups a big giftS! forgiveness of college 
loan interests! free contraceptives were very big with young, college-aged womenS!. [For] African 
American voters, S'ObamacareS™ was a huge plusS! getting free healthcare worth, what, $10,000 a 
family, in perpetuity, I mean this is hugeS!.
With regards to Hispanic voters, the amnesty for the children of illegalsS!

And in Mitt RomneyS™ s leaked dinnertime conversation:

There are 47 percent who are with him: who are dependent upon government, who believe that they are 
victims, who believe the government has a responsibility to care for them, who believe that they 
are entitled to health care, to food, to housing, to you-name-itS!. My job is is not to worry about 
those people. IS™ 11 never convince them they should take
personal responsibility and care for their livesS!

Now Mitt Romney is not a bad man. He will be either my 51st or 52nd favorite out of the 100 
senators in the next congress. And he has a strong, visceral aversion to social democracy precisely 
because it offers a drop of Sceto each according to their needsSD.

The takeaway: social democracyS”the New Deal Ordera€’’failed its sustainability test at the end of 
the 1970s. Perhaps it could have been revived and restored, even if somewhat zombie-like. Certainly 
those of us who worked for Bill Clinton or Tony Blair thought so. But I think people go too far 
when they see the coming of the Second Gilded Age as unhappy accident, or even as
simply the consequence of r > g in a world of demographic and productivity slowdown.

There are an embarrassingly large number of powerful candidates for the Neoliberal Turn ranging 
from the large political megaphones that money can buy through the vulnerability of social 
democracies to rent-seeking to the deep structure of human or perhaps only Indo-European language 
thought in placing a very high value on reciprocal gift-exchange as social glue. That the even
moderate steps toward less income and wealth inequality taken during the age of social democracy 
proved unsustainable should give all those who wish for it pause.

Leave a comment

4. What to Do?

Finally, I arrive at the fourth part of my talk: Given all this, what should I do? What should we 
do? What should you do?

Remember, first, that economicsa€™ s utilitarian roots place an extremely high value on equality. 
We have every reason to think that the marginal utility of consumption declines steeply with 
wealth, even after we have gotten out of the range where a 50% increase in family wealth, cuts 
infant mortality by 50% and raises adult height by 2 inches. Any aversion to interpersonal
comparisons of utility turns out, in practice, to be a claim that maybe it does not matter if they 
are poor because they would not appreciate the finer things. It is obvious how to judge any such 
claims.

Remember, second, that economicsa€™ s libertarian roots also place an extremely high value on 
equality. Absolute wealth is power over nature. Relative wealth is social power: power to seek the 
attention and assistance of others, to have a voice in what we are collectively going to doa€”and 
it is collectively, because on our own each of us would have a life nasty, brutish, and likely
to be short. As John Stuart Mill wrote, the lives of the poor are lives of degradation and 
imprisonment. If one is locked in a cage, it does not matter much whether there is no key or 
whether one is just not rich enough to buy a key

Remember, third, ethical philosophy also places an extremely high value on equality. We have none 
of us made anything by our hand and brain alone, but only through what has been freely gifted to us 
in the form of this planet and of the accumulated stock of human wisdom, to which we are all heirs.

We understand why, before 1870, human societies were greatly unequal: humanity had no chance of 
baking a sufficiently large economic pie for everyone to have enough. Those who did have enough did 
so by virtue of their participation in the A©litea€™ s domination-and-exploitation scheme. Since 
1870 humanity has accomplished a great deal: we now have the technological
powers to bake a sufficiently large economic pie that everyone living before 1870 would have seen 
as certainly more than enough. Yet, although we have solved the problem of baking a sufficiently 
large economic pie, The problems of slicing and tasting ita€”of equitably distributing our 
collective wealth, and of utilizing it wisely and well so that people live lives in which they feel
safe and secure, and are healthy and happy a€’’those continue to flummox us, more or less 
completely.

That the social democratic order collapsed so rapidly around 1980 makes me think we should look 
back and try to figure out why it had not collapsed earliera€”what had changed then? I am tempted 
to put forward the hypothesis that what had changed was the aging of those with visceral memories 
of the Great Depression and of World War II, who had in the front of their minds an
unusually strong degree of empathy with others, remembering how the world, chance, and fate had 
demonstrated that we were all in this together.

So perhaps the first step is to recognize that this loss of solidarity is odd, for we are all in 
this together.

In his Wealth of Nations, Adam Smith argues against those who claim that a more unequal society is 
a better society, for in a more unequal society the rich and the government can get more work out 
of the poor for the same amount of coin. Adam Smith pulls an intellectual-judo move, drawing on 
expectations about gift-exchange:

No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are 
poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body 
of the people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves 
tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodgeda€!

There are people in Pakistan whom I do not know who wove the carpets that are on the floor of my 
house. Whenever one of dogs looks like it might vomit, we frantically hustle them outside because 
the rugs are things of great beauty, which enrich our lives. In fact we should spend more time than 
we do looking down at them and admiring them. The thing about a well-functioning
gift-exchange relationship is that each party benefits greatly on net, and each party believes that 
the current favor balance is against it, so it needs to do more and thus to strengthen the 
relationship.

Every time I walk on any of my carpets, I should think: I am really one-down with respect to the 
balance of favors vis-A -vis the people in Pakistan who wove this, and I should strive harder to 
appreciate the artistic gift they have given me, and find more ways to better their lives. I should 
take care that theya€™re somewhere close to the front of my mind.
I wish I had more to offer you. But I do, at least, have this. Thank you very much.

As Michael Walzer once told me, when one starts a book project one is confident that at the end, 
when one holds the finished copy in onea€™ s hands and opens it, one will see letters of fire that 
will by the logic of iron necessity inscribe their truth directly on the minds and souls of 
readers, and that the book will be      i„Ipi a1/^, I±d1/4°i}ia1/2$, a treasure for all time. But
when the actual book appeareda€”no letters of fire, no direct truth, just chicken-scratchings that 
were not even the shadows on the wall of the cave, but rather vague gestures in the direction of 
shadows from which a good-hearted and hard-working reader might learn something. Basic is not in 
the business of publishing thousand-page books. And I very much doubt that I could have
successfully executed a thousand-page book: the difficulty of the dive goes with the square of the 
number of pages. I wound up writing a book looking forward from 1870 that is overwhelmingly about 
the political-economy consequences of the magnificent explosion in the rate of technology-driven 
growth, with occasional side-glances at the parts of the original project that I was
unable   to execute.

