Subscribe now

Give a gift subscription

First:

FRED  — 5-Year Breakeven Inflation Rate

3.2

2021-03            2021-05                             2021-09           2021

As I have said, I have a very gooda€”nearly Turing-classa€’’Larry Summers mental emulation model 
running on my wetware. It is, in fact, so good that sometimes I wonder: Has it not achieved 
sentience on its own? Has it not taken me over, and turned the rest of me into its meat-puppet?

But, as I have also said, I simply cannot track how Larry got to his conclusion that, right now, it 
is effectively 1976: that rather than focusing on achieving rapid and complete recovery and leaving 
problems of containing inflation expectations to the future, the Federal Reserve needs to focus 
RIGHT NOW on controlling inflation and IMMEDIATELY scotch expectations of an inflationary spiral,
lest it get itself into a situation like 1979 three years down the road.

David Glasner agrees with my failure-to-track:

David Glasner: Sic Transit Inflatio Mundi\ a€~The mismatch between the growth of demand and the 
growth of supply has been manifested in rising inflation. If the bottleneck theory of inflation is 
true, then the short-term growth potential of the economy is greater than the 2% rate posited by 
Summers. As bottlenecks are removed and workers that withdrew from the
labor force during the pandemic are re-employed, the economy could easily grow faster than Summers 
is willing to acknowledge. Summers simply assumes, but doesna€™t demonstrate, his conclusion. 
a€oeThis all suggests that policy will need to restrain demand to restore price stability.a€D No, 
it does not suggest that at all. It only suggests the possibility that demand
may have to be restrained to keep prices stable. Recent inflation may have been a delayed response 
to an expansive monetary policy designed to prevent a contraction of demand during the pandemic. A 
temporary increase in inflation does not necessarily call for an immediate contractionary response. 
Ita€™ s too early to tell with confidence whether preventing future
inflation requires, as Summers asserts, monetary policy to be tightened immediately. That option 
shouldna€™ t be taken off the table, but the Fed clearly hasna€™ t done soa€!

LINK: <https ://uneasy money .com/2021/12/19/sic-transit-inflatio-mundi/>

In the 1970s, it was called a "wage-price spiral" for good reason. I do nota€”yeta€”see the workers 
whose actions at the margin drive events willing to go to the mat for nominal-wage increases next 
year to make up for inflation this year. I do not seea€”yeta€”the gearing of next year's expected 
inflation to this year's actual inf that we would need to see for it to be 1976. Instead, it still 
looks to

mA mimh mnrA UITA th A nnet XX/nrlrl XX/ar IT and l^nrAtin War pra rpravprv find ctrimtiirfil 
rAfidinctmAnt dienrAtA iinward inmnc in tliA nrinA IAVAI


One Picture:

Progress in Empowering Women in MENA and Other Developing Regions, 2000


Female life expectancy
100

MENA

Developing regions


^eais neia oy women in

parliament (percent)

Reduction in fertility rate


Ratio of women to men in
nonagricultural-wage
employment

GDP per capita (USS)

Ratio of girls to boys in primary
and secondary education

Note: These are normalized indicators; the aim is to show comparison.
Sources: World Bank 2OO3J and World Bank staff estimates.

fNAhli ^nrl Chemlon 7004^

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Guardian Staff & Agencies: Crowd Boos Trump After He Reveals He Took Covid Booster. a€~Trump 
once again claimed credit for producing the vaccine, saying vaccine wariness was a€~playing into 
the handsa€™ of his opponentsa€l. The former president made the disclosure on Sunday night during 
the final stop of The History Tour, a live interview show he has been doing
with the former Fox News host Bill Oa€™ Reillya€l. a€oeWe got a vaccine done,a€D he said, telling 
supporters that wariness of the vaccine was a€oeplaying into the handsa€D of his opponents. 
a€oeDona€™ t take it away from ourselves. Youa€™ re playing right into their hands when you sort of 
like, a€~oh the vaccinea€™ a€! no mandates, but take credita€Ua€l. Trump had
told the Wall Street Journal in a September interview that he a€oeprobablya€oe wouldna€™t get a 
booster shota€! 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2021/dec/20/trump-covid-19-booster-shot-crowd-boos>

• CDC: Risk for COVIDdC “19 Infection, Hospitalization, & Death by Age 
GroMp<https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/covid-data/investigations-discovery/hospitalization-
death-by-age.html>

•  Jonathan Portes: Marking Myself to Market: My Forecasts for 2021, Evaluated'. a€~While I did 
expect inflation to rise with reopening, because of (as noted in my answers above) pent-up demand 
and labour market and product market bottlenecks, I didna€™ t think it would rise so far so fast. 
But I still think that (barring further major shocks) ita€™ s likely to fall back quite fast in
the second half of next yeara€l 
<https://ukandeu.ac.uk/marking-myself-to-market-my-forecasts-for-2021-evaluated/>

•  Noah Smith: Why the CTC Is so Important'. a€~Ita€™ s more than a welfare program: Ita€™ s the 
future of welfarea€l LINK:


Why the CTC is so important

(Even before you read this post, go sign this petition to save the Child Tax Credit!) Joe Bidena€™ 
s a€oeBuild Back Bettera€D bill is in peril. Senator Joe Manchin a€” the pivotal vote in the Senate 
a€” has declared that hea€™ s a a€cenoa€D, drawing a sharply worded statement from the White 
Housea€!

Read more

a year ago A- 26 likes A- 22 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Matthew Zeitlin: Personnel Isna€™ t Policy, Policy Is Personnel'. a€~It wasna€™ t Larry Summers 
who allegedly told Romer that monetary policy had a€oeshot its wad,a€D or tried to explain high 
unemployment with reference to bank tellers and ATMs. It was Barack Obamaa€!

Matthew Zeitlin's Newsletter

Personnel Isn't Policy, Policy Is Personnel

Ia€™ m back! Even though this newsletter is free, I feel bad about not writing. Whata€™ s going on, 
uhhh, since the beginning of the year has not been conducive to thinking about the subjects I want 
to write about or really much thinking at all. Despite that, therea€™ s actually been an influx of 
new subscribers, taking the total to over 1,000, which is thrillina€!
Read more

2 years ago A- 7 likes A- 5 comments A- Matthew Zeitlin

Paragraphs:

Dani Rodrik & Stefanie Stantcheva: Fixing Capitalismd€™ s Good Jobs Problem'. a€~Conventional 
welfare state policies that centre on education, training, progressive taxation, and social 
insurance are inadequate to address labour market polarization, which is capitalisma€™ s most 
pressing inclusion challenge at present. We propose a strategy aimed directly at the productive 
sphere of the
economy and targeting an increase in the supply of a€~good jobsa€™ . The main elements of this 
strategy are: (i) active labour market policies linked to employers; (ii) industrial and regional 
policies directly targeting the creation of good jobs; (iii) innovation policies that incentivize 
labour-friendly technologies; (iv) international economic policies that facilitate the maintenance 
of high
domestic labour/social standards. These elements are connected both by their objectivea€’’expanding 
the number of good jobsa€’’and by a new approach to regulation that is collaborative and iterative 
rather than top- down and prescriptive. We emphasize the importance of new institutional 
arrangements that enable strategic long-term information exchange and cooperation between 
governments
and firmsa€!

LINK: <https://scholar.harvard .edu/files/stantcheva/files/fixing capitalisms_good_jobs_problem 
,pdf>

Joe Conason: Why Do Republicans Keep Killing Their Own?: a€~As the omicron variant threatens to 
inflict yet more suffering and death, it is maddening to realize how easily this next wave of the 
coronavirus could have been avoided or certainly mitigated if only more Americans had been fully 
vaccinateda€!. The campaign by right-wing Republican leaders, in both politics and media, to herd
their sheeplike followers into a suicidal rejection of vaccinesa€! is a crusade rife with 
contradictions at every level. As president, Donald Trump was responsible for financing the 
a€oeOperation Warp Speeda€D effort to bring forth vaccines as rapidly as possible and could even 
claim some credit for its success. As soon as they became available, prominent conservatives such 
as Rupert Murdoch,
the superannuated Fox News boss, went abroad to get vaccinated as soon as possiblea€!. The bloody 
consequences of their demagoguery are starkly illustrated in real statistics as well as charts and 
graphsa€l. The unanswered question of why the Republicans have so eagerly adopted the anti-vaccine 
ideology once confined to a sideshow of barking crazies and grifters. Why are they fighting to
ban vaccine mandatesa€”even for health care and nursing home workers? Why are they promising to 
protect and even reward workers who refuse vaccination? Why are they forcing schools to abandon 
masking, vaccination, and other protective measures? Why, as we surpass the morbid milestone of 
800,000 dead, are they doing everything in their power to ensure that we will have to bury

many more?a€!

LINK: <https://www.nationalmemo.com/amp/republican-anti-vax-campaign-2656068237

Ed Yong: Important Pandemic Reads, Omicron Edition: a€~Omicron didna€™ t much shift the way I 
weighed my personal riska€!. If I got the virus on my birthday, Ia€™ d expect to be knocked down 
for a time but okay by Christmasa€”and Ia€™ d expect the same to be true for everyone who was meant 
to comea€!. [But] Omicron is spreading so rapidly that if someone got infected at my
party, my decision to host it could easily affect people who dona€™t know me, and who had no say in 
the risks that I unwittingly imposed upon them. Omicron is unlikely to land me in the hospital, but 
it could send my guestsa€™ grandparents or parents to onea€!. I feel that the medical system in 
this country is at a tipping pointa€”a fragile vase balanced so precariously on an edge that even a
fly could knock it over. Omicron is a bullet. Ita€™ s one that we can each choose whether to 
firea€!. The infectious nature of a virus means that a tiny bad decision can cause exponential 
harm, but also that a tiny wise decision can do exponential gooda€!

LINK: <https://www.balloon-juice.com/2021/12/20/important-pandemic-reads-omicron-edition/>

Laurie Penny: The Actual War on Christmas: a€~Yes, we all need to stay indoors and cancel our 
plans. Omicron is madly contagious. In London, hospitals are struggling to operate because so many 
of their staff are suddenly sick themselves. Omicron is so catching that in one 600-person club in 
Sydney, after one infected person attended, 200 people came down with it. Either its one hell of a
variant or thata€™ s one hell of a club. Thata€™ s whata€™ s coming, and the people who were heroes 
last time will do their best to be heroes again, but our infrastructure is exhausteda€!

LINK:



Penny Red

The Actual War on Christmas

Well, fuck. There goes another Christmas. Ia€™ m writing this from London, where the Omicron 
variant is absolutely everywhere. These past few days the city has been gradually unpeopling. The 
coffee shop we go to every morning was almost empty, and thata€™ s almost unheard of - ita€™ s a 
community hub - and at the end of the day they shut their doors. Everyone is sick, or knows
somebody who is. Everything is muffled under a torch-through-a- blanket sky. In retrospect, when a 
bunch of incompetent aristocrats promised us a staggering global catastrophe would be over by 
Christmas, we might have known not to believe thema€!

Read more

a year ago A- 1 like A- 1 comment A- Laurie Penny

Rajiv Sethi: Notes on a Remarkable Finding from Finland: a€~A paper by Ursina Schaede and Ville 
Mankkia€! a fascinating empirical findinga€ I. A change in the manner in which their teachers were 
selecteda€!. The admissions process has a first stage based largely on scores on a high school 
matriculation exam, followed by a second stagea€!. For a number of years, acceptance into the
second stage was based on a quota, ensuring that at least 40 percent of students making it through 
the first stage of evaluation were malea€!. The first post-quota cohort thus graduated in 1994. The 
paper examines the causal effects of this change on the long run outcomes for studentsa€!. Students 
differentially exposed to the quota-constrained cohorts of teachers ended up with better educational
attainment and labor force participation at age 25a€L The evidence a€oeis consistent with male 
quota teachers contributing positive qualities to the school environment that are not sufficiently 
captured by the selection criterion in absence of the quota.a€Da€l It is not that the quota 
teachers proved effective because they were male. It is that the distributions of important 
characteristics
(unmeasured                                                                                         
                                                                                                  
by scores) were not identical across male and female applicant pools. The quota was picking up 
individuals with these characteristics by proxy. It is the characteristics that mattered for 
students, not the gender of the teachera€!

LINK:

Imperfect Information

Notes on a Remarkable Finding from Finland

I recently came across a paper by Ursina Schaede and Ville Mankki that contains a fascinating 
empirical finding with major implications for the way in which we think about meritocracy. The 
paper examines the long run effects on students of a change in the manner in which their teachers 
were selected into a graduate program. Finland is well known for hava€!

Read more

a year ago A- 2 comments A- Rajiv Sethi
Leave a comment

Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality is a reader-supported publication. To receive new posts and support 
my work, consider becoming a free or paid subscriber.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

