Subscribe now

FOCUS: A Lesson on How I Should Read the Political News:


After this just-past election, I double-down on my resolution to pay more attention to information 
sources that (a) crunch numbers, (b) read reports, or (c ) think for themselves on their own 
SubStacks, and less attention to information s
The final election forecast from number-cruncher Nate Silver and company 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com> at Monday-Tuesday midnight was:

that (d) traffic in their a€ceaccessa€D, usually to sources that remain anonymous:

UPDATED NOV. 8, 2022, AT 12:22 AM

- - - - - - - - - - - - U.S. SENATE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -                     
      - - - - - - - - - - - - - U.S. HOUSE - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


Republicans are slightly
favored to win the Senate

The Deluxe version of our model simulates the election 40,000
times to see which party wins the Senate most often. This sample
of 100 outcomes gives you an idea of the range of scenarios the
model considers possible.

Republicans are favored to
win the House

The Deluxe version of our model simulates the election 40,000
times to see which party wins the House most often. This sample of
100 outcomes gives you an idea of the range of scenarios the model
considers possible.


Republicans win

59 in 100

Democrats win

41 in 100

Republicans win

84 in 100

Democrats win

16 in 100


56   55

REP
SEATS

52   53   54   55   56

DEM
SEATS

240

255

DEM
SEATS

MAJORITY                                                            MAJORITY

•  Republicans win • Democrats win                                       •  Republicans win ® 
Democrats win


SEE THE SENATE FORECAST                                          SEE THE HOUSE FORECAST

a€oeRepublicans are slightly favored to win the Senatea€D by a very small margin. And 
a€oeRepubicans are favored to win the Housea€D with a a likely result of fifteen more seats than 
needed for a bare majority.

That is what the polls showed. Perhaps there was some reason to suspect a systematic polling error, 
but Nate Silver and company think about that and try to factor it in. There was reason to think 
that if there were substantial polling errors that it would understate Republican supporta€”and 
thus that a a€oered wavea€D was not beyond the bounds of possibility. But the atmospheric factors 
for such a wave were not obvious, and it seemed to me to be a possibility,
not a likelihood.

And yet, and yet, and yet, that was not the access-journalism a€cevibea€D last weeka€!

Last weekend I read an article that seemed to me not an uncommon one for the moment, but still 
bizarre. I stuck a pin in. It was the New Yorkera€™ s Benjamin Wallace-Wells (who wrote many very 
good articles at New York and elsewhere), writing as the midterm election got down to the wire that 
a blowout, indeed a Democratic bloodbath, was not a possibility but a likelihood:

Benjamin Wallace-Wells: Why Republican Insiders Think the G.O.P. Is Poised for a Blowout: The 
consensus among pollsters and consultants is this Tuesdaya€™ s election will be a a€cebloodbatha€D 
for the Democratic Partya€!

The article starts with unclarity: (a) does the a€oeRepublicana€D adjective in the headline 
continue to modify the a€oepollsters and consultantsa€D, who are thus subclasses of a€oeRepublican 
insidersa€D, or (b) are the a€oepollsters and consultantsa€D a broader group who agree with the 
a€oeRepublican insidersa€D? Since many consultants are not true insiders, and since pollsters are 
in general not insiders, I read the sub-head as telling me that the grouips
that expects a a€cebloodbatha€D with high probability is a broader one. But I agree you can read it 
either way.

But let us go on to the text, which, I believe, names none of its sources other than Stan 
Greenberg. The text opens:

On Wednesday afternoon, I spoke with a leading Republican political consultant about the Senate 
campaign in Georgiaa€!. The Republican consultant told me that Warnocka€™ s prospects were even 
bleaker than many recent public polls suggest. a€oeThere isna€™ t a single private poll in America 
that has Herschel Walker anything but ahead,a€D the Republican consultant told me. a€oeNot one.a€D 
The consensus among a number
of G.O.P. pollsters and operatives I spoke to this week is that in the Senate races that are 
thought to be competitive, Republican candidates are heading for a clean sweep: Mehmet Oz will beat 
John Fetterman in Pennsylvania, and not just by a point or two; Adam Laxalt looks pretty certain to 
defeat the incumbent Democratic senator Catherine Cortez Masto in Nevada; even less regarded 
candidates such as Blake Masters in Arizona will
be carried into office by a predicted wavea€!. High-profile races in which G.O.P. candidates were 
already favored now look like potential blowoutsa€”Kari Lakea€™ s campaign for governor in Arizona, 
J. D. Vancea€™ s for Senate in Ohio. And some races that seemed out of reach, such as the Senate 
campaign, in New Hampshire, of the election denier Don Bolduc, now look like possible wins. The 
word that kept coming up in these
conversations was a€cebloodbatha€Da€!

At this point my reaction was: that is what they say, but is there any reason to take what they say 
to be what they believe, rather than them simply talking their book? Wallace-Wells answers my 
question in the next paragraph. It is what they believea€”for I spoke to Democrats as well a€oeto 
provide a checka€D:
My interesta€! wasa€! to collect prediction^! [and] hear the G.O.P.a€™ s story of the election. 
(Ia€! spoke witha€! Democratic peersa€! to provide a checka€!

So Wallace-Wells dove into answering the question his headline asks: Why did they believe in a 
likely a€cebloodbatha€D for the Democrats? The answer was straightforward:

I wanted to know what they thought earlier polls had missed, and how a race that had seemed like a 
tossup for much of the year could turn into a Republican routa€!. Thea€! overturning of]a€! Roe v. 
Wadea€! changed pollinga€!. [A] Republican strategist told me. a€oeAnswering a political poll 
itself became a kind of expression of political identity.a€Da€l As much as sixty per cent of 
Democratic poll respondents this summer
werea€! super votersa€! who vote in every single election, even though such voters normally compose 
about a third of the general electoratea€!. a€oeThis created an informational doom loop, where 
Democratic candidates get told, You should talk about January 6th, democracy being on the ballot, 
trans rights,a€™ a€D he said, a€oebecause their primary super voters are picking up the phone and 
telling them this is what they care
about.a€Da€! At the same time, the polls were likely underrepresenting certain segments of the 
electoratea€!. One of the most visible groups in politicsa€! especially energized bya€! Dobbsa€! 
had shifted toward Democratsa€!. One of the least visiblea€! toward Republicans. a€oeThe 
fastest-moving portion of the electorate is Hispanic men, and the second-fastest-moving portion of 
the electorate is Black men,a€D the Republican
consultant told me. You want to get them on the phone? a€oeGood fucking luck.a€D

But, once again, is this just Republican pollsters and consultants talking their booka€”what they 
say, not what they believe! Wallace-Wells says: no. It is what they believea€”and it is also true:
A Democratic pollster told me, a€oeArizona is, I think, like ground zero for that trend. I think 
youa€™re [also] seeing a lot of Hispanic drift toward Laxalta€Da€!

Why were the Democrats leaking support? Because, Wallace-Wells says, while:

Republicans couldna€™ t wait to get away from the major social issuesa€!. Democrats continued to 
focus on thema€L The Republican strategist told me, a€oeThe reason that Democrats have fucked this 
up is that they wona€™ t stop talking about abortion. And the reason that they screwed it up with 
Blacks is they wona€™ t stop talking about abortion.  Ita€™ s like theya€™re a two-issue party. 
Ita€™ s this and Trump. They

cana€™ t stop. I dona€™ t think they have anything elsea€Da€!

By contrast:

Republicans have tended to emphasize a simple story about inflationa€!. As the Republican 
strategist put it to me, a€oelnflation is the big federal story, and a lot of blame belongs on the 
White House, because the White House just wished this would goa€Ua€!. Republicans also moved to 
capitalize on the flailing economy with declarations that the country was descending into chaosa€!

And, Wallace-Wells says, there is a non-partisan judgment that the Republican message worked:

Democratic consultant Stanley Greenberg wrotea€!. Candidates a€oefaced a barrage of ads on crime 
starting in September and early October, a barrage aided by Fox News dramatically increasing its 
crime reporting.a€D This offensive seems to have worked: when Greenberg asked voters what they most 
feared about Democratic control of Congress, their top pick was a€oecrime and homelessness out of 
control in cities and police
coming under attack,a€D which ran thirteen points ahead of concerns about illegal immigration^!. By 
Octobera€! Democrats were too trapped in issuesa€’’abortion and the threat to democracya€’’that 
appealed to their most devoted and best-educated supporters, and had not done enough to reassure 
voters that they were addressing material concernsa€!

And at the end of the story Wallace-Wells sums up:

The economy is not good, and the President is both a Democrat and unpopular. If you looked only at 
those factors you might expect a result not unlike the Republican wave that these G.O.P. insiders 
have predicted. Maybe the race was simple enough that it could be sketched on a napkin. a€oel can 
show you the trajectory of all our races,a€D the Republican pollster told mea€!. Once we finally 
got to October, we have enough money, the
electorate becomes more fully engaged, and then the other side of the a€~Va€™ is straight back up. 
I can show you the same story in probably twenty-five races.a€D

The Needle: Senate and House Forecast

We stopped updating these forecasts at 4 a.m. Eastern time on Wednesday, Nov. 9.

Phonm of u/innina Qanain rnnirnl                                                                    
  Phanra of tx/inninor Moiico oonfrol


Leaning Dem.

66% CHANCE OF CONTROL

Jump to Senate forecast

Probably Rep.

83% CHANCE OF CONTROL

Jump to House forecast

LEANING


LIKELY

VERY LIKELY

LIKELY

VERY LIKELY

LIKELY

VERY LIKELY

Turning Off Our Estimates                                                4:03 AM ET

The “red wave” did not materialize, and election night ended with many close races that will be 
decided
by mail-in ballots. We expect the remaining vote that will decide control of Congress will take 
days, if
not weeks, to count. Follow the latest election results here >

The thing about Wallace-Wellsa€™ s article is that today, five days after its pre-election weekend 
publication, it is obvious that none of this is true:

• Mehmet Oz did not win over John Fetterman a€oeand not just by a point or twoa€D: he lost.

• Adam Laxalt was not a€oepretty certain to defeata€D Catherine Cortez Masto in Nevada: he is 
behind.

• Blake Masters in Arizona was not a€oecarried into office by aa€! wavea€D: she lost by five 
percentage points.

• Kari Lake in Arizona was not a a€oepotential blowouta€D: she is behind Katie Hobbs by a narrow 
but durable margin.

• Don Bolduc in New Hampshire was not a a€oepossible wina€D: he lost by ten percentage points.

•  Of the six Republicans whom Wallace-Wells had anointed as winners, only J.D. Vance managed a 
wina€’’albeit not a a€ceblowouta€D: a six percentage-point margin.

What is Wallace-Wellsa€™ s reaction to the now-obvious fact that his article of five days ago was 
bilgewatera€”that he was either tricked by Republicans talking their book, and trying to use a 
media echo chamber to create a last-minute enthusiasm wave, or high on their own supply? What is 
his reaction to the now-obvious fact that he spun a false story of Democrats massively losing the 
election talking too much about abortion and too little about controlling
inflation, deporting illegal immigrants, and putting trans people in their proper place?

He starts by interpreting his pre-election recital of Republican spina€”the thing I did, remember, 
think somewhat bizarre last weekenda€”as not him being spun into a fantasyworld, but as a 
bipartisan consensus expectation that was validated by the first several hours of the vote count:

Benjamin Wallace-Wells: The Midterm Elections Deliver a Stunning Return to the Status Quo: The red 
wave never materialized, Trumpa€™ s handpicked candidates underperformed, some new faces 
emergeda€”but the country appears as evenly divided as ever. As the first polls closeda€l 
Republicans and Democrats shared an expectation that the basic structure of U.S. politics was about 
to change, probably in a red wave, if not a
tsunami. The nighta€™ s first meaningful resultsa€l suggested that might be happeninga€l [as] Ron 
DeSantis won his race for governor by twenty pointsa€l not just in rural Florida but ina€l Tampaa€l 
Miami-Dadea€l. [That] alone suggested that a tidal change was under way.

But then, he writes, as the evening went on:

That early breakthrough quickly gave way to uncertaintya€l. Where, exactly, was the wave?a€l Not 
even in rural Pennsylvania, a symbolic heart of Trump country, wherea€l Fettermana€l was declared 
the winner early Wednesday morning. As midnight passeda€l control of the Senate was still up for 
grabs...

And so he spins the failure of his own previous camping-out in Republican-spin fantasyworld to 
reflect reality as a great mystery. That Senate control was not decided decisively for Republicans 
on election night, and that the Republicans do not have a large House majority:

qualifies as a medium-sized stunnera€l. Democrats lost sixty-three House seats in Barack Obamaa€™ s 
first midterm, and fifty-two in Bill Clintona€™ sa€l. The public broadly disapproves of the job 
that Joe Biden is doinga€l. Inflation is running at eight per centa€l. The economy, broadly, is 
teeteringa€l. How could it be that the turn away from Biden was not more decisive than this?a€I
Was there a turn away from Biden at all? The Democrats look to be more likely than not to be 
gaining a Senate seat, no?

Well, Wallace-Wells starts by saying that a bunch of things are true that are very different from 
the things he said were true five days before:


±nv iwpuunvaii pian nan uwn tu mn vn mv uvunuiiij, aim tu mini mvnioviwo ad an aiLuiiiauvu LV a 
otauud LJUV mat mv puunv ownivn ivauj LV IVJWU uui mat io namvi wnvn a wnovi vauiw oupivniv wun nao 
judtaxx [uvunuiiivuj ixw v. vvanvaxx ^aimj iiunip is OLIII nnvgiai tv uiv pvimvai iivwd, oajing 
viaz^j uniigaaxx in\.v mug nvaivio vugnt LV UV ounnnainj VAWULVU. ±1 ZAIIIVI ivano uivauij uinuv 
Liling^ aiv gving uamj, uivn wiiovi v an wo

are still part of the reasona€!

And then he stresses the closeness of results:

Many elections remained very closea€!. No one could conclusively say where many of the 
highest-profile races stooda€!. In the contested Western states that may decide control of the 
Senate (Arizona, Nevada), the results were too tentative to say mucha€!

That lowballs how much we know. John Fetterman flipped the Pennsylvania Senate seat to the 
Democrats. For the Republicans to gain control of the Senate, they would have to win the 
not-yet-counted votes in Arizona by enough to overcome a Democratic lead, and then get enough more 
of their supporters to turn out for the Georgia runoff to overcome a Democratic lead. That looks to 
me like a 25% shot. It is not the case that we cannot say much. We can say
that you shouldna€™ t bet on Republican control of the Senate at less than 3-1 odds.

And Wallace-Wells concludes with the observation that there has, perhaps, been a generational shift:
Biden himself cut a diminished figure during this campaigna€!


And:

A sitting Republican senator told Politicoa€™ s Jonathan Martin that no more than five of his 
partya€™ s fifty senators actually wanted to see Trump runa€!. The ex-President went out of his way 
to undercut DeSantisa€!. a€oel will tell you things about him that wona€™ t be very flatteringa€”I 
know more about him than anybody, other than, perhaps, his wife,a€D Trump said. a€oel think if he 
runs, he could hurt himself very
badly .a€Da€! In building his margin of twenty points, DeSantis swept the state of Floridaa€!. 
DeSantis rather than Trumpa€™ s handpicked candidatesa€! delivered the signature Republican 
victorya€!

Back when I worked for the US Treasury, I learned many things from Bob Rubin. Among them were three 
questions that a group of which I was a part should always be asking themselves:

1. [At the end of a meeting:] What else will we, in one, three, or ten years, wish we had done 
today?

2. [After we win:] Were we smarta€”did we make the right decisions along the way that led us 
herea€”or were we just lucky?

3. [After we lose:] Were we unluckya€”did we just take risks and have the dice fall the wrong 
waya€”or did we make analytical mistakes?
Am I wrong in wishing that the New Yorker would have its staff clued-in to ask these questions as 
well?

A much better day-after take comes from the SubStack of Matt Yglesias:

Matt Yglesias: Democrats pulled off one of the best midterms ever: I was wronga€\. Democratsa€™ 
best issue was clearly abortion when the Supreme Court hung an albatross around Republicansa€™ 
necks. Democrats ran lots of ads about abortion. Lots and lots and lots of ads. To the point where 
a lot of people on both sides thought they were really fucking up by not doing more to be visibly 
addressing the crime and inflation issues
that voters said was more important. I always thought the abortion-centric ad strategy was the 
right choice among the choices available, but I still didna€™ t really think it would work. Yet 
looking around, I think you have to conclude that it dida€!

Then comes the one sentence Matt wrote that annoyed me:

Democratsa€! didna€™ t wildly outperform the polls or anything. But they did outperform the 
vibesa€!.

In Matta€™ s expressed view, the a€cevibesa€D consist of (a) the history of in-party midterm 
performances, (b) the belief that Biden is unpopular and that the election would be a referendum on 
Biden, and (c) skepticism that pollsters know how to obtain a sample. But (a) and (b) are things 
that work through the pollsa€”not reasons to disbelieve them. And (c) was, as I said, a 
possibility, not a likelihood. But I think he suppresses the most important part of
a€cevibesa€D: the media echo-chamber as generated by those who do not crunch numbers or read 
reports or think for themselves but who instead traffic in their a€ceaccessa€D. That was, mostly, 
where the vibes were coming from. And there is no reason to believe in what you get from access 
journalisma€’’after all, were Jared and Ivanka really horrified by what the Trump presidency was 
doing, and trying to save us all?

But this is more-than-balanced by the best line in the piecea€”the one that made me laugh out loud:

Democrats outperformed a factional battle in which both moderates and progressives spent Tuesday 
morning a€ceexplaininga€D why Democrats did so badly (it was the other factiona€™ s fault) only to 
need to pivot once the results came ina€!.

And so he reaches his main conclusion:

People dona€™ t like having their rights taken awaya€!. A critical swathe of the public prefers not 
to be represented in office by kooks and insurrectionistsa€!. While there was polling error in 2022 
, it was random and uncorrelated, which is how ita€™ s supposed to work. I didna€™ t believe the 
polls could possibly be right, because they suggested Democrats would do amazingly well in 
historical context, which felt impossible given
that Biden isna€™ t super-popular. But I was wronga€!

And Matt has two other points that I see as exceptionally smart. First:

Ia€! think that abortion is important toa€! Florida Exceptionalisma€!. There very much was a hard 
red breaka€! ina€! Floridaa€!. Florida has a GOP trifecta that took up abortion legislation, passed 
a 15-week ban, and then went no further. Fifteen-week ban is populara€! protects the overwhelming 
majority of abortions that actually take placea€! show[s]a€! pro-choice Florida voters that they 
could be trusted with political powera€!
[which] GOP politicians elsewhere in the country couldna€™t demonstrated!

Second:

We have tentative evidence that the public rewarded the robust jobs growth under Biden more than 
the tenor of media commentary might lead you to believed!. The idea that people would regard the 
2022 economy as actually worse than the 2010 economy seemed extremely bleaka€! and I now think they 
just didna€™ t. But having restored full employment, the central task continues to be not so much 
a€oecurbing inflationa€D (which
would be achieved through massive unemployment) but unlocking abundance and delivering on the 
promise of ARP, IRA, IIJA, and the CHIPS Act with regulatory followthrougha€!

And Matt concludes:

I was wrong about the 2022 midterms, and Ia€™ ve never been so glad to be wronga€!

Remember: Competent number crunchers, people who read reports, and people who think for themselves. 
Those who traffic in their a€ceaccessa€D to anonymous sourcesa€’’especially those who are not 
immediately on the horn to their sources asking them a€oewhy do you think you were so 
wrong?a€da€”not so much.
Share

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Amy Castor: Crypto collapse: J. Pierpont Moneygonea€”FTX rekt, bought by Binance: 
a€~Bankman-Fried runsa€! Alameda Research, his crypto hedge fund; FTX, his unregulated offshore 
crypto casinoa€!. FTX US, his exchange for US customers that purports to operate under US law and 
accepts actual dollarsa€!. Ian Allison posted an explosive story on a partially leaked balance 
sheet for Alamedaa€! super cashed-upa€! if you account for
FTXa€™ s own FTT token at mark-to-market, and not what you could actually get for that much of 
their private illiquid altcoina€!

• Damian Cave: The Worlda€™ s Democracies Ask: Why Cana€™ t America Fix Itself?: a€~Conversations 
across continents reveal alarm over the United Statesa€™ direction, as it slides away from ideals 
it once pressed other nations to adopta€!

•  Steve Randy Waldmann: Real inflation cycle theory: a€~Until February of this year, team 
transitory was right. In 2022, the fiscal impulse of the COVID era was going to collapse as quickly 
as it had arisen (and it has). That, and some monetary tightening,and unsnarling some temporary  
supply-sideSNAFUs, would have ended the inflationa€!. Then shit happened. February and early Spring 
broughta€! the Ukraine Wara€! Omicrona€! [in]
COVID-Zero Chinaa€! accelerating mistrust and hostility between China and the Westa€!. Patterns of 
sustainable specialization and trade that we have long depended upon are likely to be, well, no 
longer sustainablea€!

• Matthew Downhour: In defense of entitlement: a€~Every voter wants the governments™ s help to make 
a living. Insisting that that help not be structured as an entitlement, however, drags the entire 
economy downa€!

• Casey Newton and ZoA« Schiffer: Twitter, Cut in Halfa€™: a€~Eight days into Muska€™ s ownership 
of Twitter, many pundits have begun to predict that this is the beginning of the end. No one can 
quite imagine a world without Twitter, but no  one canquite imagine this version of Twitter 
surviving, eithera€!
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

AJs:

Charlie Warzel: Elon Muska€™ s Twitter takeover, explained in 19 Elon Musk tweets: a€~I hopea€! you 
lead a richer, more spiritually fulfilling life than I doa€!. But for those who want to catch 
upa€!. SoeOctober 27: The Bird Is Freeda€!. October 28: Time to Form an Independent Committees! a 
content moderation councils!. October 28 and 29: Rejoice! Comedy Is Now Legal!S!. October 30: 
Conspiracy Theory SundayS!. October 30
(continued): Never ApologizeS!. Wow, Still October 30: BrainstormingS! a good example of Elon Musk 
and his Twitter advisers (like the investor Jason Calacanis) conducting market research via the 
internets™ s least scientific tool: Twitter pollsS!. Brief Interlude: SoeHalloween with my MomSnS!. 
November 1: Power to the Peasants: TwitterS™ s current lords & peasants system for who has or 
doesnS™ t have a blue checkmark is
bullshit.    Power to the people! Blue for $8/monthS!. November 2: More Twitter-Poll Market 
ResearchS!. November 3: The Very Big Idea: Because it consists of billions of bidirectional 
interactions per day, Twitter can be thought of as a collective, cybernetic super-intelligenceS!. 
November 6: Beyond Parody: Going forward, any Twitter handles engaging in impersonation without 
clearly specifying SoeparodySD will be permanently suspendedS!.
Surround Yourself With Yes-MenS LSD

Yesterday began the second workweek of Muska€™ s tenure. He celebrated it in the traditional way, 
by tweeting an image of a Nazi soldier in a meme about birdsa€!. Followed by two separate 
masturbation jokesa€! an endorsement of the Republican Partya€!.


WhaUi?sinSTRiinoniorro^Drin^^eyoi^noi^naos^n^a!^a^a€;
Donate Subscriptions

Get 50% off a group subscription
Give a gift subscription

Leave a comment


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong s Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Subscribe now

