Subscribe now

First, why do people do this?:

What Fresh Hell Do Republican Staffers Live in?:

Tweeting out that the CO VID threat has been overhyped by Democrats while your boss lies dying in 
the hospital from COVIDa€”this is a form of performance art that I never imagined would appear, 
even in this Fallen
Sublunary Sphere. Yet first Republican presidential candidate Herman 9-9-9 Cain, and not Republican 
House member Ron White:

Patricia Kayden: a€™ Just before he died, Republican Rep [Ron White] sent out these tweets: 
"Democrats are choosing teachers unions and special interests over the well-being of our students. 
The
CDC says schools can safely re-open if proper precautions are taken. What are we waiting for?a€!

Democrats are choosing teachers unions and special interests over the well-being of our students. 
The CPC says schools can safely re-open if proper precautions are taken. What are we waiting for?

C D.C. Savs Its Safe to Reopen
Schools, With Precautions

£l)c Washington Dost

CDC finds scant spread of coronavirus
in schools with precautions in place

7:22 PM r™ Feb 5,2021

699Likes264Retweets

Reporter Robinson: a€™ So this man was on his deathbed in a hospital and his staffers were pushing 
covid hoax bullsa€” while hiding his hospital admission. Now hea€™ s dead. From covid.
Republicansa€! LINK: <https://twitter.com/djfoxxtrott/status/1358810722210226177>

Mistermix: How Can People Be So Heartless?'. a€~Rep Ron Wright (R-TXa€“6), a man who once said that 
women should be punished for having abortions, since they had committed murder, has died of
COVIDa€“19. Wright was under treatment for lung cancer, apparently for quite a while, so he had an 
obvious, serious comorbiditya€!. Our family managed to keep mom from contracting COVID. It

was a hell of a lot of frustrating, difficult work. It involved great sacrifice, and, at every 
turn, our work was made harder by Republicans, who chose to make CO VID a political issue rather 
than a medical
one. There were a number of close calls caused by covidiots, and a huge amount of extra anxiety 
because of the unwillingness of Fox-addled small-town Republicans to take basic precautions.

Nevertheless, we persisteda€!. Ia€™ m guessing that Wrighta€™ s three children and his wife cared 
about him. And who knows? Maybe he was very careful, and was just unlucky. But, given the
behavior of most of the House Republican sedition caucus, of which he was a member, my guess is 
that he was careless. Now hea€™ s dead, like ~450,000 other Americans, in part because his party
refused to take CO VID seriouslya€!

LINK: https://www.balloon-uice.com/2021/02/08/how-can-people-be-so-heartless/

You literally could not make this up. Or, rather, you could only make this up if you were a sick, 
psychotic creepa€!
Share

Very Briefly Noted:

• Adrian Hon: mssv LINK: https://mssv.net/

• Paul Krugman: KrugmanToday. a€~Unstimulus debatesa€! LINK: https://www.krugmantoday.com/today

• Arindrajit Dube: Impacts of Minimum Wages: Review of the International

Evidence LINK: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment 
data/file/844350/impacts of minimum wages review of the international evidence Arindrajit Dube web 
.pdf


Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong

Seven Paragraphs:

Back in 1993, the expanded EITC for childless workers was one of the last things the Clinton 
Treasury threw out of the wolf-pursued troika as we dashed through the snow in the race to get the 
Clinton reconciliation bill across the
finish line. a€oeWe will fix it next yeara€D, we promised ourselves then. Nobody ever has:

Cynthia Miller & Lawrence F. Katz: Biden Wants to Boost the EITC for Workers without Dependent 
Childrend€”What Does the Research Say?: a€~Many commentators have expressed the hope that
the inequalities exposed by the pandemic will lead to renewed efforts to address them by expanding 
the social safety net and by providing basic protections for workers. An expanded EITC can be an
effective part of this effort, increasing workersa€™ incomes (without depressing work effort) and 
putting them in a better position to recover from this crisis and weather the nexta€!

LINK: 
https://thehill.com/opinion/finance/538298-biden-wants-to-boost-the-eitc-for-workers-without-depende
nt-children-what?rl=l#.YCUykA0cLq8.twitter

Really, really cool EDA by one of our graduate students here at Berkeley:

Emily Murphy Eisner: Does Telework Harm Older Workers? A First Look at Technological Change Spurred 
by C0VIDd€ “19: a€~I categorized occupation groups by whether or not they had above
median or below median take-up of teleworking technology during the pandemica€!. Being able to work 
from home during the pandemic helpeda€!. In high-teleworking occupations, there is a clear
increase in the likelihood of facing unemployment as a worker ages. The positive relationship 
between age and unemployment is not seen in professions that dona€™t have a high take-up of 
teleworking
technologiesa€!. A good change (working from home to save lives during a pandemic) can find the 
cracks in our system and do harm (in this case, reducing job security for older workers). Studying 
this
technological change will help us identify these issues, and bolster the gapsa€! LINK: 
https://emilvmurphveisner.substack.eom/p/technological-change-during-covid


a even raragrapns;

Back in 1993, the expanded EITC for childless workers was one of the last things the Clinton 
Treasury threw out of the wolf-pursued troika as we dashed through the snow in the race to get the 
Clinton reconciliation bill across the
finish line. a€oeWe will fix it next yeara€D, we promised ourselves then. Nobody ever has:

Cynthia Miller & Lawrence F. Katz: Biden Wants to Boost the EITC for Workers without Dependent 
Childrend€”What Does the Research Say?: a€~Many commentators have expressed the hope that
the inequalities exposed by the pandemic will lead to renewed efforts to address them by expanding 
the social safety net and by providing basic protections for workers. An expanded EITC can be an
effective part of this effort, increasing workersa€™ incomes (without depressing work effort) and 
putting them in a better position to recover from this crisis and weather the nexta€!

LINK: 
https://thehill.com/opinion/finance/538298-biden-wants-to-boost-the-eitc-for-workers-without-depende
nt-children-what?rl=l#.YCUykA0cLq8.twitter

Really, really cool EDA by one of our graduate students here at Berkeley:

Emily Murphy Eisner: Does Telework Harm Older Workers? A First Look at Technological Change Spurred 
by C0VIDd€ “19: a€~I categorized occupation groups by whether or not they had above
median or below median take-up of teleworking technology during the pandemica€!. Being able to work 
from home during the pandemic helpeda€!. In high-teleworking occupations, there is a clear
increase in the likelihood of facing unemployment as a worker ages. The positive relationship 
between age and unemployment is not seen in professions that dona€™t have a high take-up of 
teleworking
technologiesa€!. A good change (working from home to save lives during a pandemic) can find the 
cracks in our system and do harm (in this case, reducing job security for older workers). Studying 
this
technological change will help us identify these issues, and bolster the gapsa€! LINK: 
https://emilymurphyeisner.substack.eom/p/technological-change-during-covid

The media diet of Republican stalwarts: a sample:

Christopher G. Adamo: Can a Phony Impeachment d€~Validated€™ a Stolen Election?: a€~Honest 
Americans are aghast at the seeming obsession of leftist Democrats (with support from the usual
cadre of RINO traitors) to continue pursuing a wholly unprecedented, unwarranted, and 
unconstitutional a€oeimpeachmenta€n of President Trump after he is no longer in the White House. A 
little
a€oeConstitution 101a€D for those who are in doubt, the sole purpose of impeachment is to remove an 
unfit occupant from office. In the wake of the stolen 2020 election, President Trump is already out.
So   absolutely no legal premise can be claimed for this latest bout of leftist Democrat idiocy. As 
a result of the flagrant chicanery that occurred on Election Day and in its aftermath, Americans 
who believe
in honesty and decency are outraged. And given the enormity of actual turnout for Trump in the 2020 
election, that is a massive number of people who remain adamant that the election theft be dealt 
with.
Allowing it to stand abominates and nullifies the Constitution and the rule of law in America.

In response, leftists are redoubling their efforts to suppress, and ultimately erase, any mention 
of the theft, vainly hoping that the current situation will at some point be regarded as 
a€cenormal.a€na€! But
Americans arena€™ t buying any of it, so the left has to continually expand its efforts.Make no 
mistake. President Trump is not the actual target of this onslaught. The second sham impeachment 
isa€! an
indictment and conviction of the eighty million (and likely more) Americans who voted for him last 
November. The goal of the leftist Democrats is to tell us that our President, and more importantly 
our
votes, are a€oeinvalid.a€D But their success in convincing us to shut up and grant them this 
uncontested power is by no means guaranteed. The scheme will either succeed or fail based entirely 
on whether
or not Americans allow themselves to be cowed into abandoning reality under threats and pressure 
from the lefta€!

LINK: <https://www.gopusa.com/?p=106234?omhide=true>

I am thinking this is righta€”that the inflation of the 1970s was not due to a€oeoverheatinga€n, 
but rather to (a) a high gearing of inflation expectations on recent past inflation taught the 
economy in the late Johnson and first
Nixon administration, (b) the productivity shocks, (c) the oil shocks, and (d) the fact that 
markets coordinated on the signal provided by spot oil pricesa€’’never mind that not that much oil 
ever moved at the spot price. But Paul
could be wrong. I could be wrong:

Paul Krugman: Stagflation Revisited : In the 1970sa€! the economy never seemed to run hot enough to 
explain such a big rise in inflationa€!. So what happened? The natural explanation would
emphasize supply shocksa€”oil and other commodity pricesa€’’amplified by the widespread existence 
of cost-of-living adjustments in wage contracts. Maybe these supply shocks led to a rise in headline
inflation which caused expectations to become untethered. We dona€™t knowa€! more worka€! is 
appropriate. But suppose something like this is true. In that case, the narrative that saw 
stagflation both
as  the cost of excessively ambitious macroeconomic policy and as a vindication of conservative 
economic ideas was mostly wrong. And that matters not just for history but for policy right now, 
which is
still to some extent constrained by the fear of a 70s repeata€!

LINK: https://paulkrugman.substack.eom/p/stagflation-revisited

In an age of neofascist threat and viral dysfunctional political debate, central banks appear to be 
one of the few still fully-functional far-sighted institutions still around. Hence the demand that 
they take on more missions. I share
Barrya€™ s belief that this demand should be accommodated": those who can do, should do:

Barry Eichengreen: New-Model Central Bank: a€~Monetary authorities are increasingly expected to 
address issues such as climate change and inequality, over the objections of those who insist that
central banksa€™ narrow mandate is what sustains their operational independence. But ignoring these 
issues, or saying theya€™re someone elsea€™ s problem, is no longer an optiona€!. The US

Federal Reservea€™ s Pay check Protection Program Liquidity Facility, under which the Fed provides 
liquidity to lenders who extend loans to small businesses in pandemic-related distress. This, 
clearly, is
not your mothera€™ s central bank. Now we hear calls to broaden this ambit still furthera€!. Such 
calls horrify central-banking puristsa€I. Central bankers cannot snooze quietly in their bunks in 
the face
of an all-hands-on-deck emergency. Calls for central banks to address climate change and inequality 
reflect an awareness that these problems have risen to the level of existential crises. If central 
bankers
ignored them, or said, a€oeThese urgent problems are best addressed by someone else,a€D their 
response would be seen as a haughty and perilous display of indifference. At that point, their 
independence
would truly be at riska€!

LINK: 
https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/central-banks-have-tools-for-climate-change-and-inequal
ity-by-barry-eichengreen-2021-02

Oooh! This will be fun to watch:

William Janeway: Venture Capital in the 21st Century: a€~In this eight-part lecture series, Bill 
Janeway investigates the relationship between venture capital and technological innovation, and the
interdependent roles of entrepreneurial firms, the mission-driven State and financial speculation 
in the overall innovation systema€!

LINK: https://www.ineteconomics.org/perspectives/videos/venture-capital>

And for a preview of what Bill will be talking about at INET:

Nicolas Colin: The Digital Economy w/ Bill Janeway. Reinvention. Bezos. Musk. Communications: a€~a 
conversation with Bill Janeway, an economist, faculty member at Cambridge University, and
author of the landmark book Doing Capitalism in the Innovation Economy. Ita€™ s a book that really 
has had a profound influence on mea€’’basically containing everything you need to know about how
venture capital came to be and why ita€™ s so relevant today in the context of the transition to 
the digital economy. Billa€™ s long career in venture capital, primarily with Warburg Pincus, and 
his
academic work let him comment on todaya€™ s economy from both a business and an institutional 
perspective^!.

I consider myself, and the world at large, really, to be quite lucky that he is also such an 
affable person and generous with his time and thinking. Our conversation spanned how hea€™ s 
experienced the
very strange year that was 2020, his thesis regarding the retreat from hyperglobalization, the 
consequences of Joe Bidena€™ s election on America, the world at large, & the tech industry 
specifically, how
he sees Europea€™ s future, and much morea€! LINK:

<https://europeanstraits.substack.eom/p/the-digital-economv-w-bill-janeway>
Leave  a comment

Subscribe now

