Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)The very sharp Adriana Kugler, one of our Equitable Growth grant recipients, on MPR news. I would 
highlight the urgency of accomplishing the tasks with respect to reforming
unemployment benefits that she lays out. They really must be done before the next recession, which 
could come any year. And they should be done immediately. In the end the
United   States may turn out to, all in all, I have handled the coronavirus plague better than 
other North Atlantic economies because of the extraordinary vaccine success and a fiscal
response that was, for once, at the proper scale. But the average accomplishment of the comparison 
group was so bad that "best in class" is very weak praise indeed:

MPR News: Unemployment Benefits Saw Unprecedented Expansion during the Pandemic. Is the System 
Working?'. d~Adriana Kugler, a professor at the
McCourt School of Public Policy at Georgetown University, said critics of the benefit increases 
should remember that the dollar amounts in question are
relatively modest. Even including boosts from the Federal Pandemic Unemployment Compensation 
program, the average American family of four would
receive only $26,400 from a year of unemployment benefits. doeThat doesnd™t exactly make you 
rich,a€D Kugler saidd!. Many unemployed workers
found it difficult to navigate the arcane federal-state system that in many cases proved 
under-resourced and outdated. Some workers without recent full-
time employment fell through the cracks due to complicated qualification rules. And structural 
racism persists in the construction of the system as a whole.
The work of undertaking these and other reforms is urgent, and doeit needs to be done before the 
next recession ,dD Kugler saidd!

LINK: 
<https://www.mprnews.org/episode/2021/05/17/unemployment-benefits-saw-unprecedented-expansion-during
-the-pandemic-is-the-system-
working>

2) Our Steering Committeed™ s Alan Blinder says: if you are really a believer in supply-side 
economics, you strongly support and are very heartened by the Biden American Jobs
and American Families Plans. If you cannot see that this is the real and the best supply-side 
economicsd”well, that is pretty strong evidence that for you it was always a grift and a
con you were trying to pull, isnd™ t it?:

Alan Blinder: Bidend€™ s Plan Encourages True Supply-Side Economics'. d~Do you remember supply-side 
economicsd! the doctrine that claimed that
lowering taxes (especially on the wealthy) would cause a gusher of growth and bring in more new 
revenue than it lost[?] It wasnd™ t true, as the Reagan
and Bush tax cuts demonstratedd!. The Trump tax cutsd! [did] little to stimulate growth as well. 
But certain supply-side policies really could be counted
ond!. Some of them were even tax cutsd!. But many of the most promising supply-side policies 
involve government spending, including investment in
physical infrastructure like roads, bridges, ports and airports. The argument for more public 
investment is essentially the same as the argument for more
private investmentd!. Selecting the right projects, however, is crucial. This means not limiting 
ourselves to physical investments like factories and roads,
because investments in human capital offer many of the highest returns. Fortunately, much of 
President Bidend™ s American Jobs Plan and American
Families Plan pushes in that directiond!. Opponents of programs like these often denigrate them as 
doesocialismdn I like to praise them as real
supply-side economicsd!

LINK: <https://www.ws j 
.com/articles/bidens-plan-encourages-true-supply-side-economics-11621982Q82?page= I>

3) And I see that the Equitable Growth twitter account is focusing ond! me. My line about how 
inflation right now is burning rubber and leaving it on the road as we rejoin traffic
at speed, not overheating and melting our engine. I think that is 100% right: I said it, after all. 
And I am happy to see that Paul Krugman agrees:

Equitable Growth: d€™ Fears of chronic, long-term inflation are overblown, especially when so many 
Americans are still out of workd!. doeBurning
rubber to rejoin highway traffic is not the same thing as overheating the enginea€D 
<https://www.latimes.eom/opinion/storv/2021-05-06/inflation-
economv-recovery-labor-shifts>d!

LINK: <https://twitter. com/equitablegrowth/status/1398031648428593153

4) The sudden reappearance of the lab-leak theory of the origins of the coronavirus plague has my 
flummoxed. Given that we have not found a Patient 0 or an Animal -1, the origins
of must remain uncertain, And virology labs are a place where viruses hang out. But most of those 
pushing deewe should act as though lab-leak is truedD rather than
doeprobably zoonotic, but we should keep looking and investigatingdD are bad actors. They seem to 
be made up of (a) people who want to wage a cold war against China for
paranoia reasons, (b) people who want to wage a cold war against China for careerist reasons, (c) 
people who think that the more China can be a€ceblameda€D for the virus the
more Donald Trump and his enablers will be able to avoid taking on their proper share of the 
responsibility and blame for this catastrophic disaster, and (d) journalists who are
focused on clickbait and regard their readers as cattle to be exploited rather than customers to be 
informed. None of these are trustworthy. If they say it is raining, check to make
sure  that they are not p—ing against your leg. I talked about this:

Brad DeLong: Butd! buta€! butd! If it escapes from the lab, it escapes into people working at the 
lab who then have lots of close indoor contact
with others working at the lab. Thus the first sign we see of the disease is a huge cluster among 
lab workers. Did we see such a cluster? No. We see no

antibodies in lab workers. We see three lab workers catching what look to be bad cases of the flu 
in November 2019, and then no radiation until we get the
superspreader event at the market:

Aylin Woodward: Lab Leak vs. Animal Spillover: Evidence for Coronavirus Origin Theories'. d~The WIV 
staff saidd! no
evidence that samplesd! had been stored at the instituted!. Records reviewed by WHO did not 
indicated! viruses closely
related   to the new coronavirusd!. [But] the WHO team spent just hoursd!. Shi Zhenglid! doeis 
absolutely positive that she
had never identified this virus prior to the outbreak happeningddrd!. Three WIV staff members got 
sick and went to a hospital
more than a month befored! [with] symptomsd! doeconsistent with both COVIDd“19 and common seasonal 
illnessdDd!
blood samplesd! in the months ahead of the pandemic all tested negatived!

No, we should not be studying dangerous viruses in labs in the middle of large cities. With nuclear 
weapons, there is a reason we built Lawrence Livermore
lab very far indeed from the university in Berkeley that initially staffed it. We should treat 
contagious deadly viruses the same way. We should do this
whether the lab-leak story is true or false. We should do this if we conclude that there is a 10% 
chance, a 1% chance, an 0.01% chance, or a 0% chance that
the lab-leak story is true.

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/brieflv-noted-for-2021-05-27-th>

Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1)A very nice and up-to-date summary from the highly estimable Jason Furman. I would object to one 
statement in what I have quoted below. The Fedd™ s measure of
inflationd”the core PCE price indexd”is not deethe most important data point for markets and the 
FeddD. The facts that doeThe core PCE price index was up 0.7% in April
and   now all of the pandemic-era shortfalls in prices have been made up by higher pricesdD are 
uninteresting. We knew that there would be inflation involved in pulling workers
into the places in the economy we want them to god”remember the Korean War. We did not know how 
much, but we knew that there would be some, the most important data
points for markets and the Fed is whether that inflation is becoming incorporated into expectations 
of future inflation. If it does, there is then a strong case for action. But so far,
there are no signs I see that it is doing so:

Jason Furman: d€™ Personal consumption expenditures (about two-thirds of GDP) were 1% below their 
pre-pandemic trend in Aprild! an eternity ago
in COVID time so it is likely that in May or June consumer demandd”and overalld’’demand will be 
back [to pre-plague trend]. The composition of
demand, however, is changingd!. Goods are massively above trend while services in Aprild! were 7% 
below trend. Note that supply is not back nearly as
much as demand: a lot of the goods have come from imports and inventories. That is not possible 
with most services so as services continue to recover they
will need to be (and likely will) be matched by supply. Compensation is now back to its 
pre-pandemic trend. We know that employment remains well short,


wnat is going on nere? me story is likely composition: Mostly low-wage employment lost. People wno 
nave jobs are working longer nours at nigner

wages. The most important data point for markets and the Fed is its measure of inflation. The core 
PCE price index was up 0.7% in April and now all of the
pandemic-era shortfalls in prices have been made up by higher prices. Many prices not back yet so 
likely more rises to come. Finally, households have

$2.IT in excess saving from both additional income (driven by transfers) and reduced spending. One 
of the big questions is how this spends out. One
model is it is like wealth, and people spend ~5% a year indefinitely. Another model is it is like a 
transfer & they spend ~50%. Yet another is pent-up
demand and spend morea€!

LINK: <https://twitter.eom/jasonfurman/status/l 398263421318189057>

2) Not, I think, the most tragic consequence of the presidency of Donald Trump, the simultaneous 
rise of clickbait media and fundraising grifters interested in preying on his base,
and the cowardly surrender of Republican apparatchiks to them. But it is a tragic consequence:

Julia Reinstein: Grieving Those Who Refuse a COVID Vaccine: a€~a€oeKnowing therea€™ s something 
that was free, accessible, and could have
prevented their death, ita€™ s heartbreaking ,a€Da€ I They werena€™ t people youa€™ d typically pin 
as anti-vaxxers. He was a retired engineer and she
had worked as a nurse. But the Florida couple, both in their eighties, refused to get inoculated 
against the coronavirus, and now hea€™ s dead. Just over a
month since her father-in-law died, Marie is still grappling with the painful fact that he and his 
wife ignored the science to devastating results. a€oelta€™ s
been worse for [my husband] because ita€™ s his father,a€D Marie told BuzzFeed News. a€oeBut Ia€™ m 
mostly just angry at them, because this
didna€™  t have to happen.a€D (Marie asked, like others in this story, that her last name and 
identifying details about her family not be used for privacy
reasons.)  It didna€™ t have to happen, but it is happening, and will likely keep happening, to 
some of the roughly 1 in 5 Americans whoa€™ ve said they
will  not get a COVIDa€“19 vaccinea€!

LINK: 
<https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/juliareinstein/grief-for-people-who-refused-covid-vaccine>

3) No. We do not know yet how the coronavirus plague year has altered workplace and work-from-home 
technologies and preferences, and how it has altered relative bargaining
power over health and safety on the one hand and convenience and commuting on the other. Any other 
questions?:

Anna North: Bosses Are Acting Like the Pandemic Never Happened: a€~The last year transformed work 
in terrifying waysa€!. Workers were forced to
take on health risksa€! with line cooks facing the highest risk of Covida€“19 mortality of any 
occupational. If restaurants dona€™t raise wages, Siby
believes workers will eventually shift to retail .a€! While essential workers risked their lives on 
the job, millions of others were able to work from the
relative safety of their homesa€!. The pandemic may have brought some workplaces closer to what 
Prithwiraj Choudhury a€! calls a a€oework from
anywherea€D ideologya€!. But now, some companies are trying to turn back the clock on remote 
worka€!. JPMorgana€! a€oesometime in September,
October    it will look just like it did before .a€Da€! Mark Metrick calling Zoom a€oea culture 
killer for companiesa€D and comparing its rise to a€oewhen
cigarettes went mainstreama€Da€!

LINK: <https://www.vox.com/22455Q58/jobs-restaurants-office-emplovers-covid-pandemic-work>

4) The Republican Party was all in on George H.W. Busha€™ s NAFTA initiative, the Democratic Party 
was evenly split. Did NAFTA-impacted voters who shifted Republican in
the 1990s not understand this? It is very hard to fit these results into any of our standard 
political-economy models. You need to go to the moral-economy models: economic
insecurity and anxiety triggers hostility to the party that seeks to overcome ethnic cleavages and 
allegiance to the party that seeks to reinforce them:

Jiwon Choi, Ilyana Kuziemko, Ebonya Washington, & Gavin Wright: Local Economic and Political 
Effects of Trade Deals: Evidence from NAFTA:
a€~Counties whose 1990 employment depended on industries vulnerable to Mexican import competition 
via the 1994 North American Free Trade
Agreement (NAFTA) suffer large employment losses (relative to the bottom quartile of counties, 
counties in the top quartile of NAFTA exposure see
5a€“8 log-point declines in employment by 2000). Despite large employment losses, we can reject 
even modest population declines. Trade-adjustment-aid
relief rises, but covers a tiny share of the job losses we document, and Disability Insurance in 
fact displays a much larger response. Exposed counties
(many  in the upper South) begin the period more Democratic in terms of votes in House elections, 
but as NAFTA is debated in 1992a€‘T994 they shift in
the Republican direction and by 2000 vote majority-Republican in House elections. We show with a 
variety of microdata, including 1992a€‘T994
respondent-level panel data, that opposition to free trade predicts shifts towards Republican party 
identification^!

LINK: 
<https://www.iq.harvard.edu/files/harvard-iqss/files/choi-kuziemko-washington-wright_nafta_politics 
8dec2020.pdf>

5) Private housing construction as a share of GDP had crashed from its peak of 5.0% of GDP in 
2005Q4 through its historical average of 3.4% in 2007Q2, and had bottomed all the
way down to 2.1% by 2008Q4. That was the moment when the University of Chicagoa€™ s John H. 
Cochrane began claiming that a recession was necessary because there were
thena€”stilla€”too many people who ought to be forced into unemployment to teach that a€oepeople 
who spend their lives pounding nails in Nevada need something else to
doa€D.     Ludwig von Mises, Josef Schumpeter, and Friedrich von Hayeka€™ s view that recessions 
were part of the marketa€™ s plan and hence needed to be welcome never had
any empirical supporta€”it always appealed to deep psychological fears driving a strong reluctance 
to admit that the market was not perfect. But it was and is a hell of a drug:

Claudia Sahm: a€~a€ceWe should have a recession,a€D John H. Cochrane said in November [2008], 
speaking to students and investors. a€cePeople who
spend their lives pounding nails in Nevada need something else to do.a€D #yikes 
<https://t.co/vbSKhIRMtR>a€™ a€!. Scott Gosnell: a€~I was there. I
may even have a recording down in the archives and may have sprained my eyes I rolled them so 
harda€!. I went to all of those econ talks at Gleacher
while                                                                      I lived in Chicago. The 
noticeable thing about Cochrane was that he was very good at financial economics, but fell apart 
when he tried to jump to
macro. But of course faculty could say all kinds of things without getting much skepticism. Being a 
Mellon-style liquidationist was sort of edgy and cool
among the Republican-leaning economistsa€!. [It was a] Randian political moment. Where before, 
Austrian economics would get you a glance askance, in
2008, it would get you a $300+ bottle of wine at dinner with Paul Ryana€!

LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/a-non-socratic-dialogue-on-the-decline>

6) An ur-text for the forces leading to the above. Here George Stigler, writing back in 1949, seeks 
to assimilate the classical economists Smith, Senior, and Mill to his claim that a
good economic system does not produce prosperity but rather builds character. The lesson he draws 
from this is not that the rich should live modestly and give away their wealth to
achieve equality and hence add high utilitarian well-being to the excellences of good character. It 
is, rather, that the non-rich have no warrant to complain about their low utilitarian
well-being from poverty because they have the excellences of character. This is, of course, not 
good history of economic thoughta€”Smith and Mill never, and Senior rarely,
thought    like Stigler did. But it is, I think, a proper object of study for people who do history 
of economic thought more seriously than I do:

George Stigler (1949): Five Lectures on Economic Problems: a€~Why encourage men to work and save ? 
The customary answer is to maximize
outputa€!. One might defend the goal of maximum output by arguing that the ultimate utilitarian 
goal was maximum satisfaction, and that greater output
will   lead to larger increases of satisfaction than will greater equality. This interpretation is 
plausible, but I believe it is mistaken. Most of the important
classical economists explicitly rejected maximum satisfaction as a goal, and none except Bentham 
explicitly adopted ita€!. Why, then, did the classical
economists display such great and persistent concern with policies that maximize output? Their 
concern was with the maximizing, not with the output. The
struggle                                                                      of men for larger 
incomes was good because in the process they learned independence, self-reliance, 
self-disciplinea€’’because, in short, they
became better mena€!

LINK: 
<https://github.com/braddelong/public-files/blob/master/readings/stigler-1949-five-lectures.pdf>

7) Can scale and apps built on top of platforms a step behind and not quite cutting-edge systems 
come to dominate? Perhaps. That certainly seems to be the bet that those building
Chinaa€™ s industrial policy today are seeking to make:

Nicolas Colin: Chinaa€™s Industry Policy with Emily de La BruyA 're: a€~[On] Jordan Schneidera€™ s 
ChinaTalk podcasta€! the key idea a€!. "What
matters today is the applications of science and technologya€“a€“the sort of networks you build 
with ita€! capturing scale and being able to build and
deploya€!. [Then] ita€™ s okay to have a slight lag in when you get the patent and when you get the 
really cutting edge, as long as you can apply it to


scalea€i. The Chinese orientation appears to be focusing on that rather than on basic R&D, which 
creates this tremendous asymmetry vis-A -vis the U.S.

and really vis-A -vis the entire global system because therea€™ s just a different competition 
underwaya€!. Ita€™ s not a matter of just pouring resources
into basic research: ita€™ s about competing for applicationsa€!

LINK: <https://europeanstraits.substack.eom/p/chinas-industry-policy-w-emily-de>

8) I have read both Craig Freedman <https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1057/978-l-137-58974-3 5> 
and Stiglera€™ s 1948 LSE lectures <https://github.com/braddelong/public-
files/blob/master/readings/stigler-1949-five-lectures.pdf>. The logic of Stiglera€™ s attack on 
Chamberlin still eludes me. It seems to be composed of equal parts (a) things are
more                complex than Chamberlin allows, so we should use the even simpler Marshallian 
competitive model to understand these complex things; (b) Chamberlina€™ s model is
inconsistent unless elasticities of substitution in demand are very high, in which case the 
differences between it and perfect competition are small; and (c) the test of whether a
model   is worthwhile is whether it makes correct predictions, and Chamberlina€™ s makes no 
predictions at all. But if the test of a model is whether it makes correct predictions,
inconsistencies in its logical structure are not bugs. And the differences between monopolistic and 
perfect competition are substantiala€”and empirical tests come out on the
a€oemonopolistic competition^□ side, by and large. I am going to have to think more about this:

Paul Romer: Stigler Conviction: a€~The Great Depression was a traumatic experience fora€! 
Stiglera€!. Stigler wanted halt to progress in economic
theory because he feared that it would lead to more theories like those of Keynes and Chamberlin 
(who provided the foundation for Dixit and Stiglitz). For
him, there was apparently too much risk that such theories might lend political support for 
government policies that should not be tried. Under his division
of labor with Milton Friedman, Friedman took on Keynes and Stigler took on Chamberlin. Marshall, 
they agreed, was safe. They turned Chicago in the last
bastion of opposition to the Samuelson program and thereby prolonged for decades the confusion that 
Marshall had spawneda€!

LINK: <https://paulromer.net/what-went-wrong-in-macro-history/>
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

There a€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

