Subscribe now

FIRST: More Musings on Keynes-as-Conservative:

When one reads John Maynard Keynes with some attention to context and even a moderately open 
minda€”say, the General Theory chapter 24 
<https://www.marxists.org/reference/subject/economics/keynes/general-theory/ch24.htm>a€”and you see 
a very smart upper-class twit who believes, largely accurately, that he can save the market 
capitalist order from itself with very minor interventions, with only a small dose of light handed 
central planning. He sees
two major flaws in how the system works:

• a€oeits failure to provide for full employments !a€D

• a€oeits arbitrary and inequitable distribution of wealth and incomesa€ la€D

Both can be cured if the government will stabilize aggregate demand at the appropriate relative 
level by:

exercis[ing] a guiding influence on the propensity to consume partly through its scheme of 
taxation, partly by fixing the rate of interest, and partly, perhaps, in other waysa€!. It seems 
unlikely that the influence of banking policy on the rate of interest will be sufficient by 
itselfa€!. I conceive, therefore, that a somewhat comprehensive socialisation of investment will 
prove the only means of securing an approximation to full employment;
though this need not exclude all manner of compromises and of devices by which public authority 
will co-operate with private initiatives!

Given this, there is then:

no obvious caseS! forS! State Socialisms!. Determin[ing] the aggregate amount of resources devoted 
to augmenting the instruments and the basic rate of reward to those who own themS! accomplishe[s] 
all that is necessaryS!

Moreover, solving the problem of full employment also solves the problem of income distribution. 
Full-employment demand-management policy will be a low interest-rate policy, hence it achieves:
the euthanasia of the rentiers! of the cumulative oppressive power of the capitalist to exploit the 
scarcity-value of capital [to earn] interests! [which] rewards no genuine sacrifices!

And as Keynes sums up:

If our central controls succeed in establishing an aggregate volume of output corresponding to full 
employment as nearly as is practicable, the classical theory comes into its ownS!. The results! is 
not to dispose of the S'Manchester SystemS™ , but to indicates! [what] environments! the free play 
of economic forces requiresS!. Then the traditional advantages of individualism will still hold 
good. Let us stop for a moment to
remind ourselves what these advantages are. They are partly advantages of efficiencyS”the 
advantages of decentralisation and of the play of self-interest.S! Above all, individualism, if it 
can be purged of its defects and its abuses, is the best safeguard of personal liberty in the sense 
that, compared with any other system, it greatly widens the field for the exercise of personal 
choice. It is also the best safeguard of the variety of life, which
emerges precisely from this extended field of personal choice, and the loss of which is the 
greatest of all the losses of the homogeneous or totalitarian state. For this variety preserves the 
traditions which embody the most secure and successful choices of former generations; it colours 
the present with the diversification of its fancy; and, being the handmaid of experiment as well as 
of tradition and of fancy, it is the most powerful
instrument   to better the futurea€!

Even moderately insightful conservatives recognized that there was a good chance that Keynes was 
right. Milton Friedman, for example, it was really a Keynesian wolf in classical-libertarian 
sheep's clothing. He defined a "neutral" monetary policy to be "whatever monetary policy produced 
an interest rate path consistent with stable, full employment". He hoped that a stable nominal, 
monetary growth rate for some proper monetary aggregate would do this. But
for Friedman, the way you knew that monetary policy had been too tight or too loose. Did not depend 
on whether some quantitative monetary aggregate under shot or overshot the constant growth path. 
It, rather, depending on whether there was depression or inflation.

Milton Friedman's monetary framework consisted therefore of a portfolio of two highly leveraged 
dynamic bets: (1) that he could sell light-handed Keynesian-type central planning to his 
ideological allies by pretending that it was actually a a€ceneutrala€D laissez-faire monetary 
policy, something like the courts rather than an a€ceinterferencea€D with the market; and (2) that 
contary to Keynesa€™ s guess, Seethe influence of banking policy on the rate of
interest will be sufficient by itselfSD so Sceno somewhat comprehensive socialisation of 
investmentSD would be required. In the long-run, both of those dynamic bets went spectaculary 
bankrupt. Hence, while in the long-run Keynes and his ideas are not intellectually dead, Milton 
Friedman and his ideas are.

There was one perhaps-insightful conservative critique of Keynesian ideas. It was Jacob VinerS™ s: 
that there was no possibility of stabilizing aggregate demand at a full-employment, 
non-inflationary level for longS”that SoeKeynesianismSD could work only as long as in the 
Soeconstant race between the printing press and the business agents of the trade unionsS! the 
printing press could maintain a constant leadS !SD Businesses, Viner thought,
needed either to be flooded with cash or to expect wages to be curbed if they were to invest; the 
first was inflation, the second required the threat of periodic mass unemployment, and so KeynesS™ 
s system could not be stable and successful.

The jury is, I think, still out on Viner.

Other than Friedman and his colleaguesS”who knew very well what they were doing in dressing their 
Keynesian wolfish selves in libertarian sheepS™ s clothingS”and Viner, however, the reaction of 
conservatives to Keynes was never one of debate, acceptance, and approval for his offering them a 
potential way forward. It was, rather, unhinged rage.
Why was that?

Share

SLOUCHING

nwiwir


u I  uriA

“" THCMOMIC HIST3R’

FORB BELOMG


"A magisterial history."

-Paul Krugman

ON SALE 6 SEPTEMBER

2015-10-13


The past 24-hoursa€™ worth of reactions to my Slouching Towards Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>. Three 
different very good and very thoughtful and very critical reviews:

Scott Sumner: Brad DeLong's 20th century: a€~I am a slow reader and I was dead tired on the final 
leg of the trip. Yet I somehow managed to finish the entire 540-page book just as I landed in 
Orange County, which wouldna€™ t have been possible if DeLong hadna€™ t written an unusually 
absorbing account of this period. Everyone else seemed to be watching inflight moviesa€!. DeLonga€™ 
s real interest is in the way that ideology helped to shape the
events of the past 150 years. Ia€™ 11 focus on areas where I disagree with DeLong, but I agree with 
most of his analysis. Dona€™ t let my quibbles dissuade you from reading this engrossing 
narrativea€!

Dietz Vollrath: Review of DeLong's "Slouching Towards Utopiaa€D: a€~It is a necessary book to read 
if you are at all interested in the subject of economic growth. It is informative and 
thought-provoking. If you are one of those 50% who have not read it, go do so nowa€!. Ia€™ ma€l 
interested in is that very relevant and ultimately very necessary change in how population growth 
responded to living standards that occurred around the same time. What
happened around 1870 was not just that productivity growth was able to outpace population growth, 
but that population growth started to fall in response to increase in productivity. This was a 
fundamental flip in the typical Malthusian relationships!

Patrick Luciani: Is the age of prosperity over?: a€~Professor DeLong is a polymath who knows much 
about economics, history, and philosophy, and here his talents are on full display. But talent 
often comes with a healthy egoa€!. Ita€™ s a fantastic read, if not a bit weird in places with an 
unapologetic leftist bias. (No surprise here, given that DeLong was inspired by socialist historian 
Eric HobsbawmS™ s classic book on the twentieth century entitled The
Age of Extremes, which goes from 1914 to the fall of the Soviet Union in 1991.) In no other book on 
economic history would you find the poetry of Rudyard Kipling or the colourful career of Herbert 
Hoover, a description of the neurosis of Nikola Tesla or witty allusions to Greek mythology. And 
herea€™ s the best part: you dona€™ t have to be an economist or historian to enjoy this book or 
reach for the smelling salts to revive you from boredom...

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Other Things That Went Whizzing bya€!

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Branko Milano vic: Is liberal democracy part of human development?: a€~Leandro Prados de la 
Escosuraa€! Human Development and the Path to Freedom: 1870 to the Present^} here and an article on 
the same topic is herea€!

•  John Anthers: The UK's Crisis Is Threatening the Global Inflation Fight: a€~Financial woes are 
reverberating far beyond the countrya€™ s borders. Now, the turmoil may change how central banks 
around the world choose to deal with inflations!

• Rana Mitter: Where Is XiS™ s China Heading?: S~ChinaS™ s premiers!. If it is Wang Yang, who 
successfully led Guangdong and Chongqing, two of the countryS™ s most economically dynamic areas, 
that choice might indicate a turn toward giving the market more leewayS!. Kerry BrownS! Xi: A Study 
in PowerS!. Another valuable new book is Xi Jinping: The Most Powerful Man in the World, by German 
journalists Stefan Aust and
Adrian GeigeS!

•  Noah Smith: Book Review: "Freedom's ForgeSD: S~A successful sequel to Freedomd€™ s Forge will 
have to include less offshoring of supply chains to China, but more supply chains between U.S. 
allies. Rhetorically and conceptually, that could be a tough needle to thread. At the same time, 
the U.S. is just now beginning to emerge from its Second Gilded AgeS!. We sure could use a few 
people like Bill Knudsen right nowS!

• Wikipedia: Monarch butterfly migrations!

• Michael Tomasky: The GOPS™ s Cult of Election Deniers Is a Growing Threat to the Nationa€!

• Hamish McKenzie: Please stop calling it the a€~newsletter economya€™: a€~Or the creator economy, 
for that mattera€!

• Jamie Dupree: October Surprise: Jan. 6 panel subpoenas Trumpa€!

• Claire Potter: The Moment the Republican Party Lost Controla€!
Leave a comment

AJs:

Alan Crawford: a€~Sweeping new US restrictions were announced last Friday on sales of 
semiconductors and chipmaking equipment to China. The consequent market meltdown is tantamount to 
the fact they add up to the most drastic round of technology curbs on Beijing to datea€!. Chip 
stocks erased more than $240 billion in global market value at one point this week. Stocks later 
recovered, but the rout left a dawning realization that US policy on China has
hardened...

Paul Campos: The Institutionalist: a€~Frank Foer thinks Merrick Garland is going to indict Donald 
Trumpa€!. a€oel called Garland an a€~institutionalista€™ a€!. I was surprised he would resist the 
term. I think he wanted me to understand that he is alive to the perils facing democracya€!. 
Radicalizing Merrick Garland would be impossible. But it was an evolution. His faith in 
institutions had begun to wobble.a€™ a€! Foer argues that the last two years have
changed Garland, and that in the end he will reach the conclusion that attempting to enforce the 
law is a more compelling consideration than galaxy-brained calculations about the ultimate 
political consequences of doing so. I hope hea€™ s righta€l

Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription
Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

