
Very Briefly Noted:

•  McKay Coppins: Joe Biden & the Conservative-Book Bust’. a€~The Conservative Publishing Industry 
Has a Joe Biden Problem. Neither authors nor publishing houses have figured out how to turn the new 
president into a
compelling villaina€! 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2021/06/biden-shapiro-trump-conservative-publishing/61
9052/>

• Gary Hoover: George Westinghouse: Servant Leader, Inventor, Captain 
o/'Zn^M5Zry<https://www.archbridgeinstitute.org/2019/02/27/george-westinghouse-servant-leader-invent
or-captain-of-industrv/>

• Wikipedia: William Stanley Jevons <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William. Stanley Jevons#Works>

• Jeet Heer: Trumpists HavenaC™ t Given Up on Military Coups 
<https://ieetheer.substack.eom/p/militarv-coup-threats-on-the-right>

•  Wikipedia: Wang Dongxing: a€~WChief of Mao Zedonga€™ s personal bodyguard force, the 9th Bureau 
of the Ministry of Public Security (which included the 8341 Special Regiment)a€!

<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wang Dongxing>

• Wikipedia: Guangzhou Military Region <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Guangzhou Military Region>

• John Fell, Tuomas Peltonen, & Richard Portes: Macroprudential Policy Issues Arising From the Low 
Interest Rate Environment’. a€~Since 2016, search-for-yield behaviour has intensified in the 
banking and investment
fund sectors, and some business models are proving unsustainablea€! 
<https://voxeu.org/article/macroprudential-policy-issues-arising-low-interest-rate-environment>

•  Scott Lemieux: Blogging Is Not fortThe Weak or Faint of Heart’. a€~Former President Donald 
Trumpa€™ s bloga€! has been permanently shut down, his spokesman said Wednesdaya€!. Wea€™ ve made 
it 17 years; he
made it 17 days. Sada€! 
<https://www.lawyersgunsmoneyblog.com/2021/06/blogging-is-not-for-the-weak-or-faint-of-heart>

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Paragraphs:

It does disturb me that the numbers are not on my side. But peopled™ s lives are being transformed 
by information and communications technologies in ways that they do find powerfully attractive. I 
keep thinking, even though the
numbers say otherwise, that ICT is profoundly affecting human and societal well-being, with the 
question being the sign: are we acquiring more power over nature and within society to accomplish 
our purposes, or are our brains being
hacked in ways that turn us into unhappy dopamine loop-governed zombies? I can argue both sides. 
But what the numbers sayd”that it is not a very big deald”seems to me to fit badly with the reality 
I experience and see others
experiencing:

Paul Krugman: Remembrance of Futures Past’. d~The data bear out the general sense that the 
real-world utility of new technology has fallen far short of the hype. Labord! has risen only about 
half as fast since
2007 as it did in the generation after World War II. Why measure from 2007? Well, it was the eve of 
the financial crisis; but it also happens to be the year Apple introduced the original iPhone. So 
much
technoglitz; so little G.D.P. Why?d! Erik Brynjolfsson, Seth Benzell and Daniel Rockd!. Their 
favored explanation, however, boils down to: just you waitd!.. [But] this isnd™t the first time 
information
technology   has disappointedd!. Paul Davidd! a fascinating 1990 paper titled doeThe Dynamo and the 
Computer.dDd! Around 1995 U.S. productivity growth really did take off, beginning a rocket-like

ascent. Which lasted for around a decade, then stalled out. Maybe this time is differenta€!. [But] 
because wed™ ve been through this kind of disappointment before, itd™ s hard to avoid feeling a bit 
cynicaid!
LINK: <https://messaging-custom-newsletters .nytimes .com/template/oakv2>

Timothy B. Leed™ s hope, I guess, is that the newsletter tied to Twitterd”the good parts of 
twitterd”can revive the open, reality-based, superior instantiation of the public sphere that we 
thought we were building 20 years ago. We
probably labor in vain. But it is an interesting take on the problem:

Timothy B. Lee: How Facebook Killed Blogginga€”& Twitter Reinvented If. d~The blogging community 
that helped launch my journalism career barely existsd!. Social media plays a central roled!.
Blogging became less social. It became much less common for writers to recommend and critique one 
anotherd™ s work. Twitter picked up much of the resulting slackd!. Bloggers were constantly linking,
block-quoting, and critiquingd!. Linking, block-quoting, or critiquing other peoplesd™ blog posts 
was rarely a formula for success on Facebook or other social media platformsd!. If you wanted to 
publish a
brief   thought about something you read in 2006, youd™ d write a short blog post. If you wanted to 
do the same thing in 2016, youd™ d write a tweetd!. Some people have described the rise of email
newsletters as a resurgence of old-school bloggingd!. But the more social and ephemeral aspects of 
blogging have largely migrated to Twitter, and theyd™re unlikely to go back. Instead, Twitter has 
become a
key  way for writers to build audiences they can then sell newsletters tod!

LINK: <https://rethinking.news/how-facebook-killed-blogging-and-twitter-reinvented-it/>

Noah Smith has a theory that Twitter is about to get worse. Much worse. I would not have thought 
that possible. But he makes it sound plausible:

Noah Smith: Status Anxiety as a Service: d~My friend Eugene Weid! divides social mediad™ s function 
into three dimensionsd’’utility d! entertainmentd! and social capital. He spends much of the post
discussing the thirdd!. Social media has democratized celebrity; anyone can be an influencerd!. We 
are now in late-stage performative Twitter, where nearly every tweet is hungry as hell for 
favorites and
retweets,  and everyone is a trained pundit or comedian. Itd™ s hot takes and cool proverbs all the 
way down. This aspect of Twitter certainly exists. But I think it leaves out something 
importantd”the status­
conferring role of reply-tweetsd!. Being able to reply to high-status people, whether they want you 
to or not, is a heady status-conferring experienced!. My hypothesis is that by bringing people much 
closer
together  in social status, Twitter emphasizes the intractable gaps that remain. And this creates 
constant status anxiety among some Twitter usersd!. As Twitter ages and the distribution of status 
gets even more
frozen in, Twitter will have to rely on status anxiety more and more to keep new users engaged. 
That will exacerbate the toxic dynamics of Twitter, where every statement is willfully 
misinterpreted, humor is
nigh-impossible, and bad-faith attacks are the universal norm.a€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/status-anxiety-as-a-service>

The role played by anti-semitism in this transformation of American populist impulses is, I think, 
under appreciated. I find myself thinking of the movie The Thin Man, in which it is WASPs with too 
much money and too little sense who
are to be mocked as unworthy of their high seats in the temple of our civilization. And I wonder at 
the transformation of that impulse into a world view in which those subject to distrust are not 
rich WASPs with inherited wealth but rather
Negroes receiving government benefits, Jews with too much education, and their friends. It is not 
something that I understand:


key way for writers to build audiences they can then sell newsletters toa€!

LINK: <https://rethinking.news/how-facebook-killed-blogging-and-twitter-reinvented-it/>

Noah Smith has a theory that Twitter is about to get worse. Much worse. I would not have thought 
that possible. But he makes it sound plausible:

Noah Smith: Status Anxiety as a Service: a€~My friend Eugene Weia€! divides social mediaa€™ s 
function into three dimensionsa€’’utility a€! entertainmenta€! and social capital. He spends much 
of the post
discussing the thirda€!. Social media has democratized celebrity; anyone can be an influencera€!. 
We are now in late-stage performative Twitter, where nearly every tweet is hungry as hell for 
favorites and
retweets, and everyone is a trained pundit or comedian. Ita€™ s hot takes and cool proverbs all the 
way down. This aspect of Twitter certainly exists. But I think it leaves out something 
importanta€”the status­
conferring role of reply-tweetsa€!. Being able to reply to high-status people, whether they want 
you to or not, is a heady status-conferring experienced!. My hypothesis is that by bringing people 
much closer
together in social status, Twitter emphasizes the intractable gaps that remain. And this creates 
constant status anxiety among some Twitter usersa€!. As Twitter ages and the distribution of status 
gets even more
frozen in, Twitter will have to rely on status anxiety more and more to keep new users engaged. 
That will exacerbate the toxic dynamics of Twitter, where every statement is willfully 
misinterpreted, humor is
nigh-impossible, and bad-faith attacks are the universal norm.a€!

LINK: <https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/status-anxiety-as-a-service>

The role played by anti-semitism in this transformation of American populist impulses is, I think, 
under appreciated. I find myself thinking of the movie The Thin Man, in which it is WASPs with too 
much money and too little sense who
are to be mocked as unworthy of their high seats in the temple of our civilization. And I wonder at 
the transformation of that impulse into a world view in which those subject to distrust are not 
rich WASPs with inherited wealth but rather
Negroes receiving government benefits, Jews with too much education, and their friends. It is not 
something that I understand:

Jeet Heer: Racism & the Paradox of Anti-Democratic Populism: a€~It was from [Willmoore] Kendall 
that Buckley learned that conservatism could be successfully marketed as a revolt against thea€! un-
American elite. Both Buckley and Kendalla€! in targeting academics, journalists, and other 
a€oeegg-headsa€na€! took the traditional populist distrust of the wealthy East Coast elite and 
refashioned it as a
cultural  struggle against liberal intellectualsa€!. Kendalla€™ s embrace of elitist theories are 
especially clear in his writings on race. In 1960, he cited with approval a book by Nathaniel Weyl 
arguing that a€oethe
Negroa€D suffers from a blighted a€oebiological inheritance.a€D a€! a€oeWhen we impose upon them 
equal responsibility for civilizational achievement we may be doing them not justice but 
injusticea€Da€!

LINK: <https://jeetheer.substack.eom/p/racism-and-the-paradox-of-anti-democratic>

I concur: I think we need to draw a very sharp line between fascists on the one hand and American 
conservatives on the other. The dividing line should be between those who think their enemies are 
people to be fought, and those who
think that their enemies are ideas that lead to destructive policies. I think we can maintain that 
dividing line:

John Stoehr: Carl Schmitt, Leading Exponent of Nazi Political Thought, Would Feel at Home in 
Todaya€™ s GOP: I think Alan Wolfe used the word a€ceconservativea€D for a couple of reasons. One, 
because
he didna€™ t feel like being charitable that day. Two, and more likely, a€oefascista€n was not 
available to him in 2004.1 like to think if he were to rewrite this essay, hea€™ d make room for 
conservatives like
Norm Ornstein, or Liz Cheney for that matter, in order to establish the boundaries of acceptable 
behavior in a liberal democracy in which some things really are above politics, such as the 
political legitimacy of a
rival faction. a€oeFascist,a€n however, continues to get side-eye from mainstream commentators like 
John Harwooda€!. To make a fascista€! takes is a particular and particularly coherent worldview in 
which
everyone outside onea€™ s group is the enemy. As Harwood said, Mann and Ornstein were right. Their 
diagnosis of the GOP is undeniable. But Alan Wolfe was more right. Whata€™ s more, he gave us a
vocabulary. We should use ita€!

LINK: <https://stoehr.substack.eom/p/carl-schmitt-leading-exponent-of>

Leave a comment

(Remember: You can subscribe to thisa€! weblog-like newslettera€! here:

Subscribe now

Therea€™ s a free email list. Therea€™ s a paid-subscription list with (at the moment, only a few) 
extras too.)

