Subscribe now

This from the wise and learned Timothy Burke:

Eight by Seven

The Read: Brad DeLong, Slouching Towards Utopia: An Economic History of the Twentieth Century

Why did I get this book? Ia€™ ve been in overlapping blogspace with Brad DeLong for quite a while, 
including his Substack, so that alone was reason enougha€”Ia€™ ve always enjoyed what he writes. 
But ita€™ s also pertinent to the book I mentioned in the newsletter a while ago (the one that Ia€™ 
m going to try and find a publisher for soon after one more
round of revisa€!

Read more

4 months ago A- 5 likes A- 3 comments A- Timothy Burke

is what I hoped for in my most pleasant dreams: a very serious engagement with Slouching Towards 
Utopia <bit.lv/3pP3Krk> by a very smart and thoughtful person who thinks differently than I do. 
Indeed, now I can sing the nunc dimittisa€”what you do when everything you had ever hoped to see is 
in front of your eyes. To be called a€oevery engaginga€D and
a€oea compulsively readable economic history from an eclectic economista€™ s point of 
viewa€Da€”what more could I ask? And that so many people are saying that that is what the book 
isa€”that tells me that I have many more friends than I imagined, and that the world is a more 
benevolent place toward me than I had hoped.

So now I need to figure out how to highlight and respond to what Timothy Burke has to say. It would 
be most fun if I were to snip out selected pieces of his review, and respond to them in a 
semi-platonic dialogue. So I will do soa€”with additions in brackets:
Share

TB: [The book] did quite often leave me saying a€oeHold up a minute, I have a substantial number of 
quibbles, occasionally metastasizing into real arguments.

BD: Quibbles are great! Real arguments with the book are better!

TB: Is [the book] what I thought it was?a€! Ita€™ s completely what I expected in one sense, in 
that it is very recognizably DeLonga€!

BD: This is one thing that I wish people would expand on more. I fairly often hear it. And people 
who say it to each other nod knowingly. But I am inside this particular neural engine. And so I do 
not know what it looks like from outsidea€!

TB It often does not closely cohere toa€! what I expect to see in economic historya€!. Modern 
history from an eclectic economists! rather than in terms of a conventionally circumscribed 
economic history is fine as a decision, and it plays to DeLonga€™ s strengthsa€!

BD: But would I have served my readers well had I done anything else?

It seems to me that one owes them a duty to say not just what happened in the economy but why it 
matters, and that requires that you spread out from economics narrowly so-called to political 
economy and politics (plus bio-socio-psychology). Adam Smith certainly did.

TB: A lot of this book is straight-up (and very engaging)a€! politicsa€! warsa€! social and 
cultural changesa€! linkinga€! description and explanation of those histories to some form of 
highly generalized economic causalitya€!

BD: Yes! Exactly! Ita€™ s 600 pages. There was a moment when I had written 1000, with no central 
thrust, no single Grand Narrative for readers to hold onto and follow. And I needed one. So I took 
a chainsaw and cut the book down to the particular Grand Narrative I found myself most excited 
about at that moment..

TB: [The] highly generalized economic causalitya€! [is] that a series of interlinked changes after 
1870 began a a€oeslouch towards utopiaa€D which was at times a bit more of a rapid walk which 
inflected into all other global developments after that datea€!

BD: And the particular Grand Narrative I found myself most excited about at that moment was the 
a€oel87O is the hinge of historya€D starting point, and the a€oedownstreama€n consequences of the 
shift of the engine of scientific and technological progress into high gear. All posta€“1870 
historical developments were inflected and indeed more than inflected by
the sudden appearance of this every-generation doubling of humanity a€™s technological competence.

TB: Ia€™ 11 start with a big and abstract objectiona€! not limited to DeLonga€!. Many economists 
and allied thinkersa€! [say] that we live in a world of unimaginable wealtha€!. Thata€! makes the 
entirety of premodern economic history into an undifferentiated blob of bleak and unrelenting 
povertya€!

BD: Well, wasna€™ t it?

Before 1870 technological progress was too slow, and patriarchal and other pressures for fertility 
too strong, for humanity to ever escape from its ensorcellment by the Devil of Malthus. There was 
no possibility for humanity to produce at utopian scale; bake a sufficiently large economic pie so 
that everyone could potentially have enough. Governance and politics was
then overwhelmingly some A©lite running a force-and-fraud domination game so that its members could 
have enough. Build high cultures, yes they could. But at bottom, those high cultures were made and 
lived by a coalitions of thugs-with-spears with their associated toadying propagandists, 
bureaucrats, and accountants.

From the 30,000-foot level, isna€™ t that a bleak blob? And compared to us, dona€™ t differences 
within that bleak blob tend to become hard to see?

TB: Many economists and allied thinkersa€! [then become] rather bullisha€! [say that we] in fact 
are doing rather well at responding to the needs of humanitya€!

BDButlam not among that a€oemanya€D! Or, at least, if the a€cemea€D that is in my book places 
himself among that a€oemanya€n, I wrote the book wrong! Baking, slicing, tasting the economic pie. 
Yes, since 1870 we have made enormous progress in baking a sufficiently large pie, but slicing and 
tastinga€’’equitably distributing and then utilizing our wealth
to create a world in which people feel safe and secure and are healthy and happya€’’continues to 
flummox us, and to flummox us more-or-less completely.

For one thing, we still have our bottom 500 million, many of whose lives are not Z^aMistinguishable 
from those of our pre-industrial Agrarian Age ancestors (save for the public health that gives them 
life expectancy over 60, access to the village cellphone, and for their societal interfaces with 
the globalized world).

TB: It may be that ordinary farmers living under the rule of the Mwenemutapa state in what is now 
Zimbabwe in 1560 and even the royal court of that state are in absolute terms ridiculously poor 
compared to all modern Zimbabweans, and that farmers in the southeastern low veld of Zimbabwe today 
are enormously wealthy in material terms
compared to people living there four centuries agoa€!

BD: Yes. They are. And we are. After 1870, the technological competence of the human race doubles 
every generation. That allows the creation of enough wealth to trigger the demographic transition. 
And thereafter fertility has no chance of keeping up with technology. The possibility of a world 
rich enough for everyone to have enough draws into view, not as some
far off millennium fantasy, but rather as something that could will be accomplished in a few 
generationsa€’’Keynes, in fact, put its likely appearance sometime shortly after the year 2000.

Moreover, after 1870, governance and politics could shift from domination-and-exploitation to 
utopia-building: nurturing the process of preparing to bake and then baking the sufficiently large 
economic pie, and then undertaking the secondary tasks of properly slicing and tasting. Governance 
and politics did not have to be the grabbing A©lite of thugs-with-spears
with associated toadying propagandists, bureaucrats, and accountants, & ca€!.

TB: [But the material wealth is] a nonsense comparison when it comes to how people experience their 
material culture. If evervbodva€™ s poora€”and therea€™ s no option to be as rich as we are 
nowa€”then our judgment that theva€™re living horrible lives is irrelevant in that time framea€!


BD: This is the first thing in your review where I want to stop and say: Hold it! I really do not 
understand you here! This I find to be a hill that I will die on.

TB: [Please explain?]

BD: Unless Lindert, Milanovic, and Williamson (2015) are completely wrong <https://onlinelibrary 
.wiley .com/doi/abs/10.1111 /j. 1468-0297.2010.02403.x>, the typical prea€“1870 society was as 
unequal as it could < possibly bea€”that is, without forcing its lower class into poverty so severe 
to make its rate of population growth negative.

The typical human before 1870 would see their average son grow up stunted: 5a€™ ,3a€oe or 5a€™ 
4a€D. And that was for those of their babies that survived: the typical human would see half their 
babies die before the age of five. The typical human would live many days in which for several 
hours they would be thinking about how they really wished they could
have more calories right now. The typical human would spend many nights worrying about where their 
2000 calories per day plus essential nutrients would come from next year, or next month, or 
tomorrow. The typical human had a life expectancy at birth of less than 30 years. And the typical 
woman would find herself eating for two for more than 15 years of her
lifea€”and would routinely losing teeth during pregnancy due to calcium shortages.

The typical human before 1870 really was was desperately poor.

TB: [But that is not] how people experience[d] their material culturea€!

BD: I do not believe the argument that people then did not know that they were poor.

Many of them could look around and see people in their own societies who were not as poor.

They could see people who lost only a third rather than half of their babies before the age of 
five; people whose sons grew up to be 5a€™ 6a€oe or perhaps 5a€™ 7a€U, people who were not 
potentially protein-deprived in utero.

The tame propagandist allies of the thugs-with-spears would try to convince the typical person that 
this was the will of the gods, and perhaps that via their poverty they were storing up treasure in 
heaven or paying down some karmic debt incurred in a previous life. Those outside of the A©lite 
pretended to agree. Probably some of them did believe it.

I have always been struck by Robert Darntona€™ s 
<https://www.nybooks.com/articles/1984/02/02/the-meaning-of-mother-goose/> interpretations of fairy 
tales. What does Jack do when he finds the gianta€™ s castle at the top of the beanstalk? The first 
thing he does is head for the kitchen to eat. What was going on before the beanstalk grew? They had 
sold their
cow, and were beginning the process of starving to death.

TB: [But even their societiesa€™ rich did not Eve as we do.]

BD: Exactly. We today are not only richer than the upper classes that our past ancestors envied, 
hated, and feared for grabbing enough for themselves, we in the global north upper middle class are 
rich beyond the dreams of past utopias. We have surpassed aCcethe limit of human felicitya€D, as 
Edward Bellamy has his protagonist say in Looking
Backwardchttps ://archive .org/details/lookingbackwardO 1 bellgoog>

I would go so far as to say that for most high cultures before the 1870 coming of modern economic 
growth, the mass poverty of the poor is seen as highly functional and positively desirable. Adam 
Smith is being snarkily contrarian to the conventional wisdom of Augustan-Age Britain when he 
writes:

AS: Isa€!. improvement in the circumstances of the lower ranks of the peoplea€! an advantage or as 
an inconveniency to the society?a€! No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the 
far greater part of the members are poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who 
feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of the
people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably 
well fed, clothed, and lodged chttps://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.76521>a€!

BD: No, wealth does not necessarily make a good life and povertya€”even poverty that leaves your 
sons stunted at 5a€™ 3" adult height and perhaps protein-deprived in uteroa€”does not necessarily 
make a bad one. But wealth and poverty matter. And they are what they are.

TB: I was a bit surprised at DeLonga€™ s relative reluctance to grapple with racism and empire. He 
doesna€™ t leave it out by any means, but the Occama€™ s Razor version of explaining inequality, 
especially racial inequality, as a deliberately constructed economic system, seems to me something 
he steps around a fair amounta€!

BD: I did not intend to step around it. Maybe I just took it too much for granted?

Admittedly, most of the discussion of racism is in the American context, but I want to tell 
arresting stories that will grab my audience, the stories I know best, how to tell are the American 
stories, and I think the overwhelming bulk of my audience is an American audience.

TB: [Is that adequate?]

BD: No. Almost surely there are things on the cutting-room floor that should have been in the main 
text, buta€! can I plead 600 pages?

TB: [A few times. But not too many. It would grow tiresomea€!]

BD: And empire. Admittedly, most of the discussion of empire focuses on how imperial masters and 
colonizersa€’’whether external colonizers from Europe, internal colonizers who claimed to be 
descended from Castilan conquistadores, or semi-internal colonizers of Manchu, lineagea€”made it 
impossible for full-fledged economic development to take hold outside
the 300 mile-radius Dover Circle (plus its offshoots and emulators) before decolonization. There is 
very little about how colonial masters played the force-and-fraud domination-and-exploitation game.

TB: [And is that adequate?]

BD: Looking at it: No. You are right.

I did take it too much for granteda€”a€oeita€D being that before 1870 nearly everywhere and after 
1870 wherever modern economic growth had not yet taken hold for at least a generation, politics and 
governance was still on the old-fashioned pattern of force-and-fraud, exploitation-and-domination, 
the same old-same old. For one A©lite to elbow another out of the
way was not what I saw as different about posta€“1870 history, even though one A©lite does so with 
Maxim guns. Looking back, I was simply not invested in the fortunes of any one A©lite rather than 
another, and to spend time on how one elbowed another out of the way and then ran its version of 
the force-and-fraud exploitation-and-domination game seemed less
interesting.

TB: [Looking back: are you satisfied with your choices?]

BD: No. This was, I think a mistake: I should have spent more pages on how colonial masters played 
their version of the force-and-fraud, domination-and-exploitation game. Buta€! 600 pages?

TB: The a€oenew imperialismaCD that ramped up in 1870 is squarely in the wheelhouse of this booka€! 
but empire gets folded into war and nationalism as things that a classic liberal economist prior to 
1914 might see as unexpected atavisms that produced woefully unoptimal outcomesa€!

BD: Well, I am a liberal and an economista€”just not a a€ceclassicala€D one. They did produce 
woefully unoptimal outcomes. And they were, I think, from the standpoint of a post-demographic 
transition high-technology world in which we can produce enough, atavismsa€!

TB: [You know] that Schumpeter, Hobson, etc. were not only proven wrong but that they simply 
werena€™ t understanding what empire (and later nationalism and global war) were all abouta€!

BD: Yesa€! and now. Outside of the charmed circle of 300 miles in radius around the port of Dover, 
plus its settler-colony offshoots and successful emulators, what empire was a€ceabouta€D was the 
same-old same-old that empire had been a€ceabouta€D since the thugs-with-spears first realized that 
the farmers could not evade them by running away into the
wilderness without starving. It was another version of the force-and-fraud 
domination-and-exploitation machine. But from inside the charmed Dover Circle, Norman Angell 
<https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.261777> was right: it had become cheaper, easier, 
less effortful, and much more effective to produce and trade rather than invade, conquer, rule, and
extract.

TB: The racialization of access to the combination of features that DeLong sees as the key to 
a€oeescaping the Malthusian trapa€D in the slow-walk to utopia was often explicit not just at the 
outset of empire but all along. If economists are puzzled by why the British Raj did not engender 
transformation, theya€™re maybe not paying
attention. (But of course some havea€’’Amartya Sen has a pretty good intuition about the reason, 
for example)a€!

BD: Intersectionality: that you have not just a politics-and-governance of an A©lite running a 
force-and-fraud game, but of an imperial A©lite running a racialized force-and-fraud game.

I had hoped to capture some of that in the overlapping penumbras of my discussions of W.E.B. DuBois 
and Abubakar Tafawa Balewa. Looking back, I have to conclude that I failed: I made a mistake here.

TB: Being focused on the twentieth centurya€! is maybe a valid way to wiggle out of having to get 
into the relationship between the Atlantic slave trade (or the intensification of global trade 
generally in the early modern era) and industrial capitalism, thougha€!

BD: I would not say a€oewigglea€n. I would say that that is part of a 1500a€“1870 book that I 
simply did not write. And I would say that the issues are deep, complex, and unsettled: they are 
hard to convey in thumbnail descriptions.

That said: First, my view is that the exploitation profits of the 1500a€“1770 Imperial-Commercial 
Age west African slave trade were probably not sufficiently channeled into investments that then 
proved critical in sparking and powering the British Industrial Revolution. Most of the profits 
went not to building up capital but to boosting the consumption of the
slaveowners, and of those who bought slave-produced goods. From a resource- and ideas-mobilization 
perspective, Atlantic slavery over 1500a€“1770 probably did little to spark or power the British 
Industrial Revolution.

Second. But. Cotton. Without American slave-grown cotton and the cotton gin, the Industrial 
Revolution in textiles would have been delayed for a generation, and perhaps for longer.

Third: I find it highly plausible that the slaveowner-merchant complex gained sufficient additional 
wealth from slavery to boost its political power enough to accelerate the coming of the pieces of 
the institutional complex of modern capitalism that does power modern economic growth. And I find 
convincinga€”that is, more likely than nota€”Bob Allena€™ s
argument that without the British Empire wages in England would have been too low for it ever to 
have been worth anybodya€™ s while to spend the necessary time and energy to make the steam engine 
work. And the slavery complex was essential to the creation of the British Empire.

In short, I am an unorthodox Eric Williamsite here.

But I am certain of nothing.


But this is another book, or rather more than several other books, no?

TB: The intensification of global trade generally in the early modern era) and industrial 
capitalisma€! hea€!has quite a lot to say about this much later in the book in his discussion of 
postwar economic development in the global Southa€!

BD Yes! And not just posta€“1945! I do stress that globalization was very importan in the 
1870a€“1914 pre-WWI era. I think it significantly more likely than not that W. Arthur Lewis was 
right in his The Evolution of the International Economic Order, and that the racialized pattern of 
the 100-million pre-WWI global migration flow was decisive in the development
of underdevelopmenta€”of concentrating the worlda€™ s engineers in the Dover Circle-Plus, and of 
making it virtually impossible for anyone else to even keep pace with the global leadera€™ s in 
economic growth.

TB: Between about 1850 and 1910, many young African men were quite voluntarily drawn towards 
engaging in wage labor in new mines, in sugar plantations, and as domestic workersa€!. The market 
as a concept wasna€™t regarded as an alien intrusion on a perfectly formed moral economy. For many 
young mena€! working in order to
earn either currency or commodity paymentsa€! allowed them to do an end-run around generational 
transmission of wealth that kept them dependent on their fathers and unclesa€!

BD: Yes! Globalization brings opportunities for trade and employment! It also brings opportunities 
for learninga€”for technology transfer! It also brings the concentration of manufacturing and the 
communities of engineering practice inside the Dover-Circle-Plus, creating huge barriers to 
peripheral growth and developing underdevelopment! It also brings new forms
of industrial-scale destruction-based domination! It overturns traditional A©lites! It gives 
different A©lites much more force with which to grab! It does all of these things!

TB: The new plantation owners and then the consolidators of mineral digsa€! used racial 
restrictions, petty taxation that was only payable in currency, and a massive scale of land 
alienation that transferred the best agrarian land to exclusively white owners in order to try and 
compel African workers to work for as long as mine owners and
plantation owners needed them to work, not as long as the workers themselves wanted in terms of 
satisfying their own needsa€!

BD: Yes! A good deal of the market societya€™ s a€oethe only rights that matter are property 
rightsa€O his its then giving rising A©lites the incentive to grab all the property a€’’and 
a€oeleta€™ s run off all the Mexicans firsta€D or a€oethe Cherokee have some nice land here: John 
Marshall has said what he thinks the law is, now let him try to enforce ita€D is a
big part of the story!

TB: If a€oelaboratory, the corporation, global transportation, global communications, and falling 
barriersa€D were a big part of the kick-off after 1870 (along with education, which DeLong 
frequently sees as important), Ia€™ d argue that so was the national mobilization of violence to 
suppress the power of labor and through empire to create valuable property rights
through theft which were conferred on a racially exclusive basis long enough to structure a lasting 
global inequalitya€!

BD: But, as I say, an atavism. In the posta€“1870 world, it was more expensive and less effective 
to rule and exploit than to produce and trade. And then there is the judo-move of turning your past 
conquests into property, and then the market is on your sidea€”the mechanisms that thereafter give 
you the liona€™ s share of resources more-or-less run themselves.

TB: The a€oeman starts on third base, thinks he hit a triplea€D is not a metaphor in this case, 
ita€™ s an empirical realitya€!. The global South was integrated into globalization through empire, 
violence and racial hierarchy, and that a fair amount of the unequal distribution of modern capital 
derives from the organized transfer of resources,
land and labor from the people who had those to people who stole them on the grounds that the 
previous owners werena€™ t doing enough to create value with what they hada€!

BD: A a€oefair amounta€D. a€oePeople who had thosea€D. Increased concentration of wealth is 
something to mourn, indeed. Blocking the creation and diffusion of useful human technologies for 
manipulating nature and coAJperatively organizing humans is something to mourn, indeed, One A©lite 
elbowing another out of the way? In my view, not so much. If
you mourn the fact that after the Battle of Plassey the taxes of Bengal were going not to Siruj 
ud-Dowla but rather to Robert Clive and his employ ersa€’’well, I am getting off that streetcar at 
the next stopa€!

TB The book as a whole takes much of the a€oeglobal Southa€D in the economic history of the 20th 
Century as an edge case when it seems to me to be central to explaining not just half the planeta€™ 
s economic history but the economic history of the whole.I cana€™t imagine that laboratories, 
corporations, technology, education and
falling barriers would return the same 20th Century if half the planet had magically disappeared in 
1870s and the global North was left spinning through space intact on its owna€!

BD: These are issues that I did sidelinea€”in large part because my attempts to write them up were 
a mess, and I am genuinely uncertain what was what, and they seemed to me for the most part to have 
serious bite back before 1870.

My guesses: For the world as a whole, technology was advancing at some 0.05% per yeara€”that is 5% 
per centurya€’’before 1870. Then, for the world as a whole, 0.15%/year during the 1500a€‘T770 
Imperial-Commercial Age, then 0.45%/year during the1770a€‘T870 BritishIndustrial Revolution 
Century,  and then 2.1%/year inthe posta€‘T870 Modern
Economic Growth Era.

For the Dover-Circle-Plusa€”the 300 miles in radius around Dover, plus the settler colonies they 
established, plus those who thoroughly emulated them in places like Milan and Prague and Yokohama 
and Seoul and Taipeia€’’technology advances at 0.1% per year from 800 to 1500, as the Dover Circle 
changes from being a backwater to a potential industrial leader.
Then, after 1500: 0.2%/year (compared to a world average of 0.15%) over 1500a€‘T770,0.9% (compared 
to a world average of 0.45%) over 1770a€“1870, and then 2.5% (compared to a world average of 2.1%) 
over 1870a€“2010.

But there is also resource engrossment: conquest, theft, settlement, genocide, even purchase, plus 
the resources brought to the Dover-Circle-Plus as the emulators joined it. Those boost, I think, 
the rate of growth of the material well-being of those in the Dover-Circle-Plus by 0.12%/year over 
1500a€“1770; by 0.2%/year over 1770a€“1870; and by 0.08%/year over
1870a€“2010.

Compared to the 0.05%/year technology growth gap of 1500a€‘T770; of 0.45%/year over 1770a€“1870; 
and 0.4%/year over 1870a€“2010, these resource-engrossment numbers are of about the same order of 
magnitude as the technology advance numbers over 1500a€‘T870; but after 1870 they are small beer 
compared to the technology-advance gap.
Would I die on the hill that is made up of these guesses of mine? No. But they are my guesses.

Plus there is the fact that resource-engrossment is a profoundly negative-sum process: the gains to 
the winners are much less than the losses to the losers. It is the story of empire, of A©lites 
grabbing enough for themselves and their families from others who do not have the ability to defend 
themselves: the strong do what they wish, and the weak suffer what they
must.

Plus there is the fact that the globalized market concentrates manufacturing and engineers in the 
Dover-Circle-Plus, and that concentration is the principal reason that there is a posta€‘T870 
technology-growth gapa€!

TB: [Well, Sokrates, I am not sure how to respond to that! Let me shift gears, and move to another 
topic: Your] historya€! is quite aware of the recurrence of certain kinds of eventsa€”speculative 
panics, depressions, inflation (caused by monetary policy or otherwise), predatory transfer-seeking 
or corruption, wars that in some sense made no
a€~rationala€™ sense, etc., therea€™ s a recurrent interest in turning to serendipity, accident and 
randomness as explanation, or a€oebad luck and bad choicesa€Da€!

BD: Franz Ferdinanda€™ s drivera€™ s turning left and Lenina€™ s sealed train to the Baltic made 
huge differencesa€”how huge, I am not sure, but huge. FDR made a huge differencea€!

TB: Perhaps because more structural explanations of at least some of those seeming patterns 
unbalances the booka€™ s desire to walk between Polanyi and Hayek and to see the economic history 
of the 20th Century as also balanced between thema€!

BD: We do make our own historya€’’albeit under circumstances not of our own choosinga€!

TB: If one were to conclude that market economies predictably favor certain kinds of a€oebad 
choicesa€Da€’’perhaps actively enable thema€”then thata€™ s more than Polanyia€™ s thought that the 
market cana€™ t satisfy all human needs for justice and fairness, ita€™ s that marketsa€”or more 
abstractly capitalisma€”have an attractor
towards empirically bad outcomesa€!

BD: Why a€oecapitalisma€n rather than a€oehuman naturea€D? Certainly pre-capitalist modes of 
production seem to have had attractors toward outcomes that, to me at least, look significantly 
worse. And so do those societies that claimed to be moving toward post-capitalism.

TB: There have been so many a€oebad choicesa€D that they hardly seem like accidentsa€!

BD: But there also have been a lot of good choices! Humanity is on the cusp of baking a 
sufficiently large economic pie, after all! With all of its flaws and murders, the a€oeeconomic El 
DoradoaCD world of 1870a€“1914 was a vast improvement on its predecessors! The post-WWII trente 
glorieuses in the Dover-Circle-Plus likewise! As has been the posta€“1980
Neoliberal Era in China and India.

Yes, our being flummoxed by the problems of distribution and utilization is a scandal and a 
disgrace. Yes, the circumstances of the bottom billion today are a crime and an atrocity.

But it is not at all clear to me that any form of a€oepessimism of the intellecta€D is really 
justified. I do think that the next two generations are likely to see a richer world having a 
rougher ride than the world has had since 1945 at least. But I do not see us as structurally doomed 
at all!

TB: DeLong insists (whether talking about politics or economics) that the explanations of bad 
choices are local, particular, specific to a country, a political moment, or an individual leader. 
a€oeUtopian faith is a helluva druga€D, DeLong writes, and I think he kind of knows that there are 
times in the book where hea€™ s getting high on his
own supplya€!

BD Whether a€oewe must imagine Sisyphus happya€D means that if we dona€™ t then we kill ourselves 
immediately, or alternatively that the logic of Sisyphusa€™ s situation impels him to eagerly 
return to rolling the rock uphill, I do think there are very good reasons for Optimism of the 
Willa€”and some for Optimism of the Intellect as well.

TB: Anyway, this is me being feisty and maybe even nit-picky about a book that I enjoyed and found 
engaginga€!.

BD: All of which are good things. We pick nits because we are professorsa€”it is our job. And we 
are feisty because we care. And that is a good thing: these issues are very much worth caring 
about.

TB: I also like to take a puff or two of the desire to see our times as having the possibilities of 
utopia embedded within them and to think, with great dread, that we have crossed a boundary where 
those possibilities are going to fall away from us with accelerating speed.

BD: That is a very good please to close. But remember that whether we return to a more cyclical 
wheel-of-fortuna form of history is in our hands.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

Leave a comment
Give a gift subscription

Get 50% off a group subscription

Donate Subscriptions



Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Visit the Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality chat
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Visit the Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality chat
Subscribe now

