Jim Buhler: Thread by @ JimBuhler on Thread Reader App: a€~Last weekend, I read DeLonga€™ s 
Slouching Toward Utopia <bit.ly/3pP3Krk>, an economic history of what he
calls the long twentieth century (1870-2010). I liked the book and have thoughts.

A thread where I step even more outside my lane than usual:

Ita€™ s a long book but not a hard read even for someone like me whoa€™ s not at all an expert in 
the area. I am most interested in the period however, and Ia€™ ve done more
than a little historical work on music and entertainment media from the period.

The basic thesis of the book is that around 1870 due to globalization and the formation of 
corporations focused on invention and research the world saw an unprecedented
acceleration of economic growth that would continue throughout the long 20th century. 
Notwithstanding the wars and revolutions, this acceleration of economic growth, DeLong
argues, changed the world and made economic growth the driving historical factor of the period.

Throughout the book works with a play between Hayek and Polanyi as a structuring opposition. From 
Hayek he takes the idea the market giveth, the market taketh away. Blessed be
the market. From Polanyi DeLong takes the idea that the market is made for man but not man for the 
market. From that he derives a set of Polanyi rights that cannot be reconciled
with the market and generally lead to disenchantment with the market. This play between Hayek and 
Polanyi is an effective structuring opposition for the book. Really it is quite
remarkable what DeLong can draw from it and the clarity it brings to the historical account.

One complaint:DeLong is too easy on, even occasionally forgiving of imperial violence compared to 
fascist and communist violence. Thata€™ s not to say the book ignores
imperial violence. Ita€™ s just that compared to fascist and communist violence it does not get 
centered the same way in the analysis. Perhaps that is because fascist and communist
violence is new whereas imperial violence had its start well before the period under discussion. 
Perhaps it is because imperial violence during the period is often expressed as part of
the process of decolonization, so it is half masked. Since imperial violence is one shadow of the 
productivity gains of the global north it seems it should have factored similarly in
the analysis as fascist and communist violence do in the analysis of those two responses to the 
disenchantment with capitalism. Again DeLong doesna€™t ignore imperial violence,
it just doesna€™t seem to factor as large in his analysis as does communist and fascist violence.

Second complaint: DeLong notes that Polanyi rights have two edges. And his narrative is less 
persuasivea€”doesna€™t have good answersa€’’wherever it confronts the anti­
egalitarian edge. At least I don't find it as convincing. The anti-egalitarian edge is that unequal 
should be treated and rewarded unequally. The fruits of the world should be
distributed meaningfully, that is neither arbitrarily, randomly, nor equally. The market uses 
unequal distribution to provide incentive but the market is also capriciousa€”it giveth, it
taketh awaya€”so it often fails in terms of Polanyi rights. So the anti-egalitarian edge frequently 
turns against Hayeka€™ s market principle and DeLong sometimes takes it up
himself for unclear reasons to knock a€oereally existing socialism.a€D

I feel DeLong often putting his thumb on the scale when talking about communism to make the reader 
always aware of its real failures when his basic historical account makes the
point of its inadequacies clear enough. Maybe that disavowal is the price an economic historian who 
has learned from Charlie and Freddie still has to pay. Maybe our current return
to a world where fascism is ascendant is accompanied by rumblings of a reemergence of communism and 
DeLong wants a marker in place as a reminder of what can go wrong as
we look for solutions to our current disenchantment.

The anti-egalitarian edge of Polanyi rights is also used by fascism against the formal egalitarian 
rights embedded in democracy and so it might have made some sense to draw the
monster Carl Schmitt into the conversation. Especially since so much of movement conservatism draws 
implicitly on Schmitt and binds him to what DeLong calls Hayeka€™ s Mr
Hyde. That might have allowed DeLong to offer more clarity about the neoliberal turn, how we ended 
up where we are, and what we might do about that.

As DeLong recognizes it is with the account of the neoliberal turn that the book is weakest. And 
ita€™ s not in fact clear that a new phase should not be started there in the
problems of the 1970s and the response to that. In which case our current situation is not the 
beginning of a new epoch of lower growth but more like a response to the failures of
that period. Or to follow DeLong: history is rhyming and the period from 1980-2010 bears closer 
affinities with 1870-1914 than the latter does with the immediate post-WWII
period. And our current period is rhyming with the interwar period where the crises of capitalism 
led to the communist and fascist responses.

DeLong occasionally notes these parallels but the need to call 2010 an endpoint forecloses any 
careful consideration of the rhyme. The rhyme is also ongoing so it makes for
incomplete and tentative analysis. Not nearly as clear because open and we dona€™ t know the 
endpoint. But it does make me wonder why DeLong felt the need to end the epoch
in                                                                                 2010. Have we 
had a long enough run since 2010 to say long term global growth of productivity has permanently 
declined? Or was the Great Recession actually much closer to if
not quite as deep to the Great Depression than we care to admit?

As an outsider who doesna€™ t know enough about the details of economic history to evaluate the 
choice, I cana€™ t really say. But to me 2010 feels very arbitrary as an end point
to the story DeLong tells.

The story DeLong wants to tell in fact seems to end effectively (and tragically) in the 1970s in 
the West with the inflation cycle and a€oelegitimation crisis,a€D

which for some reason was sufficient to bring the whole thing down. It finally ended in at the end 
of the 1980s with the collapse of the Soviet Union. Of course at that point the
fateful neoliberal turn had already been taken in the West. Yes, thata€™ s closer to Hobsbawma€™ s 
narrative that DeLong is writing against, but it seems implicit in
DeLonga€™ s own account. He freely admits that the post-1980 period is more unruly in terms of 
fitting to his grand narrative.

In any event, the neoliberal turn itself seems the start of a new cycle, now outfit with covert 
Schmittian characteristics due to movement conservatism. And we are now entering the
second act after its failure (but now with more pronounced Schmittian characteristics, at least 
among the elites).

Now to step even further out of my lane into speculation that the book prompted but I'm not sure 
how to assess. Since according to DeLong the market has traditionally solved the
problem of getting the rich items they want, there seems a way of thinking about the current 
situation in terms of a performatively contradictory mass market for elites.

If we take world population as roughly 8 billion, 5% of that is 400 million, roughly the size of 
the US or EU. The point is it scales as a mass market. Containerization and global
networks of communication make possible addressing this 5% global elite as a mass market, and the 
rest of us, the national mass markets, are perhaps just along for the global ride.
My hunch is margins (and so also profits) are highera€”and quite a lot highera€”on items sold into 
this elite mass market compared to any national mass markets. At this point
workers are still needed to make things for this elite mass market, but roboticsa€”or the fantasy 
of roboticsa€”seem increasingly prevalent.

One dystopian view on this would be that the market currently seems to be solving the problem of 
how to make the 5% self sufficient, that is, not in need of the rest of the
population, which can therefore be treated indifferently or worse. Arguably this is would be one 
reason the elite on the whole can be so unconcerned about existential crises like
climate change: there seems a half-formed assumption that a radical population reduction will 
address that, and allow the elites to still prosper. (Yes, the response is both horrifying
and unlikely to work at all in practice, but it is a fantasy figure that is not close to be fully 
articulated. And even the global elite market insofar as it exists at this point still works
across and in conjunction with national markets.)

The politics of the elite seem similarly to be concerned with maintaining the power of the elite, 
changing structure of government to prevent erosion of property rights (and their
place among elites) and especially any form of redistribution. Anti-egalitarian Polanyi rights are 
invoked and politics rewritten according to rule of property rights and power under
Schmittian cover.


