Get this a€~Stack in your email inbox. &/or become a paid subscriber to support my hiring an RA for 
this, & get the Directora€™ s Cut, & command my attentiona€!

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

First: A Quick Glance at Ancient Greece

In the context of relatively stagnant Malthusian economya€”one in which a good millennium sees 
humanitya€™ s deployed technological mastery grow by 5% per century, and material standards of 
living for typical humans grow at 10% per centurya€”the a€ceefflorescencea€D, to use Jack 
Goldstonea€™ s word, of Greek civilization after the year -800 is simply gonzo.

Perhaps 300,000 people who called themselves Hellenes in the year -800 became perhaps 4 million in 
the year -300. And that was only the appetizer. Thereafter, following in the wake of the armies of 
Alexander the Great, and then the expansion of the Roman Empire to the Danube River, Greeks 
colonized city after city and spread out into the countryside from the Al-Fayyum oasis in Egypt to 
the Punjab, and from Alexandria Eschate near modern-day Tashkent
to Marseilles in France.

Alongside the extraordinary growth of the Greek population is a remarkable increase in the average 
age of death among adults. There appears to be much less violence inflicted upon adultsa€’’either 
through violence directly applied, or through violence depriving adults of the resources that they 
need to keep living.
What do I mean by a€oeless violence a€D? Consider what Odysseus says about what he did after the 
Trojan War was over, immediately after he and the twelve ships of Ithaka departed the shore:

What of my sailing, then, from Troy?

What of those years of rough adventure, weathered under Zeus?

The wind that carried west from Ilion
brought me to AQsmaros, on the far shore,

a strongpoint on the coast of the KikonA^s.

I stormed that place and killed the men who fought.

Plunder we took, and we enslaved the women,
to make division, equal shares to alla€"

but on the spot I told them: a€~Back, and quickly!
Out to sea again!a€™ My men were mutinous,

fools, on stores of wine. Sheep after sheep

they butchered by the surf, and shambling cattle,
feasting,a€"while fugitives went inland, running
to      call to arms the main force of KikonA^s.

This was an army, trained to fight on horseback
or, where the ground required, on foot. They came
with dawn over that terrain like the leaves

and blades of spring. So doom appeared to us,
dark word of Zeus for us, our evil days.

My men stood up and made a fight of it

backed on the ships, with lances kept in play,
from bright morning through the blaze of noon
holding our beach, although so far outnumbered;
but when the sun passed toward unyoking time,
then the Akhaians, one by one, gave way.

Six benches were left empty in every ship
that evening when we pulled away from death.
And this new grief we bore with us to sea:

our precious lives we had, but not our friends.

No ship made sail next day until some shipmate

had raised a cry, three times, for each poor ghost
unfleshed by the KikonA^s on that fielda€|

At the moment when he says this, Odysseus has just been washed up, a castaway, in the land of the 
Phaiakia. They ask him how he got there. And the story he tells them is that he is a pirate. It is, 
moreover, a pirate who keeps pirating. When Odysseus leaves Troy, he has just finished fighting the 
long and brutal Trojan War. He and his crew have their plunder from Troy. Yet the first thing they 
do is pirate. Plus they are rather stupid and undisciplined about
pirating. In such an environment, is anybody going to save and invest a lot? Or, rather, is anybody 
going to save and invest in anything other than weapons and weapons training both to (a) make you 
and yours a hard and difficult target for the pirates, and (b) make yourself more effective when 
you go pirate?


The economya€™ s ratio of savings to depreciation s/T is surely going to be low, depressing the 
population. We can feed this into our basic if over-complex theoretical model of an economy in 
Malthusian equilibrium:

The salience of
capital in determining
productivity

The ratio of           \

knowledge to \

subsistence            \

income

The extent to
which population
depresses
productivity

Nuisance


_ (1 +yh/3)0 (1 +Yhl0)


The Malthusian       The ratio of

equilibrium          savings to

population          depreciation

The inverse of
the taste for

Moreover, the risk that, as you mind your own business, Odysseus and company, well-trained, 
well-equipped, battle-hardened, will come along and, just because they can, a€oestormed that place 
and killed the men who fought. Plunder we took, and we enslaved the womena€!a€Da€”such high risks 
of violent death must, in Malthusian equilibrium, be offset by reduced mortality risk from disease 
and such. Hence the economya€™ s level of subsistence­
necessities consumption will also be high. That also depresses the population, at least in our 
over-complex model:


The ratio of
knowledge to
subsistence
income

The salience of
capital in determining
productivity

The extent to
which population
depresses
productivity


equilibrium          savings to             the taste for

population           depreciation           luxury

Not in the model, but potentially very real: A low population density means that ideas that are 
known and deployed somewhere will have a difficult time diffusing throughout a civilization. A low 
population density means that the a€ceSmithiana€D productivity gains from using those ideas to 
build an extensive and highly productive division of labor will be difficult to attain.
Yet from this Early Iron-Age Dark-Age beginning after the collapse of the high Mycenaean 
civilization of the Late Bronze Age, the Greek peoples built a civilization.

As Josiah Ober has written, the Greeks moved out of:

the violence and gift-exchange economy that characterized what Finley (1965) famously called 
a€oethe world of Odysseusa€Da€l. There was in fact sustained and substantial growth in the Greek 
economy between the ages of Homer and of Plato and Aristotlea€! driven by (1) efficient methods of 
production, predicated on relative advantage and aimed at increasing the quantity as well the 
quality of goods produced, and (2) by market
exchanges based on voluntary contracts. Moreover, the rational Greek state (notably, but not 
exclusively Athens) was increasingly cognizanta€’’through its legislative judicial, and 
administrative functions (ch. 5)a€”of the social (and taxable) value of providing rules and 
infrastructure aimed at facilitating the profitable production and exchange of goodsa€!. Ancient 
Greeks, as individuals and collectives, frequently employed economic
rationality, i.e. rationally instrumental reasoning in economic contextsa€!.

All-in-all, this appears to be a remarkable civilizational accomplishment, and not one limited to 
the enrichment of a luxurious predatory upper class. Houses got biggera€”a lot bigger. Trade and 
the division of labor flourished. There is a reason that the Greeks have a predominant place in our 
cultural memory. That reason is not that they are "our" ancestors, whoever "we" happened to be. The 
people who decided that universities should study the Greeks lived on
the island of Britain, in the upper Thames river valley near Oxford and in the fins of Norfolk near 
Cambridge. They were in nowise descendants, biologically or culturally, of the ancient Greeks. 
Nobody in England in 1450 could speak or read Greek. Yet the inhabitants of the valley and the fens 
adopted them as their predecessors in what they decided to call a€oewestern civilizationa€D.

Emerging out of the Iron a€oeDark Agea€U of -1200 to -800, the Greeks built a unique institutional 
framework: the city-state. It emerged with functional systems of governance which provided public 
goodsa€’’security, boundary stones, marketplaces, mediators, dispute resolution. This initiated a 
period of sustained increases in living standards. How is that consistent with Malthusian 
equilibrium of any sort? Recall that in our model there are a€oeluxuriesa€n:
commodities that enrich human flourishing but do not contribute to reproductive fitness, chief 
among which is a taste for living in cities, with a high taste for luxuries modeled by a large 
value of the coeffient .

A strong taste for luxuries gives us a high standard of living and level of productivity in 
Malthusian equilibrium. A high level of savings and investment gives us a high population density 
in Malthusian equilibrium.

The Greek City-State

Emerging out of the Iron “Dark Age” of

-1200 to -800:

•  When the Greek city states emerged they did so with functional

cvcfpmc nf nm/prnanrp Aizhteh nmxrirlArl niiMiP cmndc                        cppiinh;


UW111U VX ^VYVlllUllVV ¥▼ 111V11 |J1 V ▼ A Vi VV4 |7UV1AV ^WkAU                                     
        UVVUAAVJ^

boundary stones, marketplaces, mediators, dispute resolution.

•  This initiated a period of sustained increases in living standards.

•  While Ancient Greece did have a period of democracy, it was relative
short (less than 200 years) compared to the duration of the polity

• Remember! Most citizens—slaves, poor citizens who couldn’t
afford their tax bill, women—could not participate even in
smallholder democracy

• Many poleis oligarchies...

•  Greek institutions (rules according to which the society was organized)
tended to be “extractive”—at least if you were not one of the equals:

• Economy largely based upon slavery.

Slide taken from Melissa Dell

Now do not overstate the accomplishment. While Ancient Greece did have a period of democracy, it 
was relative short (less than 200 years) compared to the duration of the polities. Even during 
Greecea€™ s Democratic Age, most poleis remained oligarchies. And remember! Most 
citizensa€’’slaves, poor citizens who couldna€™ t afford their tax bill, womena€”could not 
participate even in smallholder democracy. The Greek rules according to which the
society was organized tended to be a€ceextractivea€Da€”at least if you were not one of the equals 
who were full citizens. And the economy was largely based upon slavery. (Do note, however, that 
with some notable exceptions like the Spartan helots and the Athenian and Syracusan mines), this 
slavery was small-scale rather than plantation slavery: it was ripping somebody out of their social 
context and placing them in a position in which they had no family or
other trusted companions to provide them with any social power.)

At and near its peak, the civilization had astonishing creative achievements. Look at the people of 
ancient classical civilization. In rhetoric and politics, we have Perikles and Cicero. In 
generalship, should we have CAisar and Alexander. In governance? We have Augustus and Trajan. In 
philosophy we have Aristotle and Plato. In sculpture and literature we have Praxiteles and 
Sophokles. They are our equal, even though they knew much less and did not stand on
the shoulders of giants.

Supermodel Mnesarete of Thespiai ("Phryne", Toad) as a
Model for Aphrodite, & Other Greek & Roman Worthies...


Even in something like making a good living through mass media via presenting yourself as a 
celebrity there were equivalents then who are our equals now. Consider Mnesarete of Thespiai. Her 
name means a€oeRemembrance of Excellencea€Q. But she was called Phryne: toad. Why? Because people 
thought her skin color, yellow, was like that of a toad. That was thought very very attractive in 
the Athens of the -300s. Phryne was the favorite model for
Aphrodite of the sculptors of her day. And I do not think she would have had anything to learn from 
Kim Kardashian about how to manage your celebrity. After all, 2000 years after her death people 
were still writing poems about and marveling at statues of her as Aphrodite.

The ancients werea€”at least those who were not protein-deprived in utero from malnutrition^”our 
equals in intelligence, cultural sophistication, mechanical ingenuity, intellectual creativity, 
and, in short, in the ability to think and do.

Let me pick one example of Greek accomplishment that is at least adjacent to the process of 
technological innovation and development that has driven our civilization to its high prosperity. 
Let me talk about the Anti-Kythera Mechanism.

Found in a shipwreck offshore of the southern tip of the Peloponnesian peninsula, the Anti-Kythera 
Mechanism was built between -150 and -70, probably by artisans and scientists on the island of 
Rhodes. As reconstructed, its outer shell was a 13a€Q x 7a€Q x 4a€oe wooden box Inside were 
gearsa€”with the largest of them 5a€Q in diameter. It looks as though there were 37 gear wheels in 
all.

The Anti-Kythera Mechanism

What is this?


• Built between -150 and -70. Rhodes 13” x 7” x 4“ wooden box. Gears—largest 5” in diameter

♦ Wikipedia: “37 gear wheels enabling it to follow the movements of the Moon and the Sun throu the 
zodiac, to predict
eclipses and even to model the irregular orbit of the Moon, where the Moon's velocity is higher in 
its perigee than in its

What is this?

• Brian Resnick: “A main gear would move

4-              4. 4.1        1      1               ]        1 J


apogee. This motion was studied in the 2nd century BC by astronomer Hipparchus of Rhodes, and it is 
speculated that
he may have been consulted in the machine’s construction. The knowledge of this technology was lost 
at some point in
antiquity. Similar technological works later appeared in the medieval Byzantine and Islamic worlds, 
but works with
similar complexity did not appear again until the development of mechanical astronomical clocks in 
Europe in the
fourteenth century...”

io represent me eaicnuar year, anu wuuiu,

in turn, move many separate smaller gears
to represent the motions of the planets,
sun, and moon. So you could set the main
gear to the calendar date and get
approximations for where those celestial
objects   would be in the sky on that

date.... You, as a user, could input a few
simple variables and it would yield a
flurry                                 of complicated mathematical
calculations.... All the user had to do was
enter the main date on one gear, and
through a series of subsequent gear turns,
the mechanism could calculate things like
the angle of the sun crossing the sky. (For
some reference, mechanical calculators—
which used gear ratios to add and subtract

—didn’t arrive in Europe until the
1600s)...”

2021-02-02

It was a mechanical computer, a clock calendar, astronomical observation and modeling device. By 
turning a crank on the side, you turned the interlinked gears to make pointers on the outside of 
the box tell you the location of astronomical objects on any particular day. A user of the 
Anti-Kythera Mechanism could thus follow the movements of the Moon and the Sun through the zodiac. 
Hea€”almost surely a a€cehea€Da€’’could predict when it was likely that
there might be eclipses. The box even modeled the irregular orbit of the Moon, for the Moon's orbit 
is not a circle but an ellipse, and so its velocity as it revolves around the earth is greater when 
the moon is near its perigee than when it is near its apogee. (That motion had been studied in the 
late -100s by the astronomer Hipparkhos of Rhodes; a natural speculation is that he may have been 
involved in the mechanisma€™ s construction.) It includes, in concrete
mechanical gear-driven form, the most advanced astronomy known to the Greeks.

The technological competence to make such a mechanism was lost. The astronomical knowledge was lost 
in the Latin Western Mediterranean, but preserved in the Greek Eastern Mediterranean and eagerly 
sought by the Muslim Middle-East, where the transfer of a copy of Claudius Ptolemya€™ s Almagest to 
Baghdad was demanded by the Kalifa Al-Maa€™mun before he would sign a peace treaty with the 
Byzantine Empire. What they made was less
complex, however: mechanisms of similar complexity would not be seen again until the mechanical 
astronomical clocks made in Western Europe more than a thousand years later, in the 1300s. Ancient 
civilization was capable of making devices of extraordinary complexity and precision.

When it was shipwrecked, the Anti-Kythera Mechanism was being carried from somewhere in the Aegean 
Sea region to somewhere in Italy. Was it booty that Roman commanders were carrying home after a 
successful conquest or raid? Was it commissioned by some wealthy Roman worthy to put on display in 
his house? Was it going to be an educational tool that a Greek philosopher or slave-tutor would use 
for demonstrations or lessons? We do not know.
Marcus Tullius Cicero wrote, in his De Re Publica, about the wonders of modern science and the 
ability to builda€! spherai is what he calls them. Which means a€cespherea€D, as you'd expect it to 
do. But it clearly has a special technical meaning here: a model to show the movements of the stars 
and the planets, the Moon, the Sun. We don't know exactly what Cicero was talking about:

C. Sulpicius Gallusa€! by chance in the house of [his one-time co-consul] M. Marcellusa€! [saw] a 
sphere^} which the ancestor of M. Marcellus had taken from the conquered Syracusansa€! out of their 
wealthy and embellished city; the only thing he had possessed himself of among so great a spoila€! 
which Arkhimedes also had madea€!. When Gallus began very scientifically to explain the nature of 
the mechanism; the Sicilian
[Arkhimedes] appeared to me to possess more genius, than human nature would seem to be capable 
ofa€!. The motions of the sun, moon, and those five stars which are called wanderinga€!. 
ArkhimedesaCI had discovered a method of producing the unequal and various courses, with their 
dissimilar velocitiesa€L The moon was made to succeed the sun by as many revolutions of the brass 
circle, as it actually took days to do in the
heavensa€!

Was this a similar mechanism? Probably.

We do know he ascribed the spherai to Archimedes. We do know that the Roman aristocrats who had 
these things were interested in collecting them as booty and bringing them back as wonders to 
display after successful warsa€”much more interested than in say, founding universities or endowing 
departments of astronomy and astronomical knowledge.
The only kingdom who seriously did do that was the Ptolemaic Dynasty of Egypt that established, 
maintained and supported the Library of Alexandria. The Roman emperors as they succeeded the 
Ptolemies continued the practice. But that was it.

Military research and development? Yes. Staff architects for the waterworks? Yes. More general 
natural philosophers? No. They accomplished they accomplished great things. They could have 
accomplished greater things. And yet they did not.
Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality


CONDITION: is a^cezero COVIDS^U Sustainable?:

BBC: Shanghai Covid: China Announces Largest City-Wide Lockdown'. a€~China has announced its 
biggest city-wide lockdown since the Covid outbreak began more than two years ago. The city of 
Shanghai will be locked down in two stages over nine days while authorities carry out Covida€‘T9 
testinga€! <https://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-60893070>
Thanks for readinga€”and please share with someone you think would learn from this...

Share

One Picture:

Figure 2

KRU region has moved from big grain importer to large exporter


Very Briefly Noted:

•  Ethan Wu: What the Bond Rout Is Telling Us: a€~The 10 year Treasury yield has risen a dizzying 
78 basis points, to 2.48 per cent. The two year Treasury has risen by a whopping 98 basis points, 
to 2.28 per cent, leaving the 10/2 yield curve near inversiona€!. Five-year inflation break-evens 
have risen 45 basis points to 3.59 per centa€l 
<https://www.ft.com/content/2clbef78-d3d7-47f4-b7c6-e925be5a416e>

• Darrick Hamilton: Neoliberalism & Race <https ://democracy 
journal.org/magazine/53/neoliberalism-and-race/>

•  Felicia Wong: Overview: Post-Neoliberalism at a Crossroads: a€~Neoliberalism is a set of 
cultural beliefsa€! [its] anti-political and anti-democratic strandsa€! are alive and thrivinga€! 
<https://democracviournal.org/magazine/64/overview-post-neoliberalism-at-a-crossroads/>

•  Molly Fischer: The Cult of Adam Tooze: a€~Toozea€™ s great intellectual power is a gift for 
synthesisa€! <https: //nymag .com/intelligencer/article/adam-tooze-profile ,html>

• Cory Doctorow: Rubber Hoses. The Best Defense Against Tyranny Isa€\ : a€~Democratic 
Accountabilitya€! <https://doctorow.medium.com/rubber-hoses-fd685385dcd4>

•  Brandon Sanderson: Some FAQs You Might Enjoy: a€~After seeing some of the discourse around what 
is going on with the Kickstarter, I thought you all might enjoy it if I answered a few questions 
Ia€™ ve been getting. (Or ones Ia€™ ve been seeing people pontificate about.) Consider this a kind 
of halfway point retrospectivea€! <https://www.brandonsanderson.com/some-faqs-vou-might-enioy/>

•  Liel Leibovitz: New York Citya€™ s Cosplay Castros Sentence a New Generation of Owners & Tenants 
to Socialist Squalor 
<https://www.tabletmag.com/sections/news/articles/dsa-comes-for-immigrant-landlords-of-color>

• Ali Alkhatib & Michael Bernstein: Streeta€“Level Algorithms: A Theory at the Gaps Between Policy 
& Decisions 
<https://hci.Stanford.edu/publications/2019/streetlevelalgorithms/streetlevelalgorithms-chi2019.pdf>


Twitter & a€~Stack:

•  Ukraine Memes: a€™ Further evidence ofVDVbearing the brunt of much of the fighting. They began 
the war as one of the more capable unit types. Theya€™ re being so heavily over committed many of 
those units simply wona€™ t exist soona€!


Ukraine Memes for NATO Teens @MENAConflicted

Further evidence of VDV bearing the brunt of much of the fighting. They began the war as one of the 
more capable unit types. They're being so heavily over committed many of those units simply won't 
exist soon.

Oryx @oryxspioenkop

#UkraineWar In addition to losing 307 tanks, the Russian Army is now also visually confirmed to 
have lost 300 infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs). Including: - 41 BMP-3s - 15 BMD-4Ms (VDV) - 58 
BMD-2s (VDV) - 108 BMP-2s - 51 BTR-82As Full list: https://t.co/QR37xcY8mq https :/Zt.co/cwXvLFknlx
4:51 PM a'™ Mar 27,2022

958Likes 127Re tweets

•  Josh Marshall: a€™ What isna€™ t getting discussed enough is that not only did Ginni Thomas 
OBVIOUSLY discuss all of this with her husband, those texts tell us more than that. There were lots 
of ways this was going to end up before SCOTUSa€!. Appearances of conflict or recusal are basically 
a joke. You cana€™t look at any of this and not know to really a certainty that Thomas himself was 
part of the coup conspiracya€!

What isn't getting discussed enough is that not only did Ginni Thomas OBVIOUSLY discuss all of this 
with her husband, those texts tell us more than that. There were lots of ways this was going to end 
up before SCOTUS. And is there anything about these texts that tells ...
1:40 AM a'™ Mar 26,2022

11,452Likes2,023Retweets

• Timothy Burke: The Re-Read: Bad Endings'.

Eight by Seven

The Re-Read: Bad Endings

Just in case you were wondering about the sandwiches from yesterday, herea€™ s one of them. Anyway, 
speaking of how things turn out in the end, after watching the original Star Wars trilogy with my 
young relatives last week, I found myself mulling over the question of when a bad ending for a 
series or franchise has been bad enough to not only turn me away fa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 2 likes A- Timothy Burke

•  Noah Smith: Why Politically Guided Science Is Bad: a€~Research should not be an effort to reach 
onea€™ s desired conclusionsa€!


Why politically guided science is bad

The other day, a paper was published in the American Economic Review about incarceration^™ s effect 
on children. It caused quite a stir, because it concluded that kids can sometimes benefit in 
certain ways from having their parents locked up: Every year, millions of Americans experience the 
incarceration of a faa€l
Read more

2 years ago A- 60 likes A- 63 comments A- Noah Smith

•  Brian Cox: a€™ The data support Johnsona€™ s claim that hea€™ s got Brexit done: Peter Foster: 
"UK goods exports fell 14% in 3 months to Jan versus same period in 2020, according to Netherlands 
Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis. Stark contrast to the global average of an 8.2 per cent rise 
over the same perioda€l"

Peter Foster @pmdfoster

dYs’dYs’UK goods exports fell 14% in 3 months to Jan v same period in 2020, according to 
Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis. Stark contrast to the global average of an 8.2 per 
cent rise over the same period. #brexit Via @valentinaromei ft.com/content/021c62a€l

UK goods exports are
underperforming the rest of the
world

Rolling 3-month average, 3-month to Jan
2020=100

World       Advanced economies

110

105

100

90


as

80

2017 2018      2019    2020    2021    2022

Source: CPB world trade monitor

©FT

Trade intensity of GDP

Trade-to-GDP ratio, 2019 = 100


2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 20212021

1:47 PM a'™ Mar 26,2022

570Likes324Retweets

Brian Cox @ProfBrianCox

The data support Johnsona€™ s claim that hea€™ s got Brexit done.

Peter Foster @pmdfoster

dYs’dYs’UK goods exports fell 14% in 3 months to Jan v same period in 2020, according to 
Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis. Stark contrast to the global average of an 8.2 per 
cent rise over the same period. #brexit Via @valentinaromei 
https://t.co/eextm8VFs6https://t.co/10UxSn2vDP
2:18 PM r™ Mar 26,2022

1,579Likes304Retweets

Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

If you are not a paid subscribera€”and if you can think of something I could add to the Directora€™ 
s Cut that would induce you to become a paid subscriber^’’please email your suggestions to me at 
brad.delong@gmail.com. &, please, become a paid subscriber to some a€~Stack, even if not this one. 
Chris, Hamish, and company are working hard and deserve more money, and their ability to satisfy 
their VC wolves with raw meat would, in the long run, help
create a much better public sphere, I think.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs

I would make this much stronger: I do not think you have any business introducing us to characters 
and starting to tell a story about them unless you have a great ending already in mind:

Timothy Burke: The Re-Read: Bad Endings'. a€~I think most of us can tally up a balance sheet of 
unforgiveably bad endings that spoil everything that can before against a€oewell, that wasna€™t a 
great ending, but thata€™ s oka€D. (Not just for long-running franchises or major plot arcs, but 
sometimes even in a single episode or film.) If nothing else, that accounting off helps clarify how 
much a great ending that completely fulfills
the rest of the show or franchise is a rare and beautiful thing. (Say, The Last Airbender series, 
or the Prydain seriesa€™ The High King.)a€\

LINK:

Eight by Seven

The Re-Read: Bad Endings

Just in case you were wondering about the sandwiches from yesterday, herea€™ s one of them. Anyway, 
speaking of how things turn out in the end, after watching the original Star Wars trilogy with my 
young relatives last week, I found myself mulling over the question of when a bad ending for a 
series or franchise has been bad enough to not only turn me away fa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 2 likes A- Timothy Burke

I think Felicia is overoptimistic here. Yes, the anti-political and anti-democratic strands of 
neoliberalism, in particular, are alive and thriving. But the wealth-accumulation and 
property-ownership strands are ready to be revivified by the next even partial rotation of the 
political-intellectual wheel:

Felicia Wong: Overview: Post-Neoliberalism at a Crossroads'. a€~Neoliberalism is a set of cultural 
beliefs that celebrates and reifies individualism, property ownership, and wealth accumulation in 
ways that are profoundly anti-political and anti-democratic. Some of the wealth accumulation and 
property ownership elements of neoliberalism have come under question, especially for younger 
people. But the anti-political and anti­
democratic strands of neoliberalism, in particular, are alive and thriving as we march into 2022a€!


Wl A

Brian Cox @ProfBrianCox

The data support Johnsona€™ s claim that hea€™ s got Brexit done.

Peter Foster @pmdfoster

dYs'dYs'UK goods exports fell 14% in 3 months to Jan v same period in 2020, according to 
Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis. Stark contrast to the global average of an 8.2 per 
cent rise over the same period. #brexit Via @valentinaromei 
https://t.co/eextm8VFs6https://t.co/10UxSn2vDP
2:18 PM r™ Mar 26,2022

1,579Likes304Retweets
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription

If you are not a paid subscribera€”and if you can think of something I could add to the Directora€™ 
s Cut that would induce you to become a paid subscriber^’’please email your suggestions to me at 
brad.delong@gmail.com. &, please, become a paid subscriber to some a€~Stack, even if not this one. 
Chris, Hamish, and company are working hard and deserve more money, and their ability to satisfy 
their VC wolves with raw meat would, in the long run, help
create a much better public sphere, I think.

Type your emaila€|       Subscribe

PAID SUBSCRIBER ONLY Content Below:

Paragraphs:

I would make this much stronger: I do not think you have any business introducing us to characters 
and starting to tell a story about them unless you have a great ending already in mind:

Timothy Burke: The Re-Read: Bad Endings'. a€~I think most of us can tally up a balance sheet of 
unforgiveably bad endings that spoil everything that can before against a€oewell, that wasna€™t a 
great ending, but thata€™ s oka€D. (Not just for long-running franchises or major plot arcs, but 
sometimes even in a single episode or film.) If nothing else, that accounting off helps clarify how 
much a great ending that completely fulfills
the rest of the show or franchise is a rare and beautiful thing. (Say, The Last Airbender series, 
or the Prydain seriesa€™ The High King.)a€\

LINK:

Eight by Seven

The Re-Read: Bad Endings

Just in case you were wondering about the sandwiches from yesterday, herea€™ s one of them. Anyway, 
speaking of how things turn out in the end, after watching the original Star Wars trilogy with my 
young relatives last week, I found myself mulling over the question of when a bad ending for a 
series or franchise has been bad enough to not only turn me away fa€!
Read more

10 months ago A- 2 likes A- Timothy Burke

I think Felicia is overoptimistic here. Yes, the anti-political and anti-democratic strands of 
neoliberalism, in particular, are alive and thriving. But the wealth-accumulation and 
property-ownership strands are ready to be revivified by the next even partial rotation of the 
political-intellectual wheel:

Felicia Wong: Overview: Post-Neoliberalism at a Crossroads: a€~Neoliberalism is a set of cultural 
beliefs that celebrates and reifies individualism, property ownership, and wealth accumulation in 
ways that are profoundly anti-political and anti-democratic. Some of the wealth accumulation and 
property ownership elements of neoliberalism have come under question, especially for younger 
people. But the anti-political and anti­
democratic strands of neoliberalism, in particular, are alive and thriving as we march into 2022a€!

LINK: <https://democracviournal.org/magazine/64/overview-post-neoliberalism-at-a-crossroads/>

I confess that I am not as enthusiastice about claims that we are about to move beyond 
neoliberalism as many, many others. It is a stubborn beast. And it will likely fight us stubbornly 
so that all that we will attain will be half-a-loaf. Going back to social democracya€’’prioritizing 
full employment, an egalitarian income distribution, and a focus on policies compensating for 
externalities, plus giving voice to the many rather than the monied in deciding what
society's priorities should bea€”seems likely to me to assemblr larger coalition and lead to much 
better outcomes than various things that are on offer. However, if you want to see someone who 
wants to move forward to something better than social democracy rather than simply settling for 
half-a-loaf, Darrick Hamilton is the person to pay attention to:

Darrick Hamilton: Neoliberalism & Race: a€~ Younger generations and social movements may be 
expanding our priorities and notions of economic good away from the self-interested neoliberal 
frame to one that incorporates morality, sustainability, and humanity. Hopefully, it will lead to a 
politics that is not narrowly constrained by the status quo of what does and does not seem feasible 
at a given moment based on our immediate past.
Hopefully, it will lead to a transformative race- and-gender conscious economic bill of rights. One 
that will ensure universally accessible quality jobs, health care, housing, schooling, financial 
services, capital, and one that ensures free mobility without the psychological (and physical) 
threat of detention or bodily harm. Rights that this country has long offered to some but continues 
to deny so manya€!

LINK: <https://democracyiournal.org/magazine/53/neoliberalism-and-race/>

Hey very flattering psychological, sociological, and intellectual portrait of the genius Adam 
Tooze. I would not, however, say that he has an extraordinary gift for synthesis: he has, rather, 
an extraordinary gift for learning and knowing stuff and learning and knowing the right stuff. A 
synthest imposes their view of reality upon readers. Adam gives you the information to construct 
your own view:

Molly Fischer: The Cult of Adam Tooze: a€~Toozea€™ s great intellectual power is a gift for 
synthesis. a€oeHe just digests staggering amounts of information ,a€D said Ted Fertika€! historical 
data, technical data, data about Russian currency reserves, data about the Nazi steel-tube industry 
a€” and returns with a reasonably accessible brief in hand. His omnivorously quantitative approach 
combines with his economic expertise to
reveal familiar subjects in new waysa€!. The media contingent of Toozea€™ s fan base are readers 
who relish a chance to a€oefeel marginally superior to Matt Yglesias,a€D as journalist Alex Pareene 
put it. Tooze conveys substancea€”a sense of undeniable expertisea€”in a way few of his fellow 
explainers can matcha€!

LINK: <https ://nymag .com/intelligencer/article/adam-tooze-profile .html>


democratic strands ot neoliberalism, in particular, are alive and thriving as we march mto 2022a€.

LINK: <https://democracyjournal.org/magazine/64/overview-post-neoliberalism-at-a-crossroads/>

I confess that I am not as enthusiastice about claims that we are about to move beyond 
neoliberalism as many, many others. It is a stubborn beast. And it will likely fight us stubbornly 
so that all that we will attain will be half-a-loaf. Going back to social democracya€’’prioritizing 
full employment, an egalitarian income distribution, and a focus on policies compensating for 
externalities, plus giving voice to the many rather          than the monied   in deciding what
society's priorities should bea€”seems likely to me to assemblr larger coalition and lead to much 
better outcomes than various things that are on offer. However, if you want to see someone who 
wants to move forward to something better than social democracy rather than simply settling for 
half-a-loaf, Darrick Hamilton is the person to pay attention to:

Darrick Hamilton: Neoliberalism & Race'. a€~ Younger generations and social movements may be 
expanding our priorities and notions of economic good away from the self-interested neoliberal 
frame to one that incorporates morality, sustainability, and humanity. Hopefully, it will lead to a 
politics that is not narrowly constrained by the status quo of what does and does not seem feasible 
at a given moment         based onour immediate past.
Hopefully, it will lead to a transformative race- and-gender conscious economic bill of rights. One 
that will ensure universally accessible quality jobs, health care, housing, schooling, financial 
services, capital, and one that ensures free mobility without the psychological (and physical) 
threat of detention or bodily harm. Rights that this country has long offered to some but continues 
to deny so manya€!

LINK: <https ://democracyj ournal .org/magazine/5 3/neoliberalism-and-race/>

Hey very flattering psychological, sociological, and intellectual portrait of the genius Adam 
Tooze. I would not, however, say that he has an extraordinary gift for synthesis: he has, rather, 
an extraordinary gift for learning and knowing stuff and learning and knowing the right stuff. A 
synthest imposes their view of reality upon readers. Adam gives you the information to construct 
your own view:

Molly Fischer: The Cult of Adam Tooze'. a€~Toozea€™ s great intellectual power is a gift for 
synthesis. a€oeHe just digests staggering amounts of information ,a€D said Ted Fertika€! historical 
data, technical data, data about Russian currency reserves, data about the Nazi steel-tube industry 
a€” and returns with a reasonably accessible brief in hand. His omnivorously quantitative approach 
combines with his economic expertise to
reveal familiar subjects in new waysa€!. The media contingent of Toozea€™ s fan base are readers 
who relish a chance to a€oefeel marginally superior to Matt Yglesias,a€D as journalist Alex Pareene 
put it. Tooze conveys substancea€”a sense of undeniable expertisea€”in a way few of his fellow 
explainers can matcha€!

LINK: <https://nym.ag .com/intelligencer/article/adam-tooze-profile .html>

