Subscribe now

CONDITION: Nearby a€ceBomb Cyclonea€D:


Jill Tucker: Will the Bay Area get hit by the imminent bomb cyclone?: a€~a€oehis one is going to 
bomb out over the open oceana€D, said UCLA climate scientist Daniel Swain, adding he expects it to 
hit 500 to 800 miles offshore. But the intense system will generate a strong atmospheric river and 
cold front that will hit the Bay Area and other parts of Northern Californiaa€!
Share

FOCUS: Azis by Noah Smith May Well Be Better A%an Anything I Read in All 2022:


I would say not a€oethree magicsa€D but fivea€”and maybe six:

Noah Smith: The third magic: A meditation on history, science, and AI: More profound and 
fundamental meta-innovationsa€! these are ways of learning about the world:

The first magica€! history^} knowledgea€! recorded in languagea€!. Animals make tools, but they 
dona€™ t collectively remembera€!. Historya€! is what allows tinkering to sticka€!.

Our second magic tricka€! was science^} figuring outa€! principles about how the world worksa€!. 
Controlled experimentsa€!. Ita€™ s pretty incredible that the world actually works that way. Ifa€! 
in the year 1500a€! [you] tolda€! [someome] one kooky hobbyist rolling little balls down ramps 
could be right about how the physical world works, when the cumulated experience of millions of 
human beings around him was wronga€!
they would have thought you were crazy. They did think that was crazy. And yet, ita€! workeda€!. 
Buta€! complex phenomena have so far defied the approacha€!. Language, cognition, society, 
economics, complex ecologies these things so far dona€™ t have any equivalent of Newtona€™ s Laws, 
and ita€™ s not clear they ever willa€!.

The Third Magica€L a€oeStatistical Modeling: The Two Culturesa€Da€! [a] split betweena€! 
parsimonious modelsa€\ [and] predictive accuracy^}. Control^}. Generalized! without finding any 
simple a€celawa€D to intermediated!. Halevyd! Norvig, andd! Pereirad! doeThe Unreasonable 
Effectiveness of DatadDd!. doeRepresent all the data with a nonparametric modeld! with very large 
data sources, the data holds a
lot of detaild!. Trustd! languaged!. See how far you can go by tying together the words that are 
already thered!. Now go out and gather some data, and see what it can dodUd!. Underlying 
regularities that are difficult to summarize but which are still possible to generalize^}. 
Black-box predictiond!. Wed™ re always in danger of overfitting and edge casesd!. The doethird 
magica€D may be more like actual magic than the
previous twod!. But even wild, occasionally-uncontrollable power is real powerd!.

A number of subfields of economicsd! have largely resisted the natural experiment approachd!. Might 
we apply AI tools?d! Khachiyan et al. arguesd! doeyesdU: doeDeep learningd! daytime satellite[s]a€! 
predict changes in income and populationd! grid cells with lateral dimensions of 1.2km and 2.4km 
(where the average US county has dimension of 55.6km)d!. Model predictionsd! exceed the accuracy of 
existing
modelsd! are 3-4 times larger than ford! nighttime lightsd!. In-period accuracyd! 0.90 to 0.94 for 
levels predictions and 0.49 to 0.51 for time differencesd!. Predicting out-of-sampled! an R2 of 
0.20 for the change in log population over 2010 to 2020d!. However, the income model is unable to 
outperform the true mean (i.e., R2 = 0) when forecasting income changes over 2007 to 2017d!. R2 
values are 0.50 for the 2000-2020
population change and 0.42 for the 2000-2017 income change (with initial conditions), which are 
similar to results for the 2000-2010 sample perioda€!a€D. Being able to predict the economic growth 
of a few city blocks 10 years into the future with even 30% or 40% accuracyd!. And this is just a 
first-pass attempta€!

The first magic is at the individual level: eyes, hands, and brains that allow us, but just to use 
and make but to plan for tool-use, and so the East African Plains Ape gains fangs, claws, fur, 
levers, and much else. The second magic is at the small group-collective level: ears and mouths 
that allow us to talk using language, and so the band of fifty of so East African Plains Apes 
becomes an anthology intelligence: what one knows, soon all know.
Then comes the third magic, which is Noahd™ s first: the artificial memory and communication device 
that is writing, and all of a sudden it is not just the band of fifty that is an anthology 
intelligence, but potentially all humanity in the present and the past.

The fourth magic is a magic of coordination: How do you get us all in harness, pulling in the same 
direction, but each doing our (relatively specialized) part? The fourth magic is gift-exchange, 
that in its hypertrophied form turns into the market economy. Doing favors for one another, in a 
social context in which there must br approximate balance, is what allows us to, collectively, not 
just know things but do things.
After that comes, as Noah correctly notes, the fifth magic of science: the experimental method, and 
the exaltation of ideas not because they solidify the band or help some A©lite run a 
force-and-fraud exploitation-and-domination game, but because the ideas are true and are a univeral 
remote controld”they enable us to understand and hence control the universe.

Those five magics have brought us where we are today.

Now how likely is it that we are now at the cusp of a sixth magic: predictive accuracy, 
generalization, and control without any simple intermediating laws, abstractions, or 
encapsulations, based simply on the fact that we have a huge amount of data, and can thus classify 
situations very finely by looking at what the situationsd™ nearby neighbors are?

On the one hand, I feel that this must be trued”! find it very hard to imagine what our brains, or, 
say, a dogsa€™ brains, are doing in wetware other than this. On the other hand, our computers are 
still a lot less sophisticated than our brains, and it is unclear if Moorea€™ s Law will get us to 
computers of sufficient complexity, and unclear if we can do as good a job of programming our 
computers as evolution has done at programming us.
But you really do need to subscribe to Noah Smitha€!

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

MUST-READ:

I confess I was disappointed that nobody noticed this little microblog I did. Maybe SubStack Chat 
is not the right venue?:

There is an interesting debate between David Glasner 
<https://uneasvmonev.com/2023/01/01/vou-sav-potato-i-sav-potahto-vou-sav-tomato-i-sav-tomahto-vou-sa
v-distribution-i-say-expectation/> and Olivier Blanchard going on:


Olivier Blanchard @ojblanchardl

1/8. A point which is often lost in discussions of inflation and central bank policy. Inflation is 
fundamentally the outcome of the distributional conflict, between firms, workers, and taxpayers. It 
stops only when the various players are forced to accept the outcome.
11:24 PM r™ Dec 30,2022

3,888Likes 1,009Re tweets

I think the easiest way to conceptualize what I think of as the major point is to set up a model in 
which:

• The central bank has a target rate of inflation.

• The rate of inflation is a constant markdown applied to the rate of nominal wage increase.

•  The rate of increase of nominal wages that workers are able to demand, and enforce, is a 
declining function of the unemployment rate and of the real wage.

In this model, there is a warranted rate of nominal wage increase: the central banka€™ s inflation 
target, plus the wedge between price inflation and nominal wage increase. In this model, the 
natural rate of unemployment is the rate at which the actual rate of nominal wage increase is equal 
to the warranted rate, and thus depends on the level of the real wagea€”with a lower real wage 
sustainable only with a higher natural rate of unemployment.
You can understand this as a distributional conflict: total demands for production greater than 
100% of supply, and so attaining a feasible equilibrium requires one of:

1. diminishing other groupsa€™ claims on income and so pushing real wages up enough that nominal 
wage increases demanded are at the nominal warranted rate of wage increase.

2. raising the unemployment rate enough that nominal wage increases demanded are at the nominal 
warranted rate of wage increase.

3. accepting an inflation rate higher than the central banka€™ s target, and thus achieving 
feasibility via the exploitation of workersa€™ short-run money illusion.
If                                                                            you take this 
approach, I think it becomes clear that Blanchard and Glasner are talking past each other, and are 
not really disagreeinga€!

Leave a comment

BRIEFLY NOTED:

ONE IMAGE: Slouchinga€::

I continue to try to get stable diffusion to generate a truly striking and apposite Slouching 
Towards Utopia cbit.ly/3pP3Krk> illustration. But it keeps going horribly wrong, and the things it 
produces that I like are vastly too dystopian:

• <•



Give a gift subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

• Mary Weitzman: Prices vs. Quantitiesa€!

•  Charlie Sykes: Kevin McCarthy's Hat-Trick of Humiliation: a€~a€oeYou're supposed to throw the 
grenade after you pull the pin. They pulled the pin and passed the grenade around!" a€” James 
Carvillea€!

•  Matt Levine: Private Markets Dona€™ t Like to Go Down: a€~One cynical way to understand private 
investing generally is that private investment firms a€” venture capital, private equity, private 
real estate, etc. a€” charge their customers high fees for the service of avoiding the visible 
volatility of public marketsa€!

•  Patricia Marx: Hell on Two Wheels, Until the E-Bikea€™ s Battery Runs Out: a€~In 2020, Americans 
bought more than twice as many electric bikes as electric cars. I test-drove a fleet of them and 
lived to tell the talea€”and make recommendationsa€!

•  Noah Millman: What Do The Republican Renegades Want?: a€~McCarthya€!. I cana€™ t see what he 
could give them the insurgents that would be of comparable value to his scalpa€!. What they want to 
prove is that they can veto a choice they dona€™ t approve of, [so] what can he possibly give 
them?a€!

•  Robert Minchin: a€~My hope for 2023 is that this will be the year when people start following 
the advice of the National Institute of Standards and Technology that: a€oel2 a.m. and 12 p.m. are 
ambiguous and should not be useda€D. Everytime you break this rule, a kitten criesa€!

•  Alexandra Petri: a€~Little-known fact: if the speaker vote goes to a seventh ballot John Quincy 
Adams rises from the sea astride a seahorse of enormous dimensions and the winner has to fight 
hima€!

• Jake Sherman: a€~Interesting momenta€”Kat Cammack said Democrats have been drinking during the 
speaker vote. Dems ask to a€oetake down her wordsa€Da€”a mechanism to formally erase her words from 
the record. There are no rules, so there's no mechanism to do thisa€!
Get 33% off a group subscription

AJs:

Jacob Levy: a€~Cammack's speech is pretty entertaining, and not primarily for her a€oethe House is 
not in order so Ia€™ m allowed to stay stuff I would be forbidden to say under normal rules of 
decoruma€D. Therea€™ a€~ standard pablum about unity and working togethera€” which only applies 
intra-party, so it alternates sentence by sentence with a€oeand we are united in hating THEMa€D. 
And there are appeals to the authority of Ronald Reagan, as if
it were 1993 or 2003 or 2013. a€oeAre we Reagan Republicans?a€D doesn't work in 2023a€!


Mark Gongloff: Kevin McCarthy falls victim to the GOP rebellion about nothing: a€~The American 
voting public, in its infinite wisdom, handed the Republican Party the gavel to the House of 
Representatives. The party took the gavel this week and promptly began smashing itself in the face 
with it, again and again. Sometimes, when the partya€™ s smashing arm got tired, from all the 
smashing, it chewed on the gavel. At one point the House sergeant at arms
had to pry the gavela€™ s handle from one of the partya€™ s nostrils. Everythinga€™ s going great, 
in other wordsa€!. McCarthy has already done almost everything to appease the extremists short of 
renaming both of his children a€oeDonald Trump.a€D Nothing has workeda€!. Like Robert Redford in 
a€ceThe Candidate,a€D after it won the House, the GOP more or less said, a€oeSo what do we do 
now?a€D It campaigned without a plan for governance
and forgot to develop one between November and January, Bloomberga€™ s editorial board writes. Its 
Rebellion About Nothing is par for the course, reallya€!

Josh Barro: When Does the House Need a Speaker?: a€~Republicans have good reasons to want to get 
this speaker election mess over witha€!. But theya€™re not excellent reasons, and theya€™re not 
urgenta€!. If you think waiting will get you leadership and rules that are more to your liking, and 
especially if youa€™re someone like Matt Gaetz whose whole purpose in office is to gain attention, 
which becomes easier rather than harder with this mess going
on.                                                                                                 
                                                                                                    
          And thata€™ s why I have trouble seeing how this thing ends

Timothy Snyder: Life as a Lie: Trump, Santos, and Putin: a€~After he lost, Trump was lying to 
extend his political life. It wasn't that he labored under a misapprehension about the election. He 
knew that he had lost. But he was lying not so much to deny the truth to invite people into an 
alternative realitya€!. Trump knew that he had lost the election, and also knew that his also knew 
that his specific claims of fraud were untrue. And that is all made
abundantly clear. Yet there is a deeper point to be made about the nature of politics, which is 
that it can be transformed by big lies issued from positions of authority.a€! Big Lies demand 
violence, since they command the faith of some, but cannot overcome the common sense or lived 
experience of others. The smaller lies within the Big Lie, by generating distrust of institutions, 
create a sense that only violence can restore the righteous order of thingsa€!. The
striving                                                                                            
                                                                                                    
                 for an all-embracing fiction explains the deep affinity between Trump and 
Putina€!. Putin also tells big lies, for example that Ukraine does not exist, that there is no 
Ukrainian society, no Ukrainian nationa€!. Once factual truth is no defense in politics, all that 
remains is spectacle and forcea€!

Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

Henry Farrell, Hugo Mercier, & Melissa Schwartzberg: Analytical Democratic Theory: A 
Microfoundational Approach: a€~Aa€! literature challenges the quality of democratic decision 
making, drawing ona€! specific claims about the ubiquity of cognitive biasa€!. A competing 
literaturea€! defends the wisdom of crowdsa€!. Wea€! demonstrate that the former literature is 
based on outdated and erroneous claims and that the latter is overly sanguinea€!.
a€oeInteractionista€D scholarship shows how individual-level biases are not devastating for group 
problem solving, given appropriate conditions. This provides possible microfoundations fora€l 
investigating how different group structures are associated with both success and failure in 
democratic decision making. This agenda would have implications for both democratic theory and 
democratic practicea€!

Marcin Piatkowski: BA©la Tomkaa€™ s a€oeAusterities and Aspirations: A Comparative History of 
Growth, Consumption, and Quality of Life in East Central Europe since 1945a€D: a€~While communist 
countries lagged behind Western Europe in practically every facet of development, they nonetheless 
scored much higher on education outcomes, mortality, gender equality and many other key elements of 
development and well-being than what would be
suggested by their levels of income.... By now all four countries... Poland, Czechia, Slovakia and 
Hungary... [and]! the rest of the CEE region from Estonia down to Bulgariaa€”are all living through 
their Golden Age, defined as the shortest distance in history between their levels of incomes and 
quality of life and those in Western Europe... This is surprising in view of the booka€™ s 
generally useful coverage of the

Matt Levine (Feb 10,2021): Now... things are valuable not based on their cash flows but on their 
proximity to Elon Musk: a€~It was a joke?... You might think that a€cedid Elon Musk tweet about a 
thinga€D would be a simpler valuation metric than, like, a€oeestimate its cash flows in perpetuity 
and apply an appropriate discount rate,a€D but I dona€™ t know, therea€™ s a lot going on.  Here is 
a website called a€ceElon Stocks,a€D which promises to send

you a text aCcewhen Elon mentions a stock in a tweet.a€D (I cannot advise you either on investing 
strategy, or on the wisdom of typing your phone number into a random website, but I mention it here 
purely for entertainment purposes.) I assume they are working on a premium high-speed direct feed 
to alert high-frequency traders to Muska€™ s tweets microseconds before everyone else. I hope 
Twitter Inc. is doing that, actually.  You dona€™t need

economics anymore, you need memes, Ia€™ m so sorry...

Maciej Ceglowski: Why Not Mars: a€~Going to Mars made sense, back when astronauts were a cheap and 
lightweight alternative to costly machinerya€!. No one had been in space long enough to discover 
the degenerative effects of freefall  But fifty years of progress in miniaturization and software 
changed the balance between robots and humansa€! space probes improved by something like six orders 
of magnitude, while the technologies of long-duration

spaceflight did not.... As for that space station, the jewel of human spaceflight, it exists in a 
state of nearly perfect teological closure, its only purpose being to teach its creators how to 
build future spacecraft like ita€!. The idea of sending something like it on a three year journey 
to Mars does not get engineersa€™ hearts racing, at least not in the good way.  When you hold on to 
a belief so strongly that neither facts nor reason can change it, what you are doing

is no longer science, but religion. So Ia€™ ve come to believe the best way to look at our Mars 
program is as a faith-based initiative...


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

Henry Farrell, Hugo Mercier, & Melissa Schwartzberg: Analytical Democratic Theory: A 
Microfoundational Approach: a€~Aa€! literature challenges the quality of democratic decision 
making, drawing ona€! specific claims about the ubiquity of cognitive biasa€!. A competing 
literaturea€! defends the wisdom of crowdsa€!. Wea€! demonstrate that the former literature is 
based on outdated and erroneous claims and that the latter is overly sanguinea€!.
a€oeInteractionista€D scholarship shows how individual-level biases are not devastating for group 
problem solving, given appropriate conditions. This provides possible microfoundations fora€l 
investigating how different group structures are associated with both success and failure in 
democratic decision making. This agenda would have implications for both democratic theory and 
democratic practicea€!

Marcin Piatkowski: BA©la Tomkaa€™ s a€oeAusterities and Aspirations: A Comparative History of 
Growth, Consumption, and Quality of Life in East Central Europe since 1945a€D: a€~While communist 
countries lagged behind Western Europe in practically every facet of development, they nonetheless 
scored much higher on education outcomes, mortality, gender equality and many other key elements of 
development and well-being than what would be
suggested by their levels of income.... By now all four countries... Poland, Czechia, Slovakia and 
Hungary... [and]! the rest of the CEE region from Estonia down to Bulgariaa€”are all living through 
their Golden Age, defined as the shortest distance in history between their levels of incomes and 
quality of life and those in Western Europe... This is surprising in view of the booka€™ s 
generally useful coverage of the

Matt Levine (Feb 10,2021): Now... things are valuable not based on their cash flows but on their 
proximity to Elon Musk: a€~It was a joke?... You might think that a€cedid Elon Musk tweet about a 
thinga€D would be a simpler valuation metric than, like, a€oeestimate its cash flows in perpetuity 
and apply an appropriate discount rate,a€D but I dona€™ t know, therea€™ s a lot going on.  Here is 
a website called a€oeElon Stocks,a€□ which promises to send

you a text aCcewhen Elon mentions a stock in a tweet.a€D (I cannot advise you either on investing 
strategy, or on the wisdom of typing your phone number into a random website, but I mention it here 
purely for entertainment purposes.) I assume they are working on a premium high-speed direct feed 
to alert high-frequency traders to Muska€™ s tweets microseconds before everyone else. I hope 
Twitter Inc. is doing that, actually.  You dona€™t need

economics anymore, you need memes, Ia€™ m so sorry...

Maciej Ceglowski: Why Not Mars: a€~Going to Mars made sense, back when astronauts were a cheap and 
lightweight alternative to costly machinerya€!. No one had been in space long enough to discover 
the degenerative effects of freefall  But fifty years of progress in miniaturization and software 
changed the balance between robots and humansa€! space probes improved by something like six orders 
of magnitude, while the technologies of long-duration

spaceflight did not.... As for that space station, the jewel of human spaceflight, it exists in a 
state of nearly perfect teological closure, its only purpose being to teach its creators how to 
build future spacecraft like ita€!. The idea of sending something like it on a three year journey 
to Mars does not get engineersa€™ hearts racing, at least not in the good way.  When you hold on to 
a belief so strongly that neither facts nor reason can change it, what you are doing

is no longer science, but religion. So Ia€™ ve come to believe the best way to look at our Mars 
program is as a faith-based initiative...

