Subscribe now

Worthy Reads from Equitable Growth:

1)it is time to re-up this from a year and a half ago. It would be a very good thing to have the 
Bureau of Economic Analysis do spadework on income distribution trends in America
today. The focus on totals and averages that it currently pursues was a very political decision, 
and a very unwise one for the sake of sensible policy making in America:

Equitable Growth: Nobel Laureates, Former Fed Chair, Two Former CEA Chairsd€\ Endorse the Measuring 
Real Income Growth Act of 2019: a€~Robert Solow and Joseph
Stiglitz, former chair of the Federal Reserve Janet Yellen, and former chairs of the Council of 
Economic Advisers Jason Furman and Laura Tyson, endorsed the Measuring Real
Income Growth Act of 2019, which was reintroduced in the U.S. Senate today by Senator Chuck Schumer 
(D-NY) and Senator Martin Heinrich (D-NM)a€l. The Measuring Real
Income Growth Act would add a distributional component to the National Income and Product Accounts, 
breaking out income growth into deciles of income and allowing us
policymakers and the American people see who prospers when the U.S. economy growsa€! LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/nobel-laureates-former-fed-chair-two-former-cea-
chairs-and-58-economists-endorse-the-measuring-real-income-growth-act-of-2019/>

2) Very well done. Solid evidence that migration benefits men's access to material resources and 
within-the-household status more than it benefits women. If I were at the labor
department right now, I would be thinking about job search assistance for "trailinga€D spouses as 
one place where the fruit is very low-hanging and where the potential benefit-cost
ratio  is very very high:

Joanna Venator: Dual-Earner Migration Decisions, Earnings, & Unemployment Insurance: a€~Access to 
unemployment insurance (UI) for trailing spouses increases long­
distance migration rates by 1.9a€“2.3 percentage points (38a€“46%) for married couplesa€!. Women 
are the primary beneficiaries of this policy, with higher UI uptake following a
move and higher annual earnings of $4,500-$ 12,000 three years post-movea€!. [My] structural model 
of dual-earner couplesa€™ migration decisionsa€! increasing the likelihood
of joint distant offers substantively increases migration rates, increases womena€™ s post-move 
employment rates, and improves both men and womena€™ s earnings growth at
the time of a move. However, unconditional subsidies for migration that are not linked to having an 
offer in hand at the time of the move reduce post-move earnings for both men
and women, with stronger effects for womena€! LINK: 
<https://equitablegrowth.org/working-papers/dual-earner-migration-decisions-earnings-and-unemploymen
t-insurance/>

3) The intellectual panoply the social sciences currently possess is, unfortunately, much better 
tuned to analyzing the societies of western Europe between 1900 and 1950 than in
analyzing any significant chunk of the world today. We academics need to figure out which political 
economy and social theory authors and schools will be most insightful as tools
for understanding the world of 2045. And we then need to figure out how to best teach those authors 
and schools:

Brad DeLong: What Are We Doing When We Teach a€oePolitical Economya€\JF. a€~We havea€! more 
technological and organizational change in the world economy now in
every two years than we had in any century back before 1500a€!. Political economy is thus social 
theory in the age of this extraordinary transformation of technology, understood as
human powers to transform naturea€”not always in a good waya€”and to organize humansa€”not always 
in a good way at alla€! [and] not that economists or political scientists
have  any special expertise in figuring out what the appropriate social theory for this age of 
extraordinary transformation of technology isa€!. The economy is changing and
changing  so rapidly and those changes ramify so far that they pretty much have to be at the core 
of whatever analysis you might undertake. Now: rubber, meet road: What should
we teach?a€! LINK: <https://braddelong.substack.eom/p/what-are-we-doing-when-we-teach-political>

4) We economists have been very lazy at thinking about how corporations in our economy both (1) are 
as economically efficient as they are, alongside (2) what prevents them from
being even more efficient. Unfortunately, we economists have few answers, other than to gesture at 
outside market competition and at the effect of the buy-or-make a decision on
internal processes. I wrote this 2 1/2 decades ago. I wish I did not think it was still so close to 
state of the art. I wish we had made more progress:

Brad DeLong (1997): The Corporation as a Command Economy: a€~We were all told, back when the Soviet 
Union collapsed, that hierarchical organizations simply did not work
as modes of organizing economic lifea€”that you needed a market in order to achieve anything better 
than low-productivity, bureaucracy-ridden economic stagnation. What, then,
are all these large corporationsa€! doing? What methods of corporate control have saved them from 
turning into smaller versions of the unproductive Soviet economy ?a€! Our
politics would be very different without corporations both as sources of pressure an influence on 
politicians and as intermediaries serving the purposes of politicians. It should not
be surprising that the continued existence and, indeed, economic dominance of large corporations is 
due to a number of different forces. Very, very few things in this world have a
single causea€! LINK: 
<https://www.bradford-delong.com/2013/05/brad-delong-1997-the-corporation-as-a-command-economv.html>


Share

Worthy Reads from Elsewhere:

1) The extremely sharp Martin Sandbu calls for European policymakers to take a lesson from Joe 
Biden, Kamala Harris, Nancy Pelosi, Chuck Schumer, and the Democratic House
and Senate legislative caucuses and prioritize a rapid reattainment of full employment as 
vaccination that kicks in and the possibility of ending the coronavirus plague of depression
opens up:

Martin Sandbu: US Stimulus Package Leaves Europe Standing in the Dust: a€~Europe and the US will 
loom less large in the global economy as emerging countries outperform
their growth. That is inevitable. What we do not know is how fast that US and European dominance 
will be whittled awaya€!. US president Joe Biden has delayed his countrya€™ s
relative decline. EU leaders, however, look set to accelerate theirs. Bidena€™ s $1.9tn fiscal 
stimulus package, passed last week, may not be literally visible from space, but it is
certainly                                                                                 of 
planetary scale. In the OECDa€™ s March update to its forecasts, the organisation estimated that 
the US stimulus will add one whole percentage point to projected
global growth. It more than doubled its 2021 growth forecast for the US itself, from 3.3 to 6.5 per 
cent. Bidena€™ s own administration foresees US output returning to its potential
three to four years faster because of the stimulusa€! LINK: 
<https://amp.ft.com/content/20096b0a-8a94-453d-8788-c3b 15dc1704c>

2) I have no idea whether this attempt by China to shift to an economic policy of self-reliance for 
both demand and technologically crucial links in the value chain will work. I
cannot visualize how it could. But, when I look back, I find that at each point in the past I have 
been unable to visualize how the Chinese model might accomplish rapid growth for
more than the subsequent five years. And yet it has always managed to do so:

Bates Gill: Endorsing a€ceSe If-Re Hance a€CJ Beijing Raises the Geopolitical Stakes: a€~The 
a€oedual circulationa€n strategy announced at the National Peoplea€™ s
Congressa€l a framework first coined by Xi Jinping last yeara€!. Greater reliance on Chinaa€™ s 
enormous internal market (a€oedomestic circulationa€D) for growth and
technological innovation, rather than on capital-intensive growth, low-value exports and imported 
technology which spurred the countrya€™ s economic success in the past. The
other    half of the strategy, a€oeinternational circulationa€D, will double down on Chinaa€™ s 
long-standing effort known as a€oeMade in China 2025a€D (MIC 2025)a€! to
upgrade its manufacturing base through the integration of information technology to improve 
productivity, increase the indigenous content of higher-end technology products,
reduce reliance on foreign inputs and become more self-sufficient technologicallya€! position China 
as the leading source of critical technologies and industrial outputs of the future
across the value chaina€”in design, manufacturing processes, technology and material inputs, and 
finished productsa€”in high-priority sectors including next-generation
information technology, robotics, aerospace, high-speed rail, green energy, biopharma and new 
materialsa€!. The NPC is not a deliberative body, but rather a political pageant to
formalise decisions already made by party higher-ups. As such, the announcements last week signal a 
profound rethinking in Beijinga€! LINK: <https://www.lowyinstitute.org/the-
interpreter/endorsing-self-reliance-beiiing-raises-geopolitical-stakes>

3) I confess I am totally flummoxed here. Phil Stephens seems to have it right. If Britaina€™ s 
Conservatives really do see Britain as having an important future role as global
honest broker, then it is very important that, right now, they builda€”as rapidly as possiblea€”a 
strong reputation for brokering honestly. And yet that is not what Boris Johnson is
doing. He is busy setting his credibility on fire. He will leave himself with no potential allies 
anywhere in the world for whatever he wants to do on international diplomacy or
economic policy. But do he and the Conservatives want to do anything, other than hold on to power 
as Britaina€™ s economy undergoes its likely post-Brexit rapid economic
relative decline?:

Philip Stephens: Squandering Trust Is No Route to a a€~Global Britaina€™: a€™ By seeking to renege 
on his Brexit commitments, Boris Johnson has made the UK an unreliable
allya€!. Middle-ranking and smaller states seeka€! sheltering behind alliances, coalitions of the 
like-minded and multilateral rulesa€!. Boris Johnsona€™ s government must start
from this simple premisea€!. Unreliable partners do not get to act as conveners. Which renders all 
the more inexplicable Johnsona€™ s efforts to renege on the Brexit agreement he
signed with the EUa€!. Such things are noticed. Witness the remarks of Brendan Boyle, a 
congressional ally of US president Joe Biden. This was the second time, Boyle told BBC


televisiona€™ s Newsnight, a€oethat this UK government has signed up to an international agreement 
and then immediately decided to go back on what it agreed toa€D. The move

carried a€oeall sorts of ramificationsa€D. One of which could be a serious falling out with 
Washington. Biden has signalled he expects Johnson fully to uphold the Irish
protocola€! LINK: <https://www.ft.com/content/10ec8895-c84f-479e-9fc7-9dde0706dca3>

4) One of the major pedagogical and intellectual-presentational revolutions of our time. For 70 
years now, our civilizations ability to think through issues has been gravely humbled
by the problem that C.P. Snow called "the two cultures". The coming of data science tools may give 
us an opportunity to repair the speech by making literacy in data analysis
acceptable in a way that it is not when it has to be built on knowledge of the higher math. The 
model-simulate-generalize computational-experiment path to performing and
evaluating   data visualization and calculation exercises has, I think, great promise. Now if only 
we can construct a framework of tropes and methods that make it genuinely
accessible:

Matt Asay: Jupyter Has Revolutionized Data Science, & It Started with a Chance Meeting Between Two 
Students'. a€~If you want to do data science, youa€™re going to have to
become familiar with Jupytera€! create and share documents that contain live code, equations, 
visualizations and narrative text. This proves to be a great way to extract data with
code and collaborate^!. It started with a friendship. Fernando PA©rez and Brian Grangera€! had no 
idea how much of an impact it would have within academia and

beyonda€! LINK: 
<https://www.techrepublic.com/article/jupyter-has-revolutionized-data-science-and-it-started-with-a-
chance-meeting-between-two-students/>

5) I am not yet willing to say that the global south outside of China and India is on the road to 
"convergence" to the global north. I am willing to say that China and India have
accomplished absolutely wonderful and historically unprecedented feats of poverty reduction and 
economic growth over the past two generations. I am willing to say that the era of
"divergence" that lasted from 1800 to 2000 appears to be over. I am not yet willing to go farther 
than that in my economic-development optimism. But Noah Smith is:

Noah Smith: Checking in on the Global South: a€~To some, the idea of a Global South means that 
history is destinya€”that the dead hand of colonialism, or the living hand of
neocolonialism, is holding down the developing world. To others, ita€™ s an expression of the idea 
that poor countries just dona€™ t have what it takes to get rich. Either way,
ita€™ s a form of implicit defeatisma€”a belief that historical and/or cultural forces are stronger 
than economic forces. Southeast Asia hasna€™ t yet broken these ideas on the
wheel of hard data, but it might not take much longer to do so. Bangladesha€™ s similar 
performance, meanwhile, suggests that South Asia might not be far behinda€! LINK:

<https://noahpinion.substack.eom/p/checking-in-on-the-global-south>

6) A very, very nice talka€”the intellectual grandchild of Ragnar Nurkse, by way of Nicola 
Gennaioli and Andrei Shleifer. The extremely sharp Ivan Werning is thinking very, very
hard about the interaction of speculation, enthusiasm, regulation, monetary policy, and financial 
markets. Very much worth watching:

Ivan Werning: Taming a Minsky Cycle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mzfqTWJ4JhU>:

7) James Robinson is scared at the large-scale lack of public virtue on the part of Republican 
actual and wannabee office holders. But I do not think he is scared enough. It is not at
all clear to me that Trumpian populism has failed. Trump has failed. But his flavor of neofascism 
remains a mighty powerful force. James Robinson should recognize that Trump
did a€oedeliver the goodsa€D to his basea€”it imagines that, before the coming of the plague, there 
was an unparalleled economic boom; and it is not mistaken to think that Trump
delivered the hate he had promised against immigrants, against uppity Blacks who did not know and 
stay in what Trumpists continue to think is their proper place, and against
rootless cosmopolites. But, fortunately, the center of the electorate of non-suppressed voters is 
nota€”or is not yeta€”Trumpian:

James A. Robinson: Why Trumpian Populism Failed: a€~Trump worked to de-institutionalize America and 
enrich himselfa€!. The Republican Party either sat on its hands or in
some cases applaudeda€!. At the end of the day, Trumpa€™ s a€oeAmerica Firsta€D was mostly 
posturing, because he couldna€™ t deliver real improvements in the lives of his
base. All successful autocratsa€”like former Venezuelan President Hugo ChAj vez, postwar Argentine 
President Juan PerA3n, or current Ugandan President Yoweri Musevenia€”
somehow a€oedeliver the goods a€D for their core constituencies. Trump delivered, but only to the 
rich, by cutting taxes and regulations. His symbolic gestures wona€™ t endure,
and   his a€oeMake America Great Againa€D slogan is destined for burial at the back of millions of 
American closetsa€! LINK: <https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/us-
democratic-institutions-prevailed-over-trump-this-time-by-james-a-robinson-2021-03>

8) Figuring out how to do antitrust in the age of the attention economy is really, really hard:

Ben Thompson: The FTCa€™ s Google Documents, the Staff Memo, the Economists Memo: a€~The 
fundamental premise of the Politico article, along with much of the antitrust
chatter in Washington, misses the point: Google is dominant because consumers like it. That 
doesna€™ t mean the company didna€™ t act anticompetitively, or that we
shouldna€™  t think seriously about acquisitions or contracts or advertising. Such thinking, 
though, has to start with a certain degree of humility about the fundamentally different
nature                                                                                of the 
Internet and how it is leading to these Aggregator-type outcomes. It really might be different this 
timea€! LINK: <https://stratechery.com/2021/the-ftcs-google-
documents-the-staff-memo-the-economists-memo/>

Share Grasping Reality Newsletter, by Brad DeLong
Leave a comment

