Not satisfied with this yet, but it is the drop-dead date for this, if I am going to get it into 
the stream. So working away:

In the long-term historical perspective, things should be going righta€”we are, compared to all 
human history before a century or so ago, immensely wealthy. Yet things seem to be
going badly wrong.

For the first ten-thousand years after the invention of agriculture, nothing that anyone would ever 
recognize as approaching utopia was within humanitya€™ s grasp. In ours and in
our parentsa€™ and our grandparentsa€™ lifetimes, however, it is come near. Yet we continue to fail 
to grasp it. And we will continue to fail to grasp for a, as my friend the late
Max Singer used to say, a a€oetruly human worlda€D until we figure out how to shape a collective 
politics that can handle the task of achieving a fair economic distribution of
wealth.

Back up: Until the time of our grandparents, humanity was ensorcelled by the Devil of Malthus. The 
growth of technology was slow. Mortality was extremely high. In a world in
which nearly 1/3 of post-middle age women had no sons or grandsons surviving and hence no social 
power, pressure to have more children was immense. And so increasing
populations and the smaller farm sizes they entailed kept typical living standards low and 
stagnant, offsetting any gain in productivity and incomes from better technology. The
happiest   a Malthusian society could be was if customs of late marriage pushed down the birth rate 
somewhat so that it was sociology rather than biology in the form of malnutrition
that was active in restraining further population growth. The happiest the A©lite of a Malthusian 
society could be was if the extraction of wealth from the farmers and craftsmen
went smoothly, so that the A©lite at least could have enough.

Flash-forward to today: We are almost through the demographic transition: Malthusian population 
pressure no longer keeps us poor. Our productivity and technology vastly exceeds
that of all previous generations: at a minimum, by two generations hence we will have seen as much 
proportional growth in our technological powers since 1870a€’’itself a
technologically advanced and industrializing worlda€”as was seen since the beginning of the great 
out-of-Africa migration 50,000 years ago and 1870. There is in much of the
world,      and will soon for the entire world, be enough: enough food that nobody need be hungry, 
enough clothing that nobody need be cold, enough shelter that nobody need be wet,
enough medicine that few need die before three-score-and-ten, enough information and entertainment 
that nobody need be bored, and enough other resources that everyone can
create.   It is true that there may not be enough prestige to satisfy some, and that there surely 
will not be enough envy to satisfy others who are spiteful, but if we are willing to settle
for respect, than there is no reason for an arrangement of society in which anybody feels 
disrespected and dissed.

Yet things appear to be going badly wrong.

First, the wealth we currently have is absurdly, appallingly, criminally maldistributed around the 
globe. That our bottom billiona€’’smartphones and public health, which are very
important, asidea€”do not like that much better than our pre-industrial Malthusian society 
ancestors is a crime. It is now 75 years since Harry Truman wisely put global economic
development on the Global Northa€™ s task list. And while we should be extremely happy that the 
global south is today much much richer than it was back in 1945, we should be
tremendously disappointed that the proportional gap today is as large as or larger than it was back 
then.

Second, the world has failed to build global governmental institutions to manage the world-scale 
problem of global warming. It could have been handled at very low cost a
generation ago. Now it will be tremendously destructive, and tremendously costly to either stem or 
to adapt to. And to what end? Merely to preserve the wealth of robber barons
who                                                                             own carbon-energy 
wells and mines.

Third, even within the rich Global North we face apparently unsolvable problems of distributing the 
enormous wealth modern postindustrial technologies and economies create. The
neoliberal beliefa€’’surprisingly, strong around 1980a€”that a more-unequal society would release 
immense entrepreneurial energies has been a flop. But the shift back toward a
wealth distribution that accords with well-being, utility, and what people deserve has been 
stopped.

It has been stopped politically: as a result of political mobilizations around the principle that 
some of societya€™ s non-rich do not deserves more but deserve even lessa€’’whether
Hispanics and African-Americans in the United States, Muslims in India, Turks in Britain, or 
a€oerootless cosmopolitesa€D insufficiently rabid in their public displays of
allegiance   to blood-and-soil nationalism everywhere. The hopes that equals could be treated 
equally has into the Aristotelian principle that it is unjust to treat unequals equally, and
a widespread belief that Thomas Jefferson was wrong in his Declaration-of-Independence assertion of 
natural equality.

And it has been stopped economically: the hope that technology, capital, and labor would always be 
complements because every non-human powered machine and every
information-processing task needed to be at least supervised by a human brain appears to have been 
vain. Our information-processing technologies are beating our educational
system,    badly.

These are the big problems facing humanity in what will be the post-plague decades. But, as 
Franklin Delano Roosevelt said in 1933, quoting Proverbs 29:18: a€oe Where there is
no vision, the people perisha€la€D From where will the vision arise?


