Subscribe now

CONDITION: No, We Do Not Know What Is Going on in China Right Now

Leo Lord-Jones @leolordjones

China today reported just two new Covid deaths, but this was the queue of hearses at Beijinga€™ 
s_Dongjiao crematorium this morning. Ita€™ s designated to handle Covid deaths. A man told us his 
frienda€™ s 73yo mother died from Covid despite having no underlying conditions.

r r               7c fl                           X. W



10:47 AM r™ Dec 19,2022

7 !Likes28Re tweets

Share Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality

FOCUS: Elon Musk Does Not Look Like He Is Rage-Tweeting to Mea€!

I think Matt Yglesias misses the main story here.

It is not so much that Elon Musk is a victim, but rather he has been a beneficiary of the social 
media ecosystem. He has drawn lessons as to what plays to run. And so now he is trying to rerun his 
plays because they worked in the past. But he is trying to rerun them in an enviroment where they 
are unlikely to work.

Engineers at Tesla and SpaceX have done great things. Auto competitors took the plague-years chip 
shortage not as a problem to be solved but as a convenient way to organize a cartel to cut their 
production, and so did Tesla a great favor. But those did not make Musk a 100-billionaire. Musk 
became a 100-billionaire via social-media celebrity and the meme-stock channela€”not by virtue of 
owning large chunks of companies that saw the greatest jumps ever in
the rationally-expected present value of their properly discounted future earnings. Think of him as 
a walking, talking, tweeting DogeCoin:

Matt Yglesias: Elon Musk is the latest victim of the online ragetrap: Dona€™ t spend all day 
nursing grievances and making yourself miserable'. a€~The other day, Elon Musk joked on Twitter 
that a€oemy pronouns are Prosecute/Fauci.a€D Ita€™ s a mean spirited joke from Musk, who we already 
know enjoys mean jokes about trans peoplea€”the suspension of the Babylon Bee for making a mean 
joke about Rachel Levine was an
important motivator of Muska€™ s decision to buy Twittera€L The pronouns thing references a genuine 
dispute in American politics and culture. Small numbers of people really are using they/them 
pronouns or socially transitioning from she/her to he/him, and if someone wants to spend their time 
being angry about that then I think thata€™ s a weird decision, but they are, in fact, choosing to 
be angry about a thing that is happeninga€!.
But   if youa€™re sitting here in mid-December 2022 getting mad at Fauci and Biden for imposing 
repeated rounds of lockdowns, then youa€™re getting mad about something you made up. A pseudonymous 
wag using the handle @ToiletGun quipped a couple of years ago that a€oeTwitter is 90% someone 
imagining a guy, tricking themselves into believing that guy exists and then getting mad about 
ita€Da€!

As Chance pointed out, Muska€™ s rage-tweets appear to be following a script set out last April, 
when somone whose name was redacted by the Delaware Court of Chancery sent him what I think is a 
Signal message:

A Blake Masters tvoe

Who is Blake Masters? He is a sycophant of right-wing Silicon-Valley nutcase plutocrat Peter Theil, 
who ran a strange unsuccessful campaign for Governor of Arizona backed by oodles and oodles of 
Theila€™ s money. And when I say a€oestrangea€C, I mean a€cestrangea€D:

WON'T ASK YOUR PRONOUNS


IN THE U.S. SENATE

a BLAKE MASTERS

WILL PROSECUTE FAUCI
WC IN THE US. SENATE

Elon Musk appears to have taken the April advice of his still-unknown interlocutor seriously, but 
to have decided to cut out the middleman. Here is what Matt calls the ragetweet:

Elon Musk ©


My pronouns are Prosecute/Fauci

Taking Blake Masters as a model, and doing so seriously, is, I think, the only way one could ever 
think including a€cepronounsa€D, a€ceprosecutea€O, and a€oeFaucia€D in a five-word sentence.

a€oeEmulate Blake M aster a€D and a€oedelicately let the neo-Nazis back on Twittera€D are not the 
only pieces of advice Musk was given. The interlocutor had, 15 minutes before the a€oeBlake 
Mastersa€D signal, advised Musk thus with respect to his takeover of Twitter:

1. a€oeBlame the platforma€D, check.

2. a€oeCoordinated pressure campaigna€D, check.

3. a€oeExodus of the Bluechecksa€D, well, Musk is certainly trying.

4. a€oeDeplatforming a€~But it will not be easy. It will be a war. Let the battle begina€™ a€C. It 
certainly looks like it is underway.
Chance reports that the a€oeabove articlea€D is this unhinged antisemitic provocation:

<https://www.revolver.news/2022/04/elon-musk-buy-twitter-free-speech-tech-censorship-american-regime
-war/>: a€oeTransforming Twitter back into a real free speech platform would represent nothing less 
than a declaration of war against the Globalist American Empirea€!. If Elon Musk bought Twitter and 
did nothing more than return it to the speech norms it had ten years ago, that act alone would 
constitute a a€~national security
threata€™ , The threat posed to Americaa€™ s joke institutions and the clowns who run them would 
be, in fact, existentiala€!a€D

And sums up: a€oelt's actually kind of banal how closely [Musk] is hewing to this timeline that 
[redacted] sent to him back in Aprila€la€D

The Chancery Daily and 99 others @ chancery daily

it's actually kind of banal how closely he is hewing to this timeline that [redacted] sent to him 
back in


L 1 BLAKE MASTERS

I WONTASKYOUR PRONOUNS
IN THE U.S. SENATE

AAA Elon Musk O

@elonmusk

8 BLAKE MASTERS . ’

" WILL PROSECUTE FAUCI

IN THE US. SENATE

My pronouns are Prosecute/Fauci

4:58 AM • Dec 11, 2022

2022-04-04 08:52:30 (CDT)    

Congratulations!! The above article ^was laying out some of the things that might happen:
Step 1: Blame the platform for its users Step 2. Coordinated pressure campaign Step 3:
Exodus                                                        of the Bluechecks Step 4: 
Deplatforming "But it will not be easy. It will be a war. Let
the battle begin."    

2022-04-04 09:07:32 (CDT)

It will be a delicate game of letting right wingers back on Twitter anonbw to navigate that

(especially the boss himself, if you're up for that) I would also lay out the standards early but
have someone wno nas a savvy cultural/politicaI view to be the VP of actual enforcement

2022-04-04              09:08:17              (CDT)                              

A Blake Masters type]

12:32 AM r™ Dec 19,2022

74Likes23Retweets

Two obvious conclusions:

1. Chancery Daily is very much worth paying fora€l

2. Teslaa€™ s market capitalization rocketed from $15 billion in July 2019 to a peak of $400 
billion and now down to $140 billion; SpaceXa€™ s non-market valuation appears to be around $150 
billion, up from, well, not very much in 2019. Forbes guesses Musk is currently worth $180 
billiona€”a 33% ownership share of both companies. Musk is a billionaire, yes, but Musk is a 
hyperbillioniare only because he,personally, became a meme stock
during the plague. Ownership and use of Twitter is a way to maintain that meme-stock celebrity 
position. In short, this is not a€oecapitalisma€EI as we have known it.

Share

BRIEFLY NOTED:

ONE AUDIO: Aze Macro Outlook on Odd Lots:

Tracy Alloway & Joe Wiesenthal: Where Things Stand Now With Inflation and the Fed: a€~Last week was 
a big one. On Tuesday, we got a CPI report that came in substantially cooler than expected. Then on 
Wednesday, the Fed hiked 50 basis points, which was a step down from the series of 75 basis point 
hikes that we had been getting at recent meetings. So where do things stand now? When will we get a 
proper pivot? When will the Fed feel confident that
inflation has been defeated. We spoke with two macro guests: Jon Turek, founder of JST Advisors and 
author of the Cheap Convexity Blog, as well as Tim Duy, Chief US Economist at SGH Macro as well as 
a Professor of Practice in economics at the University or Oregon. They gave as their readings on 
inflation, the Fed, and what to watch at the start of 2023a€l

<https://overcast ,fm/+5 AWM0p0s0>
Leave a comment


ONE IMAGE: The Dover Circlea€”& Azose Places Its People Have Settled, or Where People Have 
Thoroughly & Successfully Emulated Its Culture & Institutions:

NOR: 53 6k
OEM: 52.6k
SWE: 42.8k
FIN: 42.1k

FOL Z5.9k
EST: 23.6k
IW: 22.9k
LAT: 22.4k


LUX: 62 6k

SUI: 60 1k

154: 56.0k
NEO $2 8k
IU: 51.7k
BEL: 49 6k
AUT: 48.3k
GER: 46.4k
FRA: 43.0k
GM 42 8k
ESP: 37.3k
HA: 35 4k
POR: 24.5k

ISA: 34.0k
GW: 2S.lk

SCO. 35.0k
SVX: 23.5k

JAP. 39.1k
KOR. 32 4k


Averoge wage

150k • 25.0k

| 25 .1k -350k

■ 35.1k-45.0k

■ 45.1k-55.0k

■ 55.1k-65.0k

USA: 60 2k
CAN: 48.4k
CHI: 28.4k
M6X: 15.1k

AUS: S9 1k
Ma: 39 2k

Give a gift subscription

MUST-READ: A Nice Review of Blindera€™s Monetary & Fiscal History.

James Surowiecki: Taming the Economy: The story of fiscal and monetary policy over the last 60 
years is the story of what government can and should do to the economy. a€~Ita€™ s hard to imagine 
a better moment for Alan Blindera€™ s new book, A Monetary and Fiscal History of the United States, 
1961-202la€\. That book offers pretty much exactly what the title promises, a blow-by-blow 
chronological history of the evolution of
American monetary and fiscal policy over the last 60 years, along with short biographical sketches 
of key figures in that history, and sharp analytical riffsa€!. [The] narrative is, on the whole, 
one of progress, however halting. Thata€™ s especially the case when it comes to monetary 
policya€!. One of the most striking things about Blindera€™ s book, in fact, is its reminder that 
the Fed in the 1960s and a€~70s seemed to be very much
flying by the seat of its pantsa€!..

The Federal Reserve also used to be far more politicized. The exemplar of this, in Blindera€™ s 
account, was Arthur Burns, head of the Fed under Nixon, who kept the President (who was his friend) 
in the loop about interest rate cuts and, Blinder argues, helped engineer a miniboom before the 
1972 election in part in order to get Nixon reelected.But it wasna€™ t just Nixona€!. That changed, 
really, with Bill Clinton, who despite being
angry at Alan Greenspan for raising rates heading into the 1994 midterm election was convinced to 
hold his tongue (in public, at least). This continued for two decades, until that norm, like so 
many others, was shattered by Donald Trumpa€!.

The Fed has been more patient and less anxious to raise interest rates than it was in the 1980s and 
early a€~90s. And while we may in part be paying for that now with higher inflation, ita€™ s also 
the reason unemployment before the pandemic fell to 3.5 percent, lower than ita€™ s been at any 
point in the last 50 years, and why it returned to that low thisyear lower than ita€™ s been at any 
point in the last 50 years. Thata€™ s made life
materially better for millions of workers who might now be without a job if the Fed had raised 
interest rates too soon. If the story Blinder tells of monetary policy is, generally speaking, the 
story of the Fed becoming more technocratic and systematic in its approach, the story of fiscal 
policy over the last 60 years is, predictably, much messier...

Get 50% off a group subscription

Very Briefly Noted:

•  Martin Sandbu: Central banks should beware mistaking wage rises for an inflation problem: 
a€~Profound changes in labour markets since the pandemic may mean that many workers and companies 
are more productivea€!

•  Bill Dudley: Investors Would Be Better Off Believing the Fed: a€~If markets remain optimistic, 
the central bank will just have to tighten more to achieve its inflation objectivea€!

•  Bill Gross: The Fed needs to stop raising rates: a€~With too much hidden leverage around, the 
central bank should wait to see if the punch bowl has been sufficiently draineda€!

•  Leticia Miranda: Amazon Is Ubiquitous. But It Isn't Invincible Anymore: a€~The firm has written 
the rules of modern retail. After a disappointing year, it may not be able to keep winning at its 
own gamea€!

•  Jason Garcia: DeSantis Leaves Floridians At The Mercy Of His Insurance Donors: a€~A rewrite of 
Floridaa€™ s property insurance laws will usher in the statea€™ s most sweeping civil lawsuit 
restrictions since Jeb Bush was in officea€!

•  Therese Raphael: View to 2023: Sometimes the Future Is Obvious: a€~Sometimes we dona€™ t need to 
look beyond the current weather patterns to see a storm is coming. If the last year taught us 
anything, it was to take the known risks and double them...

•  Gideon Rachman: The year the strongmen stumbled: a€~Putina€™ s decision to invade Ukraine 
demonstrated why authoritarian rule so often ends in disastera€!


Donate Subscriptions

AJs:

Mark Gongloff: With Elon Musk Off the Reservation, Tesla Needs Adult Supervision: a€~An activist 
investor would do the trick, if only the CEO and his pliant board werena€™ t in the waya€L The 
worlda€™ s largest electric-vehicle company, the value of which had plunged by 60% this yeara€!. At 
many other struggling companies, an activist investor would have swooped in to clean up this mess 
by now, Liam Denning notes. But Tesla is a special
unicorn, whose CEO is a god-king with robust defenses against investors. One of those is a board 
made up of Elon Muska€™ s brother, several mannequins and a life-size cutout of Michael Jordan 
riding a model train. Good luck getting any influence therea€!

Ruchir Sharma: How private markets became an escape from reality: a€~The rage for private investing 
began in the early 2000s, after the success of the Yale University endowment fund led by David 
Swensena€!. Swensena€™ s definition of a€celonga€D was decadesa€!. He looked for private managers 
who were building companiesa€!. Swensen defined his job as generating multigenerational wealtha€i. 
What started as a sound idea has become an escape
from something else entirely: reality. In return for the promise of superior returns, private funds 
typically a€oelock ina€D client money for up to 10 years, then report to clients much less 
frequently than public funds doa€!. In the new tight money era, with losses spreading across asset 
classes, private channels have become a way for money managers to conceal losses from clientsa€! 
who are often content in the darka€!

Dan Drezner: The Possible Limits of American Polarization: a€~With Democrats in the Senate and the 
White HouseaCI Republicans] have fewer bargaining chips to play. They can threaten to defund the 
government or refuse to raise the debt ceilinga€”but that requires the kind of hostage-taking 
tactics that will alienate Biden-leaning districts and more moderate Republicans. When Trump tried 
it in 2019, it ended badly for hima€!. The House GOPa€™ s other
option is to use their oversight powers to investigate and harass the Biden administration^!. Ia€™ 
m not saying that Republicans will use their majority to make life easy for Biden. Ia€™ m not 
saying Kevin McCarthy is the second coming of Bob Michel. What I am saying is that for the past 
decade, many observers have wondered if there is a limit to how far right the GOP can shift. And 
for the first time in a while, that limit is becoming visiblea€!


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

Leave a comment
Subscribe now

