Subscribe now

Paul Krugman: Technology and the Triumph of Pessimism

One of the best-selling novels of the 19th century was a work of what wea€™d now call speculative 
fiction: Edward Bellamya€™ s a€oeLooking Backward: 2000-1887.a€D Bellamy was one of the first 
prominent figures to recognize that rapid technological progress had become an enduring feature of 
modern life a€” and he imagined that this progress would vastly
improve human happiness.

In one scene, his protagonist, who has somehow been transported from the 1880s to 2000, is asked if 
he would like to hear some music; to his astonishment his hostess uses what we would now call a 
speakerphone to let him listen to a live orchestral performance, one of four then in progress. And 
he suggests that having such easy access to entertainment would
represent a€oethe limit of human felicity .a€D

Well, over the past few days Ia€™ ve watched several shows on my smart TV a€” I havena€™t made up 
my mind yet about the new season of a€ceWestworlda€D a€” and also watched several live musical 
performances. And let me say, I find access to streamed entertainment a major source of enjoyment. 
But the limit of felicity? Not so much.
Share


Ia€™ ve also read recently about how both sides in the Russia-Ukraine war are using precision 
long-range missiles a€” guided by more or less the same technology that makes streaming possible 
a€” to strike targets deep behind each othera€™ s lines. For what ita€™ s worth, Ia€™m very much 
rooting for Ukraine here, and it seems significant that the Ukrainians
seem to be striking ammunition dumps while the Russians are carrying out terror attacks on shopping 
malls. But the larger point is that while technology can bring a lot of satisfaction, it can also 
enable new forms of destruction. And humanity has, sad to say, exploited that new ability on a 
massive scale.

My reference to Edward Bellamy comes from a forthcoming book, Slouching Towards Utopia, by Brad 
DeLong, an economics professor at the University of California, Berkeley. The book is a magisterial 
history of what DeLong calls the a€oelong 20th century,a€D running from 1870 to 2010, an era that 
he says a€” surely correctly a€” was shaped overwhelmingly
by the economic consequences of technological progress.

Why start in 1870? As DeLong points out, and many of us already knew, for the great bulk of human 
history a€” roughly 97 percent of the time that has elapsed since the first cities emerged in 
ancient Mesopotamia a€” Malthus was right: There were many technological innovations over the 
course of the millenniums, but the benefits of these innovations were always
swallowed up by population growth, driving living standards for most people back down to the edge 
of subsistence.

There were occasional bouts of economic progress that temporarily outpaced what DeLong calls 
a€oeMalthusa€™ s devila€D a€” indeed, modern scholarship suggests there was a significant rise in 
per-capita income during the early Roman Empire. But these episodes were always temporary. And as 
late as the 1860s, many smart observers believed the progress that
had taken place under the Industrial Revolution would prove equally transitory.

Share Brad DeLong1 s Grasping Reality

Around 1870, however, the world entered an era of sustained rapid technological development that 
was unlike anything that had happened before; each successive generation found itself living in a 
new world, utterly transformed from the world into which its parents had been born.
As DeLong argues, there are two great puzzles about this transformation a€” puzzles that are highly 
relevant to the situation in which we now find ourselves.

The first is why this happened. DeLong argues that there were three great a€cemeta-innovationsa€D 
(my term, not his) a€” innovations that enabled innovation itself. These were the rise of large 
corporations, the invention of the industrial research lab and globalization. We could, I think, 
argue the details here. More important, however, is the suggestion a€” from
DeLong and others a€” that the engines of rapid technological progress may be slowing down.

The second is why all this technological progress hasna€™ t made society better than it has. One 
thing I hadna€™ t fully realized until reading a€oeSlouching Towards Utopiaa€D is the extent to 
which progress hasnd€™ t brought felicity. Over the 140 years DeLong surveys, there have been only 
two eras during which the Western world felt generally optimistic
about the way things were going. (The rest of the world is a whole other story.)

The first such era was the 40 or so years leading up to 1914, when people began to realize just how 
much progress was being made and started to take it for granted. Unfortunately, that era of 
optimism died in fire, blood and tyranny, with technology enhancing rather than mitigating the 
horror (coincidentally, today is the 108th anniversary of Archduke
Ferdinanda€™ s assassination).

The second era was the a€ce30 glorious years,a€D the decades after World War II when social 
democracy a€” a market economy with its rough edges smoothed off by labor unions and a strong 
social safety net a€” seemed to be producing not Utopia, but the most decent societies humanity had 
ever known. But that era, too, came to an end, partly in the face of
economic setbacks, but even more so in the face of ever more bitter politics, including the rise of 
right-wing extremism that is now putting democracy itself at risk.

It would be silly to say that the incredible progress of technology since 1870 has done nothing to 
improve things; in many ways the median American today has a far better life than the richest 
oligarchs of the Gilded Age. But the progress that brought us on-demand streaming music hasna€™ t 
made us satisfied or optimistic. DeLong offers some explanations for this
disconnect, which I find interesting but not wholly persuasive. But his book definitely asks the 
right questions and teaches us a lot of crucial history along the way.

Subscribe now
Leave a comment

Give a gift subscription
Donate Subscriptions


Read Brad DeLong's Grasping Reality in the Substack app
Available for iOS and Android

Get the app


Available for iOS and Android

Get the app

